
Approach to the Patient with Cancer: Introduction

The application of current treatment techniques (surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biologic therapy) results in the cure of nearly two of three patients diagnosed with cancer. Nevertheless, patients experience the diagnosis of cancer as one of the most traumatic and revolutionary events that has ever happened to them. Independent of prognosis, the diagnosis brings with it a change in a person's self-image and in his or her role in the home and workplace. The prognosis of a person who has just been found to have pancreatic cancer is the same as the prognosis of the person with aortic stenosis who develops the first symptoms of congestive heart failure (median survival, 8 months). However, the patient with heart disease may remain functional and maintain a self-image as a fully intact person with just a malfunctioning part, a diseased organ ("a bum ticker"). By contrast, the patient with pancreatic cancer has a completely altered self-image and is viewed differently by family and anyone who knows the diagnosis. He or she is being attacked and invaded by a disease that could be anywhere in the body. Every ache or pain takes on desperate significance. Cancer is an exception to the coordinated interaction among cells and organs. In general, the cells of a multicellular organism are programmed for collaboration. Many diseases occur because the specialized cells fail to perform their assigned task. Cancer takes this malfunction one step further. Not only is there a failure of the cancer cell to maintain its specialized function but it also strikes out on its own; the cancer cell competes to survive using natural mutability and natural selection to seek advantage over normal cells in a recapitulation of evolution. One consequence of the traitorous behavior of cancer cells is that the patient feels betrayed by his or her body. The cancer patient feels that he or she, and not just a body part, is diseased.
 
The Magnitude of the Problem

No nationwide cancer registry exists; therefore, the incidence of cancer is estimated on the basis of the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, which tabulates cancer incidence and death figures from nine sites, accounting for about 10% of the U.S. population, and from population data from the U.S. Census Bureau. In 2010, 1.530 million new cases of invasive cancer (789,620 men, 739,940 women) were diagnosed and 569,490 persons (299,200 men, 270,290 women) died from cancer. The percent distribution of new cancer cases and cancer deaths by site for men and women are shown in Table 81每1. Cancer incidence has been declining by about 2% each year since 1992.

Table 81每1 Distribution of Cancer Incidence and Deaths for 2010

 
 
Male Female 
Sites % Number Sites % Number 
Cancer Incidence  
Prostate 28 217,730 Breast 28 207,090 
Lung 15 116,750 Lung 14 105,770 
Colorectal 9 72,090 Colorectal 10 70,480 
Bladder 7 52,760 Endometrial 6 43,470 
Melanoma 5 38,870 Thyroid 5 33,930 
Lymphoma 4 35,380 Lymphoma 4 30,160 
Kidney 4 35,370 Melanoma 4 29,260 
Oral cavity 3 25,420 Kidney 3 22,870 
Leukemia 3 24,690 Ovary 3 21,880 
Pancreas 3 21,370 Pancreas 3 21,770 
All others 19 149,190 All others 20 153,260 
All sites 100 789,620 All sites 100 739,940 
Cancer Deaths  
Lung 29 86,220 Lung 26 71,080 
Prostate 11 32,050 Breast 15 39,840 
Colorectal 9 26,580 Colorectal 9 24,790 
Pancreas 6 18,770 Pancreas 7 18,030 
Liver 4 12,720 Ovary 5 13,850 
Leukemia 4 12,660 Lymphoma 4 9500 
Esophagus 4 11,650 Leukemia 3 9180 
Lymphoma 4 10,710 Endometrial 3 7950 
Bladder 3 10,410 Liver 2 6190 
Kidney 3 8210 CNS 2 5720 
All others 23 69,220 All others 24 64,160 
All sites 100 299,200 All sites 100 270,290 
 

 

The most significant risk factor for cancer overall is age; two-thirds of all cases were in those older than age 65 years. Cancer incidence increases as the third, fourth, or fifth power of age in different sites. For the interval between birth and age 39 years, 1 in 70 men and 1 in 48 women will develop cancer; for the interval between ages 40 and 59 years, 1 in 12 men and 1 in 11 women will develop cancer; and for the interval between ages 60 and 79 years, 1 in 3 men and 1 in 5 women will develop cancer. Overall, men have a 44% risk of developing cancer at some time during their lives; women have a 38% lifetime risk.

Cancer is the second leading cause of death behind heart disease. Deaths from heart disease have declined 45% in the United States since 1950 and continue to decline. Cancer has overtaken heart disease as the number one cause of death in persons younger than age 85 years (Fig. 81-1). After a 70-year period of increase, cancer deaths began to decline in 1990-1991 (Fig. 81-2). Between 1990 and 2006, cancer deaths decreased by 21% among men and 12.3% among women. The five leading causes of cancer deaths are shown for various populations in Table 81每2. The 5-year survival for white patients was 39% in 1960每1963 and 69% in 1999每2005. Cancers are more often deadly in blacks; the 5-year survival was 59% for the 1999每2005 interval. Incidence and mortality vary among racial and ethnic groups (Table 81每3). The basis for these differences is unclear.

Figure 81-1

 
 
 
Death rates for heart disease and cancer among people younger and older than age 85 years. A. In people younger than age 85 years, cancer has overtaken heart disease as the largest cause of death. B. In people older than age 85 years, heart disease is by far the major cause of death. (From Jemal et al.)
 
 

Figure 81-2

 
 
 
 
Sixty-five-year trend in cancer death rates for (A) women and (B) men by site in the United States, 1930每2006. Rates are per 100,000 age-adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. (From Jemal et al.)
 
 
Table 81每2 The Five Leading Primary Tumor Sites for Patients Dying of Cancer Based on Age and Sex in 2007

 
 
    Age, years 
Rank   All Ages Under 20 20每39 40每59 60每79 >80 
1 M Lung Leukemia Leukemia Lung Lung Lung 
  F Lung Leukemia Breast Breast Lung Lung 
2 M Prostate CNS CNS Colorectal Colorectal Prostate 
  F Breast CNS Cervix Lung Breast Colorectal 
3 M Colorectal Bone sarcoma Colorectal Liver Prostate Colorectal 
  F Colorectal Endocrine Leukemia Colorectal Colorectal Breast 
4 M Pancreas Endocrine Lymphoma Pancreas Pancreas Bladder 
  F Pancreas Bone sarcoma Colorectal Ovary Pancreas Pancreas 
5 M Leukemia Soft tissue sarcoma Lung Esophagus Esophagus Pancreas 
  F Ovary Soft tissue sarcoma CNS Pancreas Ovary Lymphoma 
 


Abbreviations: M, male; F, female.
 
Table 81每3 Cancer Incidence and Mortality in Racial and Ethnic Groups, U.S., 2002每2006

 
 
Site   White Black Asian/Pacific Islander American Indian Hispanic 
Incidence per 100,000 Population  
All M 550.1 626.8 334.5 318.4 430.3 
F 420.0 389.5 276.3 265.1 326.8 
Breast   123.5 113.0 81.6 67.2 90.2 
Colorectal M 58.2 68.4 44.1 38.1 50.0 
F 42.6 51.7 33.1 30.7 35.1 
Kidney M 19.7 20.6 9.0 16.6 18.2 
F 10.3 10.6 4.5 10.6 10.3 
Liver M 8.0 12.5 21.4 8.9 15.9 
F 2.8 3.8 8.1 4.6 6.2 
Lung M 85.9 104.8 50.6 57.9 49.2 
F 57.1 50.7 27.6 41.3 26.5 
Prostate   146.3 231.9 82.3 82.7 131.1 
Deaths per 100,000 Population  
All M 226.7 304.2 135.4 183.3 154.8 
F 157.3 183.7 95.1 140.1 103.9 
Breast   23.9 33.0 12.5 17.6 15.5 
Colorectal M 21.4 31.4 13.8 20.0 16.2 
F 14.9 21.6 10.0 13.7 10.7 
Kidney M 6.1 6.0 2.4 9.0 5.2 
F 2.8 2.7 1.2 4.2 2.4 
Liver M 6.8 10.8 15.0 10.3 11.2 
F 2.9 3.9 6.6 6.5 5.1 
Lung M 69.9 90.1 36.9 48.0 33.9 
F 41.9 40.0 18.2 33.5 14.4 
Prostate   23.6 56.3 10.6 20.0 19.6 
 


Abbreviations: M, male; F, female.
 

Cancer Around the World

In 2002, 11 million new cancer cases and 7 million cancer deaths were estimated worldwide. When broken down by region of the world, 45% of cases were in Asia, 26% in Europe, 14.5% in North America, 7.1% in Central/South America, 6% in Africa, and 1% in Australia/New Zealand (Fig. 81-3). Lung cancer is the most common cancer and the most common cause of cancer death in the world. Its incidence is highly variable, affecting only 2 per 100,000 African women but as many as 61 per 100,000 North American men. Breast cancer is the second most common cancer worldwide; however, it ranks fifth as a cause of death behind lung, stomach, liver, and colorectal cancer. Among the eight most common forms of cancer, lung (2-fold), breast (3-fold), prostate (2.5-fold), and colorectal (3-fold) cancers are more common in more developed countries than in less developed countries. By contrast, liver (2-fold), cervical (2-fold), and esophageal (2- to 3-fold) cancers are more common in less developed countries. Stomach cancer incidence is similar in more and less developed countries but is much more common in Asia than North America or Africa. The most common cancers in Africa are cervical, breast, and liver cancers. It has been estimated that nine modifiable risk factors are responsible for more than one-third of cancers worldwide. These include smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, physical inactivity, low fruit and vegetable consumption, unsafe sex, air pollution, indoor smoke from household fuels, and contaminated injections.

Figure 81-3

 
 
 
Worldwide overall annual cancer incidence, mortality and 5-year prevalence for the period of 1993每2001. (From Kamangar et al.)
 
 
 
Patient Management

Important information is obtained from every portion of the routine history and physical examination. The duration of symptoms may reveal the chronicity of disease. The past medical history may alert the physician to the presence of underlying diseases that may affect the choice of therapy or the side effects of treatment. The social history may reveal occupational exposure to carcinogens or habits, such as smoking or alcohol consumption, that may influence the course of disease and its treatment. The family history may suggest an underlying familial cancer predisposition and point out the need to begin surveillance or other preventive therapy for unaffected siblings of the patient. The review of systems may suggest early symptoms of metastatic disease or a paraneoplastic syndrome.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of cancer relies most heavily on invasive tissue biopsy and should never be made without obtaining tissue; no noninvasive diagnostic test is sufficient to define a disease process as cancer. Although in rare clinical settings (e.g., thyroid nodules) fine-needle aspiration is an acceptable diagnostic procedure, the diagnosis generally depends on obtaining adequate tissue to permit careful evaluation of the histology of the tumor, its grade, and its invasiveness and to yield further molecular diagnostic information, such as the expression of cell-surface markers or intracellular proteins that typify a particular cancer, or the presence of a molecular marker, such as the t(8;14) translocation of Burkitt's lymphoma. Increasing evidence links the expression of certain genes with the prognosis and response to therapy (Chaps. 83 and 84).

Occasionally a patient will present with a metastatic disease process that is defined as cancer on biopsy but has no apparent primary site of disease. Efforts should be made to define the primary site based on age, sex, sites of involvement, histology and tumor markers, and personal and family history. Particular attention should be focused on ruling out the most treatable causes (Chap. 99).

Once the diagnosis of cancer is made, the management of the patient is best undertaken as a multidisciplinary collaboration among the primary care physician, medical oncologists, surgical oncologists, radiation oncologists, oncology nurse specialists, pharmacists, social workers, rehabilitation medicine specialists, and a number of other consulting professionals working closely with each other and with the patient and family.

Defining the Extent of Disease and the Prognosis

The first priority in patient management after the diagnosis of cancer is established and shared with the patient is to determine the extent of disease. The curability of a tumor usually is inversely proportional to the tumor burden. Ideally, the tumor will be diagnosed before symptoms develop or as a consequence of screening efforts (Chap. 82). A very high proportion of such patients can be cured. However, most patients with cancer present with symptoms related to the cancer, caused either by mass effects of the tumor or by alterations associated with the production of cytokines or hormones by the tumor.

For most cancers, the extent of disease is evaluated by a variety of noninvasive and invasive diagnostic tests and procedures. This process is called staging. There are two types. Clinical staging is based on physical examination, radiographs, isotopic scans, CT scans, and other imaging procedures; pathologic staging takes into account information obtained during a surgical procedure, which might include intraoperative palpation, resection of regional lymph nodes and/or tissue adjacent to the tumor, and inspection and biopsy of organs commonly involved in disease spread. Pathologic staging includes histologic examination of all tissues removed during the surgical procedure. Surgical procedures performed may include a simple lymph node biopsy or more extensive procedures such as thoracotomy, mediastinoscopy, or laparotomy. Surgical staging may occur in a separate procedure or may be done at the time of definitive surgical resection of the primary tumor.

Knowledge of the predilection of particular tumors for spreading to adjacent or distant organs helps direct the staging evaluation.

Information obtained from staging is used to define the extent of disease either as localized, as exhibiting spread outside of the organ of origin to regional but not distant sites, or as metastatic to distant sites. The most widely used system of staging is the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) system codified by the International Union Against Cancer and the American Joint Committee on Cancer. The TNM classification is an anatomically based system that categorizes the tumor on the basis of the size of the primary tumor lesion (T1每4, where a higher number indicates a tumor of larger size), the presence of nodal involvement (usually N0 and N1 for the absence and presence, respectively, of involved nodes, although some tumors have more elaborate systems of nodal grading), and the presence of metastatic disease (M0 and M1 for the absence and presence, respectively, of metastases). The various permutations of T, N, and M scores (sometimes including tumor histologic grade G) are then broken into stages, usually designated by the roman numerals I through IV. Tumor burden increases and curability decreases with increasing stage. Other anatomic staging systems are used for some tumors, e.g., the Dukes classification for colorectal cancers, the International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians classification for gynecologic cancers, and the Ann Arbor classification for Hodgkin's disease.

Certain tumors cannot be grouped on the basis of anatomic considerations. For example, hematopoietic tumors such as leukemia, myeloma, and lymphoma are often disseminated at presentation and do not spread like solid tumors. For these tumors, other prognostic factors have been identified (Chaps. 109, 110, and 111).

In addition to tumor burden, a second major determinant of treatment outcome is the physiologic reserve of the patient. Patients who are bedridden before developing cancer are likely to fare worse, stage for stage, than fully active patients. Physiologic reserve is a determinant of how a patient is likely to cope with the physiologic stresses imposed by the cancer and its treatment. This factor is difficult to assess directly. Instead, surrogate markers for physiologic reserve are used, such as the patient's age or Karnofsky performance status (Table 81每4) or Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (Table 81每5). Older patients and those with a Karnofsky performance status <70 or ECOG performance status 3 have a poor prognosis unless the poor performance is a reversible consequence of the tumor.

Table 81每4 Karnofsky Performance Index

 
 
Performance Status Functional Capability of the Patient 
100 Normal; no complaints; no evidence of disease 
90 Able to carry on normal activity; minor signs or symptoms of disease 
80 Normal activity with effort; some signs or symptoms of disease 
70 Cares for self; unable to carry on normal activity or do active work 
60 Requires occasional assistance but is able to care for most needs 
50 Requires considerable assistance and frequent medical care 
40 Disabled; requires special care and assistance 
30 Severely disabled; hospitalization is indicated although death is not imminent 
20 Very sick; hospitalization necessary; active supportive treatment is necessary 
10 Moribund, fatal processes progressing rapidly 
0 Dead 
 

 
Table 81每5 The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Scale

 
 
ECOG Grade 0: Fully active, able to carry on all predisease performance without restriction 
ECOG Grade 1: Restricted in physically strenuous activity but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or sedentary nature, e.g., light housework, office work 
ECOG Grade 2: Ambulatory and capable of all self-care but unable to carry out any work activities. Up and about more than 50% of waking hours 
ECOG Grade 3: Capable of only limited self-care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours 
ECOG Grade 4: Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self-care. Totally confined to bed or chair 
ECOG Grade 5: Dead 
 


Source: From MM Oken et al: Am J Clin Oncol 5:649, 1982.
 

Increasingly, biologic features of the tumor are being related to prognosis. The expression of particular oncogenes, drug-resistance genes, apoptosis-related genes, and genes involved in metastasis are being found to influence response to therapy and prognosis. The presence of selected cytogenetic abnormalities may influence survival. Tumors with higher growth fractions, as assessed by expression of proliferation-related markers such as proliferating cell nuclear antigen, behave more aggressively than tumors with lower growth fractions. Information obtained from studying the tumor itself will increasingly be used to influence treatment decisions. Host genes involved in drug metabolism can influence the safety and efficacy of particular treatments.

Making a Treatment Plan

From information on the extent of disease and the prognosis and in conjunction with the patient's wishes, it is determined whether the treatment approach should be curative or palliative in intent. Cooperation among the various professionals involved in cancer treatment is of the utmost importance in treatment planning. For some cancers, chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus radiation therapy delivered before the use of definitive surgical treatment (so-called neoadjuvant therapy) may improve the outcome, as seems to be the case for locally advanced breast cancer and head and neck cancers. In certain settings in which combined modality therapy is intended, coordination among the medical oncologist, radiation oncologist, and surgeon is crucial to achieving optimal results. Sometimes the chemotherapy and radiation therapy need to be delivered sequentially, and other times concurrently. Surgical procedures may precede or follow other treatment approaches. It is best for the treatment plan either to follow a standard protocol precisely or else to be part of an ongoing clinical research protocol evaluating new treatments. Ad hoc modifications of standard protocols are likely to compromise treatment results.

The choice of treatment approaches was formerly dominated by the local culture in both the university and the practice settings. However, it is now possible to gain access electronically to standard treatment protocols and to every approved clinical research study in North America through a personal computer interface with the Internet.1

The skilled physician also has much to offer the patient for whom curative therapy is no longer an option. Often a combination of guilt and frustration over the inability to cure the patient and the pressure of a busy schedule greatly limit the time a physician spends with a patient who is receiving only palliative care. Resist these forces. In addition to the medicines administered to alleviate symptoms (see below), it is important to remember the comfort that is provided by holding the patient's hand, continuing regular examinations, and taking time to talk.

Management of Disease and Treatment Complications

Because cancer therapies are toxic (Chap. 85), patient management involves addressing complications of both the disease and its treatment as well as the complex psychosocial problems associated with cancer. In the short term during a course of curative therapy, the patient's functional status may decline. Treatment-induced toxicity is less acceptable if the goal of therapy is palliation. The most common side effects of treatment are nausea and vomiting (see below), febrile neutropenia (Chap. 86), and myelosuppression (Chap. 85). Tools are now available to minimize the acute toxicity of cancer treatment.

New symptoms developing in the course of cancer treatment should always be assumed to be reversible until proven otherwise. The fatalistic attribution of anorexia, weight loss, and jaundice to recurrent or progressive tumor could result in a patient dying from a reversible intercurrent cholecystitis. Intestinal obstruction may be due to reversible adhesions rather than progressive tumor. Systemic infections, sometimes with unusual pathogens, may be a consequence of the immunosuppression associated with cancer therapy. Some drugs used to treat cancer or its complications (e.g., nausea) may produce central nervous system symptoms that look like metastatic disease or may mimic paraneoplastic syndromes such as the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone. A definitive diagnosis should be pursued and may even require a repeat biopsy.

A critical component of cancer management is assessing the response to treatment. In addition to a careful physical examination in which all sites of disease are physically measured and recorded in a flow chart by date, response assessment usually requires periodic repeating of imaging tests that were abnormal at the time of staging. If imaging tests have become normal, repeat biopsy of previously involved tissue is performed to document complete response by pathologic criteria. Biopsies are not usually required if there is macroscopic residual disease. A complete response is defined as disappearance of all evidence of disease, and a partial response as >50% reduction in the sum of the products of the perpendicular diameters of all measurable lesions. The determination of partial response may also be based on a 30% decrease in the sums of the longest diameters of lesions (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, or RECIST, criteria). Progressive disease is defined as the appearance of any new lesion or an increase of >25% in the sum of the products of the perpendicular diameters of all measurable lesions (or an increase of 20% in the sums of the longest diameters by RECIST). Tumor shrinkage or growth that does not meet any of these criteria is considered stable disease. Some sites of involvement (e.g., bone) or patterns of involvement (e.g., lymphangitic lung or diffuse pulmonary infiltrates) are considered unmeasurable. No response is complete without biopsy documentation of their resolution, but partial responses may exclude their assessment unless clear objective progression has occurred.

1 The National Cancer Institute maintains a database called PDQ (Physician Data Query) that is accessible on the Internet under the name CancerNet at www.icic.nci.nih.gov/health.htm. Information can be obtained through a facsimile machine using CancerFax by dialing 301-402-5874. Patient information is also provided by the National Cancer Institute in at least three formats: on the Internet via CancerNet at www.icic.nci.nih.gov/patient.htm, through the CancerFax number listed above, or by calling 1-800-4-CANCER. The quality control for the information provided through these services is rigorous.

Tumor markers may be useful in patient management in certain tumors. Response to therapy may be difficult to gauge with certainty. However, some tumors produce or elicit the production of markers that can be measured in the serum or urine, and in a particular patient, rising and falling levels of the marker are usually associated with increasing or decreasing tumor burden, respectively. Some clinically useful tumor markers are shown in Table 81每6. Tumor markers are not in themselves specific enough to permit a diagnosis of malignancy to be made, but once a malignancy has been diagnosed and shown to be associated with elevated levels of a tumor marker, the marker can be used to assess response to treatment.

Table 81每6 Tumor Markers

 
 
Tumor Markers Cancer Nonneoplastic Conditions 
Hormones  
Human chorionic gonadotropin Gestational trophoblastic disease, gonadal germ cell tumor Pregnancy 
Calcitonin Medullary cancer of the thyroid   
Catecholamines Pheochromocytoma   
Oncofetal Antigens  
 Fetoprotein Hepatocellular carcinoma, gonadal germ cell tumor Cirrhosis, hepatitis 
Carcinoembryonic antigen Adenocarcinomas of the colon, pancreas, lung, breast, ovary Pancreatitis, hepatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, smoking 
Enzymes  
Prostatic acid phosphatase Prostate cancer Prostatitis, prostatic hypertrophy 
Neuron-specific enolase Small cell cancer of the lung, neuroblastoma   
Lactate dehydrogenase Lymphoma, Ewing's sarcoma Hepatitis, hemolytic anemia, many others 
Tumor-Associated Proteins  
Prostate-specific antigen Prostate cancer Prostatitis, prostatic hypertrophy 
Monoclonal immunoglobulin Myeloma Infection, MGUS 
CA-125 Ovarian cancer, some lymphomas Menstruation, peritonitis, pregnancy 
CA 19-9 Colon, pancreatic, breast cancer Pancreatitis, ulcerative colitis 
CD30 Hodgkin's disease, anaplastic large cell lymphoma 〞 
CD25 Hairy cell leukemia, adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma 〞 
 


Abbreviation: MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance.
 

The recognition and treatment of depression are important components of management. The incidence of depression in cancer patients is 25% overall and may be greater in patients with greater debility. This diagnosis is likely in a patient with a depressed mood (dysphoria) and/or a loss of interest in pleasure (anhedonia) for at least 2 weeks. In addition, three or more of the following symptoms are usually present: appetite change, sleep problems, psychomotor retardation or agitation, fatigue, feelings of guilt or worthlessness, inability to concentrate, and suicidal ideation. Patients with these symptoms should receive therapy. Medical therapy with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor such as fluoxetine (10每20 mg/d), sertraline (50每150 mg/d), or paroxetine (10每20 mg/d) or a tricyclic antidepressant such as amitriptyline (50每100 mg/d) or desipramine (75每150 mg/d) should be tried, allowing 4每6 weeks for response. Effective therapy should be continued at least 6 months after resolution of symptoms. If therapy is unsuccessful, other classes of antidepressants may be used. In addition to medication, psychosocial interventions such as support groups, psychotherapy, and guided imagery may be of benefit.

Many patients opt for unproven or unsound approaches to treatment when it appears that conventional medicine is unlikely to be curative. Those seeking such alternatives are often well educated and may be early in the course of their disease. Unsound approaches are usually hawked on the basis of unsubstantiated anecdotes and not only cannot help the patient but may be harmful. Physicians should strive to keep communications open and nonjudgmental, so that patients are more likely to discuss with the physician what they are actually doing. The appearance of unexpected toxicity may be an indication that a supplemental therapy is being taken.2

2 Information about unsound methods may be obtained from the National Council Against Health Fraud, Box 1276, Loma Linda, CA 92354, or from the Center for Medical Consumers and Health Care Information, 237 Thompson Street, New York, NY 10012.

Long-Term Follow-Up/Late Complications

At the completion of treatment, sites originally involved with tumor are reassessed, usually by radiography or imaging techniques, and any persistent abnormality is biopsied. If disease persists, the multidisciplinary team discusses a new salvage treatment plan. If the patient has been rendered disease-free by the original treatment, the patient is followed regularly for disease recurrence. The optimal guidelines for follow-up care are not known. For many years, a routine practice has been to follow the patient monthly for 6每12 months, then every other month for a year, every 3 months for a year, every 4 months for a year, every 6 months for a year, and then annually. At each visit, a battery of laboratory and radiographic and imaging tests were obtained on the assumption that it is best to detect recurrent disease before it becomes symptomatic. However, where follow-up procedures have been examined, this assumption has been found to be untrue. Studies of breast cancer, melanoma, lung cancer, colon cancer, and lymphoma have all failed to support the notion that asymptomatic relapses are more readily cured by salvage therapy than symptomatic relapses. In view of the enormous cost of a full battery of diagnostic tests and their manifest lack of impact on survival, new guidelines are emerging for less frequent follow-up visits, during which the history and physical examination are the major investigations performed.

As time passes, the likelihood of recurrence of the primary cancer diminishes. For many types of cancer, survival for 5 years without recurrence is tantamount to cure. However, important medical problems can occur in patients treated for cancer and must be examined (Chap. 102). Some problems emerge as a consequence of the disease and some as a consequence of the treatment. An understanding of these disease- and treatment-related problems may help in their detection and management.

Despite these concerns, most patients who are cured of cancer return to normal lives.

Supportive Care

In many ways, the success of cancer therapy depends on the success of the supportive care. Failure to control the symptoms of cancer and its treatment may lead patients to abandon curative therapy. Of equal importance, supportive care is a major determinant of quality of life. Even when life cannot be prolonged, the physician must strive to preserve its quality. Quality-of-life measurements have become common endpoints of clinical research studies. Furthermore, palliative care has been shown to be cost-effective when approached in an organized fashion. A credo for oncology could be to cure sometimes, to extend life often, and to comfort always.

Pain

Pain occurs with variable frequency in the cancer patient: 25每50% of patients present with pain at diagnosis, 33% have pain associated with treatment, and 75% have pain with progressive disease. The pain may have several causes. In 70% of cases, pain is caused by the tumor itself〞by invasion of bone, nerves, blood vessels, or mucous membranes or obstruction of a hollow viscus or duct. In 20% of cases, pain is related to a surgical or invasive medical procedure, to radiation injury (mucositis, enteritis, or plexus or spinal cord injury), or to chemotherapy injury (mucositis, peripheral neuropathy, phlebitis, steroid-induced aseptic necrosis of the femoral head). In 10% of cases, pain is unrelated to cancer or its treatment.

Assessment of pain requires the methodical investigation of the history of the pain, its location, character, temporal features, provocative and palliative factors, and intensity (Chap. 11); a review of the oncologic history and past medical history as well as personal and social history; and a thorough physical examination. The patient should be given a 10-division visual analogue scale on which to indicate the severity of the pain. The clinical condition is often dynamic, making it necessary to reassess the patient frequently. Pain therapy should not be withheld while the cause of pain is being sought.

A variety of tools are available with which to address cancer pain. About 85% of patients will have pain relief from pharmacologic intervention. However, other modalities, including antitumor therapy (such as surgical relief of obstruction, radiation therapy, and strontium-89 or samarium-153 treatment for bone pain), neurostimulatory techniques, regional analgesia, or neuroablative procedures are effective in an additional 12% or so. Thus, very few patients will have inadequate pain relief if appropriate measures are taken. A specific approach to pain relief is detailed in Chap. 9.

Nausea

Emesis in the cancer patient is usually caused by chemotherapy (Chap. 85). Its severity can be predicted from the drugs used to treat the cancer. Three forms of emesis are recognized on the basis of their timing with regard to the noxious insult. Acute emesis, the most common variety, occurs within 24 h of treatment. Delayed emesis occurs 1每7 days after treatment; it is rare, but, when present, usually follows cisplatin administration. Anticipatory emesis occurs before administration of chemotherapy and represents a conditioned response to visual and olfactory stimuli previously associated with chemotherapy delivery.

Acute emesis is the best understood form. Stimuli that activate signals in the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the medulla, the cerebral cortex, and peripherally in the intestinal tract lead to stimulation of the vomiting center in the medulla, the motor center responsible for coordinating the secretory and muscle contraction activity that leads to emesis. Diverse receptor types participate in the process, including dopamine, serotonin, histamine, opioid, and acetylcholine receptors. The serotonin receptor antagonists ondansetron and granisetron are the most effective drugs against highly emetogenic agents, but they are expensive.

As with the analgesia ladder, emesis therapy should be tailored to the situation. For mildly and moderately emetogenic agents, prochlorperazine, 5每10 mg PO or 25 mg PR, is effective. Its efficacy may be enhanced by administering the drug before the chemotherapy is delivered. Dexamethasone, 10每20 mg IV, is also effective and may enhance the efficacy of prochlorperazine. For highly emetogenic agents such as cisplatin, mechlorethamine, dacarbazine, and streptozocin, combinations of agents work best and administration should begin 6每24 h before treatment. Ondansetron, 8 mg PO every 6 h the day before therapy and IV on the day of therapy, plus dexamethasone, 20 mg IV before treatment, is an effective regimen. Addition of oral aprepitant (a substance P/neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist) to this regimen (125 mg on day 1, 80 mg on days 2 and 3) further decreases the risk of both acute and delayed vomiting. Like pain, emesis is easier to prevent than to alleviate.

Delayed emesis may be related to bowel inflammation from the therapy and can be controlled with oral dexamethasone and oral metoclopramide, a dopamine receptor antagonist that also blocks serotonin receptors at high dosages. The best strategy for preventing anticipatory emesis is to control emesis in the early cycles of therapy to prevent the conditioning from taking place. If this is unsuccessful, prophylactic antiemetics the day before treatment may help. Experimental studies are evaluating behavior modification.

Effusions

Fluid may accumulate abnormally in the pleural cavity, pericardium, or peritoneum. Asymptomatic malignant effusions may not require treatment. Symptomatic effusions occurring in tumors responsive to systemic therapy usually do not require local treatment but respond to the treatment for the underlying tumor. Symptomatic effusions occurring in tumors unresponsive to systemic therapy may require local treatment in patients with a life expectancy of at least 6 months.

Pleural effusions due to tumors may or may not contain malignant cells. Lung cancer, breast cancer, and lymphomas account for 75% of malignant pleural effusions. Their exudative nature is usually gauged by an effusion/serum protein ratio of 0.5 or an effusion/serum lactate dehydrogenase ratio of 0.6. When the condition is symptomatic, thoracentesis is usually performed first. In most cases, symptomatic improvement occurs for <1 month. Chest tube drainage is required if symptoms recur within 2 weeks. Fluid is aspirated until the flow rate is <100 mL in 24 h. Then either 60 units of bleomycin or 1 g of doxycycline is infused into the chest tube in 50 mL of 5% dextrose in water; the tube is clamped; the patient is rotated on four sides, spending 15 min in each position; and, after 1每2 h, the tube is again attached to suction for another 24 h. The tube is then disconnected from suction and allowed to drain by gravity. If <100 mL drains over the next 24 h, the chest tube is pulled, and a radiograph taken 24 h later. If the chest tube continues to drain fluid at an unacceptably high rate, sclerosis can be repeated. Bleomycin may be somewhat more effective than doxycycline but is very expensive. Doxycycline is usually the drug of first choice. If neither doxycycline nor bleomycin is effective, talc can be used.

Symptomatic pericardial effusions are usually treated by creating a pericardial window or by stripping the pericardium. If the patient's condition does not permit a surgical procedure, sclerosis can be attempted with doxycycline and/or bleomycin.

Malignantascites is usually treated with repeated paracentesis of small volumes of fluid. If the underlying malignancy is unresponsive to systemic therapy, peritoneovenous shunts may be inserted. Despite the fear of disseminating tumor cells into the circulation, widespread metastases are an unusual complication. The major complications are occlusion, leakage, and fluid overload. Patients with severe liver disease may develop disseminated intravascular coagulation.

Nutrition

Cancer and its treatment may lead to a decrease in nutrient intake of sufficient magnitude to cause weight loss and alteration of intermediary metabolism. The prevalence of this problem is difficult to estimate because of variations in the definition of cancer cachexia, but most patients with advanced cancer experience weight loss and decreased appetite. A variety of both tumor-derived factors (e.g., bombesin, adrenocorticotropic hormone) and host-derived factors (e.g., tumor necrosis factor, interleukins 1 and 6, growth hormone) contribute to the altered metabolism, and a vicious cycle is established in which protein catabolism, glucose intolerance, and lipolysis cannot be reversed by the provision of calories.

It remains controversial how to assess nutritional status and when and how to intervene. Efforts to make the assessment objective have included the use of a prognostic nutritional index based on albumin levels, triceps skinfold thickness, transferrin levels, and delayed-type hypersensitivity skin testing. However, a simpler approach has been to define the threshold for nutritional intervention as >10% unexplained body weight loss, serum transferrin level <1500 mg/L (150 mg/dL), and serum albumin <34 g/L (3.4 g/dL).

The decision is important, because it appears that cancer therapy is substantially more toxic and less effective in the face of malnutrition. Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether nutritional intervention can alter the natural history. Unless some pathology is affecting the absorptive function of the gastrointestinal tract, enteral nutrition provided orally or by tube feeding is preferred over parenteral supplementation. However, the risks associated with the tube may outweigh the benefits. Megestrol acetate, a progestational agent, has been advocated as a pharmacologic intervention to improve nutritional status. Research in this area may provide more tools in the future as cytokine-mediated mechanisms are further elucidated.

Psychosocial Support

The psychosocial needs of patients vary with their situation. Patients undergoing treatment experience fear, anxiety, and depression. Self-image is often seriously compromised by deforming surgery and loss of hair. Women who receive cosmetic advice that enables them to look better also feel better. Loss of control over how one spends time can contribute to the sense of vulnerability. Juggling the demands of work and family with the demands of treatment may create enormous stresses. Sexual dysfunction is highly prevalent and needs to be discussed openly with the patient. An empathetic health care team is sensitive to the individual patient's needs and permits negotiation where such flexibility will not adversely affect the course of treatment.

Cancer survivors have other sets of difficulties. Patients may have fears associated with the termination of a treatment they associate with their continued survival. Adjustments are required to physical losses and handicaps, real and perceived. Patients may be preoccupied with minor physical problems. They perceive a decline in their job mobility and view themselves as less desirable workers. They may be victims of job and/or insurance discrimination. Patients may experience difficulty reentering their normal past life. They may feel guilty for having survived and may carry a sense of vulnerability to colds and other illnesses. Perhaps the most pervasive and threatening concern is the ever-present fear of relapse (the Damocles syndrome).

Patients in whom therapy has been unsuccessful have other problems related to the end of life.

Death and Dying

The most common causes of death in patients with cancer are infection (leading to circulatory failure), respiratory failure, hepatic failure, and renal failure. Intestinal blockage may lead to inanition and starvation. Central nervous system disease may lead to seizures, coma, and central hypoventilation. About 70% of patients develop dyspnea preterminally. However, many months usually pass between the diagnosis of cancer and the occurrence of these complications, and during this period the patient is severely affected by the possibility of death. The path of unsuccessful cancer treatment usually occurs in three phases. First, there is optimism at the hope of cure; when the tumor recurs, there is the acknowledgment of an incurable disease, and the goal of palliative therapy is embraced in the hope of being able to live with disease; finally, at the disclosure of imminent death, another adjustment in outlook takes place. The patient imagines the worst in preparation for the end of life and may go through stages of adjustment to the diagnosis. These stages include denial, isolation, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance, and hope. Of course, patients do not all progress through all the stages or proceed through them in the same order or at the same rate. Nevertheless, developing an understanding of how the patient has been affected by the diagnosis and is coping with it is an important goal of patient management.

It is best to speak frankly with the patient and the family regarding the likely course of disease. These discussions can be difficult for the physician as well as for the patient and family. The critical features of the interaction are to reassure the patient and family that everything that can be done to provide comfort will be done. They will not be abandoned. Many patients prefer to be cared for in their homes or in a hospice setting rather than a hospital. The American College of Physicians has published a book called Home Care Guide for Cancer: How to Care for Family and Friends at Home that teaches an approach to successful problem-solving in home care. With appropriate planning, it should be possible to provide the patient with the necessary medical care as well as the psychological and spiritual support that will prevent the isolation and depersonalization that can attend in-hospital death.

The care of dying patients may take a toll on the physician. A "burnout" syndrome has been described that is characterized by fatigue, disengagement from patients and colleagues, and a loss of self-fulfillment. Efforts at stress reduction, maintenance of a balanced life, and setting realistic goals may combat this disorder.

End-of-Life Decisions

Unfortunately, a smooth transition in treatment goals from curative to palliative may not be possible in all cases because of the occurrence of serious treatment-related complications or rapid disease progression. Vigorous and invasive medical support for a reversible disease or treatment complication is assumed to be justified. However, if the reversibility of the condition is in doubt, the patient's wishes determine the level of medical care. These wishes should be elicited before the terminal phase of illness and reviewed periodically. Information about advance directives can be obtained from the American Association of Retired Persons, 601 E Street, NW, Washington, DC 20049, 202-434-2277 or Choice in Dying, 250 West 57th Street, New York, NY 10107, 212-366-5540. A full discussion of end-of-life management is in Chap. 9.
 
Further Readings

Edge SB et al (eds): American Joint Commission on Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. New York, Springer, 2010 

 
Eisenhauer EA et al: New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: Revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 45:228, 2009[PMID: 19097774] 

 
Green E et al: Cancer-related pain management: A report of evidence-based recommendations to guide practice. Clin J Pain 26:449, 2010[PMID: 20551720] 

 
Jemal A et al: Cancer statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J Clin 60:277, 2010[PMID: 20610543] 

 
Kamangar F et al: Patterns of cancer incidence, mortality, and prevalence across five continents: Defining priorities to reduce cancer disparities in different geographic regions of the world. J Clin Oncol 24:2137, 2006[PMID: 16682732] 

 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Clinical Practice Guideline Number 9, Management of Cancer Pain. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research publication no. 94-0592, 1994 

 
Walsh D et al: The symptoms of advanced cancer: Relationship to age, gender, and performance status in 1000 patients. Support Care Cancer 8:175, 2000[PMID: 10789956] 

 
Wickham R: Best practice management of CINV in oncology patients: II. Antiemetic guidelines and rationale for use. J Support Oncol 8:10, 2010[PMID: 20629453] 
 
^^
Prevention and Early Detection of Cancer: Introduction

Improved understanding of carcinogenesis has allowed cancer prevention and early detection (also known as cancer control) to expand beyond the identification and avoidance of carcinogens. Specific interventions to prevent cancer in those at risk, and effective screening for early detection of cancer, are the goals.

Carcinogenesis is not simply an event but a process, a continuum of discrete tissue and cellular changes over time resulting in more autonomous cellular processes. Prevention concerns the identification and manipulation of the biologic, environmental, and genetic factors in the causal pathway of cancer.
 
Education and Healthful Habits

Public education on the avoidance of identified risk factors for cancer and encouraging healthy habits contributes to cancer prevention and control. The clinician is a powerful messenger in this process. The patient-provider encounter provides an opportunity to teach patients about the hazards of smoking, the features of a healthy lifestyle, use of proven cancer screening methods, and sun avoidance.

Smoking Cessation

Tobacco smoking is a strong, modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, and cancer. Smokers have an approximately 1 in 3 lifetime risk of dying prematurely from a tobacco-related cancer or cardiovascular or pulmonary disease. Tobacco use causes more deaths from cardiovascular disease than from cancer. Lung cancer and cancers of the larynx, oropharynx, esophagus, kidney, bladder, pancreas, and stomach are all tobacco-related.

The number of cigarettes smoked per day and the level of inhalation of cigarette smoke are correlated with risk of lung cancer mortality. Light- and low-tar cigarettes are not safer because smokers tend to inhale them more frequently and deeply.

Those who stop smoking have a 30每50% lower 10-year lung cancer mortality rate compared to those who continue smoking, despite the fact that some carcinogen-induced gene mutations persist for years after smoking cessation. Smoking cessation and avoidance have the potential to save more lives than any other public health activity.

The risk of tobacco smoke is not limited to the smoker. Environmental tobacco smoke, known as secondhand or passive smoke, causes lung cancer and other cardiopulmonary diseases in nonsmokers.

Tobacco prevention is a pediatric issue. More than 80% of adult American smokers began smoking before the age of 18 years. Approximately 20% of Americans in Grades 9 through 12 have smoked a cigarette in the past month. Counseling of adolescents and young adults is critical to prevent smoking. A clinician's simple advice to not start smoking or to quit smoking can be of benefit. Providers should query patients on tobacco use and offer smokers assistance in quitting.

Current approaches to smoking cessation recognize that smoking is an addiction (Chap. 395). The smoker who is quitting goes through a process with identifiable stages that include contemplation of quitting, an action phase in which the smoker quits, and a maintenance phase. Smokers who quit completely are more likely to be successful than those who gradually reduce the number of cigarettes smoked or change to lower-tar or lower-nicotine cigarettes. More than 90% of the Americans who have successfully quit smoking did so on their own, without participation in an organized cessation program, but cessation programs are helpful for some smokers. The Community Intervention Trial for Smoking Cessation (COMMIT) was a 4-year program showing that light smokers (<25 cigarettes per day) were more likely to benefit from simple cessation messages and cessation programs than those who did not receive an intervention. Quit rates were 30.6% in the intervention group and 27.5% in the control group. The COMMIT interventions were not successful in heavy smokers (>25 cigarettes per day). Heavy smokers may need an intensive broad-based cessation program that includes counseling, behavioral strategies, and pharmacologic adjuncts, such as nicotine replacement (gum, patches, sprays, lozenges, and inhalers), bupropion, and/or varenicline.

The health risks of cigars are similar to those of cigarettes. Smoking one or two cigars daily doubles the risk for oral and esophageal cancers; three or four cigars daily increases the risk of oral cancers more than eightfold and esophageal cancer fourfold. The risks of occasional use are unknown.

Smokeless tobacco also represents a substantial health risk. Chewing tobacco is a carcinogen linked to dental caries, gingivitis, oral leukoplakia, and oral cancer. The systemic effects of smokeless tobacco (including snuff) may increase risks for other cancers. Esophageal cancer is linked to carcinogens in tobacco dissolved in saliva and swallowed.

Physical Activity

Physical activity is associated with a decreased risk of colon and breast cancer. A variety of mechanisms have been proposed. However, such studies are prone to confounding factors such as recall bias, association of exercise with other health-related practices, and effects of preclinical cancers on exercise habits (reverse causality).

Diet Modification

International epidemiologic studies suggest that diets high in fat are associated with increased risk for cancers of the breast, colon, prostate, and endometrium. These cancers have their highest incidence and mortalities in western cultures, where fat comprises an average of one-third of the total calories consumed.

Despite correlations, dietary fat has not been proven to cause cancer. Case-control and cohort epidemiologic studies give conflicting results. In addition, diet is a highly complex exposure to many nutrients and chemicals. Low-fat diets are associated with many dietary changes beyond simple subtraction of fat. Other lifestyle changes are also associated with adherence to a low-fat diet.

In observational studies, dietary fiber is associated with a reduced risk of colonic polyps and invasive cancer of the colon. However, cancer-protective effects of increasing fiber and lowering dietary fat have not been proven in the context of a prospective clinical trial. The putative protective mechanisms are complex and speculative. Fiber binds oxidized bile acids and generates soluble fiber products, such as butyrate, that may have differentiating properties. Fiber does not increase bowel transit times. High-fiber diets could lower the risk of breast and prostate cancer by absorbing and inactivating dietary estrogenic and androgenic cancer promoters. However, two large prospective cohort studies of >100,000 health professionals showed no association between fruit and vegetable intake and risk of cancer.

The Polyp Prevention Trial randomly assigned 2000 elderly persons, who had polyps removed, to a low-fat, high-fiber diet versus routine diet for 4 years. No differences were noted in polyp formation.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health Women's Health Initiative, launched in 1994, was a long-term clinical trial enrolling >100,000 women aged 45每69 years. It placed women in 22 intervention groups. Participants received calcium/vitamin D supplementation; hormone-replacement therapy; and counseling to increase exercise, eat a low-fat diet with increased consumption of fruits, vegetables, and fiber, and cease smoking. The study showed that while dietary fat intake was lower in the diet intervention group, invasive breast cancers were not reduced over an 8-year follow-up period compared to the control group. No reduction was seen in the incidence of colorectal cancer in the dietary intervention arm. The difference in dietary fat averaged 10% between the two groups. Evidence does not currently establish the anticarcinogenic value of vitamin, mineral, or nutritional supplements in amounts greater than those provided by a balanced diet.

Energy Balance

Risk of cancer appears to increase as body mass index increases to more than 25 kg/m2. Obesity is associated with increased risk for cancers of the colon, breast (female postmenopausal), endometrium, kidney (renal cell), and esophagus, although causality has not been established.

In observational studies, relative risks of colon cancer are increased in obesity by 1.5每2 for men and 1.2每1.5 for women. Obese postmenopausal women have a 30每50% increased risk of breast cancer. A hypothesis for the association is that adipose tissue serves as a depot for aromatase that facilitates estrogen production.

Sun Avoidance

Nonmelanoma skin cancers (basal cell and squamous cell) are induced by cumulative exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Intermittent acute sun exposure and sun damage have been linked to melanoma, but the evidence is inconsistent. Sunburns, especially in childhood and adolescence, may be associated with an increased risk of melanoma in adulthood. Reduction of sun exposure through use of protective clothing and changing patterns of outdoor activities can reduce skin cancer risk. Sunscreens decrease the risk of actinic keratoses, the precursor to squamous cell skin cancer, but melanoma risk may not be reduced. Sunscreens prevent burning, but they may encourage more prolonged exposure to the sun and may not filter out wavelengths of energy that cause melanoma.

Educational interventions to help individuals accurately assess their risk of developing skin cancer have some impact. Self-examination for skin pigment characteristics associated with skin cancer, such as freckling, may be useful in identifying people at high risk. Those who recognize themselves as being at risk tend to be more compliant with sun-avoidance recommendations. Risk factors for melanoma include a propensity to sunburn, a large number of benign melanocytic nevi, and atypical nevi.
 
Cancer Chemoprevention

Chemoprevention involves the use of specific natural or synthetic chemical agents to reverse, suppress, or prevent carcinogenesis before the development of invasive malignancy.

Cancer develops through an accumulation of tissue abnormalities associated with genetic and epigenetic changes that are potential points of intervention to prevent cancer. The initial changes are termed initiation. The alteration can be inherited or acquired through the action of physical, infectious, or chemical carcinogens. Like most human diseases, cancer arises from an interaction between genetics and environmental exposures (Table 82每1). Influences that cause the initiated cell to progress through the carcinogenic process and change phenotypically are termed promoters. Promoters include hormones such as androgens, linked to prostate cancer, and estrogen, linked to breast and endometrial cancer. The distinction between an initiator and promoter is sometimes arbitrary; some components of cigarette smoke are "complete carcinogens," acting as both initiators and promoters. Cancer can be prevented or controlled through interference with the factors that cause cancer initiation, promotion, or progression. Compounds of interest in chemoprevention often have antimutagenic, hormone modulation, anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative, or pro-apoptotic activity (or a combination).

Table 82每1 Suspected Carcinogens

 
 
Carcinogensa  Associated Cancer or Neoplasm 
Alkylating agents Acute myeloid leukemia, bladder cancer 
Androgens Prostate cancer 
Aromatic amines (dyes) Bladder cancer 
Arsenic Cancer of the lung, skin 
Asbestos Cancer of the lung, pleura, peritoneum 
Benzene Acute myelocytic leukemia 
Chromium Lung cancer 
Diethylstilbestrol (prenatal) Vaginal cancer (clear cell) 
Epstein-Barr virus Burkitt's lymphoma, nasal T cell lymphoma 
Estrogens Cancer of the endometrium, liver, breast 
Ethyl alcohol Cancer of the liver, esophagus, head and neck 
Helicobacter pylori  Gastric cancer, gastric MALT lymphoma 
Hepatitis B or C virus Liver cancer 
Human immunodeficiency virus Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, squamous cell carcinomas (especially of the urogenital tract) 
Human papilloma virus Cervix cancer, head and neck cancer 
Human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma 
Immunosuppressive agents (azathioprine, cyclosporine, glucocorticoids) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
Ionizing radiation (therapeutic or diagnostic) Breast, bladder, thyroid, soft tissue, bone, hematopoietic, and many more 
Nitrogen mustard gas Cancer of the lung, head and neck, nasal sinuses 
Nickel dust Cancer of the lung, nasal sinuses 
Phenacetin Cancer of the renal pelvis and bladder 
Polycyclic hydrocarbons Cancer of the lung, skin (especially squamous cell carcinoma of scrotal skin) 
Schistosomiasis Bladder cancer (squamous cell) 
Sunlight (ultraviolet) Skin cancer (squamous cell and melanoma) 
Tobacco (including smokeless) Cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract, bladder 
Vinyl chloride Liver cancer (angiosarcoma) 
 


aAgents that are thought to act as cancer initiators and/or promoters.
 

Chemoprevention of Cancers of the Upper Aerodigestive Tract

Smoking causes diffuse epithelial injury in the oral cavity, neck, esophagus, and lung. Patients cured of squamous cell cancers of the lung, esophagus, oral cavity, and neck are at risk (as high as 5% per year) of developing second cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract. Cessation of cigarette smoking does not markedly decrease the cured cancer patient's risk of second malignancy, even though it does lower the cancer risk in those who have never developed a malignancy. Smoking cessation may halt the early stages of the carcinogenic process (such as metaplasia), but it may have no effect on late stages of carcinogenesis. This "field carcinogenesis" hypothesis for upper aerodigestive tract cancer has made "cured" patients an important population for chemoprevention of second malignancies.

Oral human papilloma virus (HPV) infection, particularly HPV-16, increases the risk for cancers of the oropharynx. This association exists even in the absence of other risk factors such as smoking or alcohol use (although the magnitude of increased risk appears greater than additive when HPV infection and smoking are both present). Oral HPV infection is believed to be largely sexually acquired. The introduction of the HPV vaccine might eventually reduce oropharyngeal cancer rates.

Oral leukoplakia, a premalignant lesion commonly found in smokers, has been used as an intermediate marker allowing demonstration of chemopreventive activity in smaller shorter-duration, randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Response was associated with upregulation of retinoic acid receptor- (RAR-). Therapy with high, relatively toxic doses of isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) causes regression of oral leukoplakia. However, the lesions recur when the therapy is withdrawn, suggesting the need for long-term administration. More tolerable doses of isotretinoin have not proven beneficial in the prevention of head and neck cancer. Isotretinoin also failed to prevent second malignancies in patients cured of early-stage non-small cell lung cancer; mortality rates were actually increased in current smokers.

Several large-scale trials have assessed agents in the chemoprevention of lung cancer in patients at high risk. In the -tocopherol/-carotene (ATBC) Lung Cancer Prevention Trial, participants were male smokers, ages 50每69 years at entry. Participants had smoked an average of one pack of cigarettes per day for 35.9 years. Participants received -tocopherol, -carotene, and/or placebo in a randomized, two-by-two factorial design. After median follow-up of 6.1 years, lung cancer incidence and mortality were statistically significantly increased in those receiving -carotene. -Tocopherol had no effect on lung cancer mortality, and no evidence suggested interaction between the two drugs. Patients receiving -tocopherol had a higher incidence of hemorrhagic stroke.

The -Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) involved 17,000 American smokers and workers with asbestos exposure. Entrants were randomly assigned to one of four arms and received -carotene, retinol, and/or placebo in a two-by-two factorial design. This trial also demonstrated harm from -carotene: a lung cancer rate of 5 per 1000 subjects per year for those taking placebo and of 6 per 1000 subjects per year for those taking -carotene.

The ATBC and CARET results demonstrate the importance of testing chemoprevention hypotheses thoroughly before their widespread implementation as the results contradict a number of observational studies. The Physicians' Health Trial showed no change in the risk of lung cancer for those taking -carotene; however, fewer of its participants were smokers than those in the ATBC and CARET studies.

Chemoprevention of Colon Cancer

Many colon cancer prevention trials are based on the premise that most colorectal cancers develop from adenomatous polyps. These trials use adenoma recurrence or disappearance as a surrogate endpoint (not yet validated) for colon cancer prevention. Early clinical trial results suggest that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as piroxicam, sulindac, and aspirin, may prevent adenoma formation or cause regression of adenomatous polyps. The mechanism of action of NSAIDs is unknown, but they are presumed to work through the cyclooxygenase pathway. Pooled findings from observational cohort studies demonstrate a relative reduction in colorectal cancer incidence of approximately 22%, and a relative reduction in colorectal adenoma incidence of about 28%, with regular aspirin use; however, in two randomized controlled trials (the Physicians' Health Study and the Women's Health Study), aspirin had no effect on colon cancer or adenoma incidence in persons with no previous history of colonic lesions, at up to 10 years of therapy. The randomized controlled trials did show an approximately 18% relative risk reduction for colonic adenoma incidence in persons with a previous history of adenomas after 1 year's therapy.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors have also been considered for colorectal cancer and polyp prevention. Trials with COX-2 inhibitors were initiated but an increased risk of cardiovascular events in those taking the COX-2 inhibitors was noted, suggesting that these agents are not suitable for chemoprevention in the general population.

Epidemiologic studies suggest that diets high in calcium lower colon cancer risk. Calcium binds bile and fatty acids, which cause proliferation of colonic epithelium. It is hypothesized that calcium reduces intraluminal exposure to these compounds. The randomized controlled Calcium Polyp Prevention Study found that calcium supplementation decreased the absolute risk of adenomatous polyp recurrence by 7% at 4 years; extended observational follow-up demonstrated a 12% absolute risk reduction 5 years after cessation of treatment. However, in the Women's Health Initiative, combined use of calcium carbonate and vitamin D twice daily did not reduce the incidence of invasive colorectal cancer compared with placebo after 7 years.

The Women's Health Initiative demonstrated that postmenopausal women taking estrogen plus progestin have a 44% lower risk of colorectal cancer compared to women taking placebo. Of >16,600 women randomized and followed for a median of 5.6 years, 43 invasive colorectal cancers occurred in the hormone group and 72 in the placebo group. The positive effect on colon cancer is mitigated by the modest increase in cardiovascular and breast cancer risks associated with combined estrogen plus progestin therapy.

A case-control study suggested that statins decrease the incidence of colorectal cancer; however, several subsequent case-control and cohort studies have not demonstrated an association between regular statin use and a reduced risk of colorectal cancer. No randomized controlled trials have addressed this hypothesis. A meta-analysis of statin use showed no protective effect of statins on overall cancer incidence or death.

Chemoprevention of Breast Cancer

Tamoxifen is an antiestrogen with partial estrogen agonistic activity in some tissues, such as endometrium and bone. One of its actions is to upregulate transforming growth factor , which decreases breast cell proliferation. In randomized placebo-controlled trials to assess tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer, tamoxifen reduced the number of new breast cancers in the opposite breast by more than a third. In a randomized placebo-controlled prevention trial involving >13,000 women at high risk, tamoxifen decreased the risk of developing breast cancer by 49% (from 43.4 to 22 per 1000 women) after a median follow-up of nearly 6 years. Tamoxifen also reduced bone fractures; a small increase in risk of endometrial cancer, stroke, pulmonary emboli, and deep vein thrombosis was noted. The International Breast Cancer Intervention Study (IBIS-I) and the Italian Randomized Tamoxifen Prevention Trial also demonstrated a reduction in breast cancer incidence with tamoxifen use. Tamoxifen has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for reduction of breast cancer in women at high risk for the disease (1.66% risk at 5 years based on the Gail risk model: http://www.nci.nih.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/breast-and-ovarian/healthprofessional#Section_66).

A trial comparing tamoxifen with another selective estrogen receptor modulator, raloxifene, showed that raloxifene is comparable to tamoxifen in cancer prevention. This trial only included postmenopausal women. Raloxifene was associated with more noninvasive breast cancer than tamoxifen; the drugs are similar in risks of other cancers, fractures, ischemic heart disease, and stroke. Because the aromatase inhibitors are even more effective than tamoxifen in adjuvant breast cancer therapy, it is hoped that they would be more effective in breast cancer prevention. However, no data are yet available on this point.

Chemoprevention of Prostate Cancer

Finasteride is a 5--reductase inhibitor. It inhibits conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a potent stimulator of prostate cell proliferation. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) randomly assigned men aged 55 years or older at average risk of prostate cancer to finasteride or placebo. All men in the trial were being regularly screened with PSA and digital rectal examination. After 7 years of therapy, the incidence of prostate cancer was 18.4% in the finasteride arm and 24.8% in the placebo arm, a statistically significant difference. However, the finasteride group had more patients with tumors of Gleason score 7 and higher compared to the placebo arm (6.4 vs 5.1%). The clinical significance of this finding, if any, is unknown. The observed increase in high-grade tumors was spurious and likely due to an increased sensitivity of PSA and digital rectal exam for high-grade tumors in men receiving finasteride.

Another 5--reductase inhibitor, dutasteride, has also been evaluated as a preventive agent for prostate cancer. The Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE) trial was a randomized double-blind trial in which approximately 8200 men with an elevated PSA (2.5每10 ng/mL for men aged 50每60 years and 3每10 ng/mL for men aged 60 years or older) and negative prostate biopsy on enrollment received daily 0.5 mg dutasteride or placebo. A preliminary report from this trial noted a statistically significant 23% relative risk reduction in the incidence of biopsy-detected prostate cancer in the dutasteride arm at 4 years of treatment (659 cases vs 857 cases, respectively). Unlike the PCPT, no difference was observed in the rates of high-grade prostate cancer. Since all men in both the PCPT and REDUCE trials were being screened and since screening approximately doubles the rate of prostate cancer, it is not known if finasteride or dutasteride decrease the risk of prostate cancer in men who are not being screened.

Several favorable laboratory and observational studies led to the formal evaluation of selenium and -tocopherol (vitamin E) as potential prostate cancer preventives. The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) assigned 35,533 men to receive 200 g/d selenium, 400 IU/d -tocopherol, selenium plus vitamin E, or placebo. After a median follow-up of 5.5 years, no significant difference in the prostate cancer incidence rate was observed for any group. In fact, compared to placebo, a trend toward an increased risk of developing prostate cancer was observed for those men taking vitamin E alone (hazard ratio 1.13, 95% confidence interval, 0.99每1.29)

Vaccines and Cancer Prevention

A number of infectious agents cause cancer. Hepatitis B and C are linked to liver cancer; some human papilloma virus (HPV) strains are linked to cervical and head and neck cancer; and Helicobacter pylori is associated with gastric adenocarcinoma and gastric lymphoma. Vaccines to protect against these agents may reduce the risk of their associated cancers.

The hepatitis B vaccine is effective in preventing hepatitis and hepatomas due to chronic hepatitis B infection. Public health officials are encouraging widespread administration of the hepatitis B vaccine, especially in Asia, where the disease is epidemic.

A quadrivalent HPV vaccine (covering HPV strains 6, 11, 16, and 18) and a bivalent vaccine (covering HPV strains 16 and 18) are available for use in the United States. HPV types 16 and 18 cause cervical cancer, and types 6 and 11 cause genital papillomas. For females not previously infected with these HPV strains, the vaccines demonstrate high efficacy in preventing persistent strain-specific HPV infections. Trials that evaluated the vaccines' ability to prevent cervical cancer relied on surrogate outcome measures [cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) I, II, and III], and no cases of cervical cancer were observed in either the vaccine or control arms. The vaccines do not appear to impact preexisting infections; efficacy was markedly lower for populations that had previously been exposed to vaccine-specific HPV strains. The vaccine is recommended for girls and women ages 9每26 years. Reduction in these HPV types could prevent >70% of cervical cancers worldwide.
 
Surgical Prevention of Cancer

Some organs in some individuals are at such high risk of developing cancer that surgical removal of the organ at risk may be considered. Women with severe cervical dysplasia are treated with conization and occasionally even hysterectomy. Colectomy is used to prevent colon cancer in patients with familial polyposis or ulcerative colitis.

Prophylactic bilateral mastectomy may be chosen for breast cancer prevention among women with genetic predisposition to breast cancer. In a prospective series of 139 women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, 76 chose to undergo prophylactic mastectomy and 63 chose close surveillance. At 3 years, no cases of breast cancer had been diagnosed in those opting for surgery, but 8 in the surveillance group had developed breast cancer. A larger (n = 639) retrospective cohort study reported that 3 patients developed breast cancer after prophylactic mastectomy compared with an expected incidence of 30每53 cases: a 90每94% reduction in breast cancer risk. The effect of the procedure on mortality is unknown.

Prophylactic oophorectomy may also be employed for the prevention of ovarian and breast cancers among high-risk women. A case-control study of women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations found that 6 (2.8%) of 259 women who underwent bilateral prophylactic oophorectomy had stage I ovarian cancer at the time of surgery and 2 (0.8%) developed papillary serous peritoneal carcinoma over 9 years. By comparison, 58 (19.9%) of 292 women in the matched control group developed ovarian cancer: this corresponds to a 96% relative risk reduction for ovarian cancer with the use of prophylactic surgery. Studies of prophylactic oophorectomy for prevention of breast cancer in women with genetic mutations have shown relative risk reductions of approximately 50%.

At present, all of the evidence concerning the use of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy for prevention of breast and ovarian cancer in high-risk women has been observational in nature; such studies are prone to a variety of biases, including case selection bias, family relationships between patients and controls, and inadequate information about hormone use. Thus, they may give an overestimate of the magnitude of benefit.

Orchiectomy is an effective method of androgen deprivation in prostate cancer.

Cancer Screening

Screening is a means of detecting disease early in asymptomatic individuals, with the goal of decreasing morbidity and mortality. While screening can potentially reduce disease-specific deaths and has been shown to do so in cervical, colon, and breast cancer, it is also subject to a number of biases that can suggest a benefit when actually there is none. Biases can even mask net harm. Early detection does not in itself confer benefit. To be of value, screening must detect disease earlier, and treatment of earlier disease must yield a better outcome than treatment at the onset of symptoms. Cause-specific mortality, rather than survival after diagnosis, is the preferred endpoint (see below).

Because screening is done on asymptomatic, healthy persons, it should offer substantial likelihood of benefit that outweighs harm. Screening tests and their appropriate use should be carefully evaluated before their use is widely encouraged in screening programs, as a matter of public policy.

A large and increasing number of genetic mutations and nucleotide polymorphisms have been associated with an increased risk of cancer. Testing for these genetic mutations could in theory define a high-risk population. However, most of the identified mutations have very low penetrance and individually provide minimal predictive accuracy. The ability to predict the development of a particular cancer may some day present therapeutic options as well as ethical dilemmas. It may eventually allow for early intervention to prevent a cancer or limit its severity. People at high risk may be ideal candidates for chemoprevention and screening; however, efficacy of these interventions in the high-risk population should be investigated. Currently, persons at high risk for a particular cancer can engage in intensive screening. While this course is clinically reasonable, it is not known if it saves lives in these populations.

The Accuracy of Screening

A screening test's accuracy or ability to discriminate disease is described by four indices: sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value (Table 82每2). Sensitivity, also called the true positive rate, is the proportion of persons with the disease who test positive in the screen (i.e., the ability of the test to detect disease when it is present). Specificity, or 1 minus the false positive rate, is the proportion of persons who do not have the disease and test negative in the screening test (i.e., the ability of a test to correctly identify that the disease is not present). The positive predictive value is the proportion of persons who test positive and actually have the disease. Similarly, negative predictive value is the proportion testing negative who do not have the disease. The sensitivity and specificity of a test are independent of the underlying prevalence (or risk) of the disease in the population screened, but the predictive values depend strongly on the prevalence of the disease.

Table 82每2 Assessment of the Value of a Diagnostic Testa

 
 
  Condition Present Condition Absent 
Positive test a  b  
Negative test c  d  
a = true positive

b = false positive

c = false negative

d = true negative
     
Sensitivity   The proportion of persons with the condition who test positive: a/(a + c)  
Specificity   The proportion of persons without the condition who test negative: d/(b + d)  
Positive predictive value (PPV)   The proportion of persons with a positive test who have the condition: a/(a + b)  
Negative predictive value   The proportion of persons with a negative test who do not have the condition: d/(c + d)  
Prevalence, sensitivity, and specificity determine PPV


     
 


aFor diseases of low prevalence, such as cancer, poor specificity has a dramatic adverse effect on PPV such that only a small fraction of positive tests are true positives.
 

Screening is most beneficial, efficient, and economical when the target disease is common in the population being screened. To be valuable, the screening test should have a high specificity; sensitivity need not be very high.

Potential Biases of Screening Tests

Common biases of screening are lead time, length-biased sampling, and selection. These biases can make a screening test seem beneficial when actually it is not (or even causes net harm). Whether beneficial or not, screening can create the false impression of an epidemic by increasing the number of cancers diagnosed. It can also produce a shift in proportion of patients diagnosed at an early stage and inflated survival statistics without reducing mortality (i.e., the number of deaths from a given cancer relative to the number of those at risk for the cancer). In such a case, the apparent duration of survival (measured from date of diagnosis) increases without lives being saved or life expectancy changed.

Lead-time bias occurs when a test does not influence the natural history of the disease; the patient is merely diagnosed at an earlier date. When lead-time bias occurs, survival appears increased, but life is not really prolonged. The screening test only prolongs the time the subject is aware of the disease and spends as a patient.

Length-biased sampling occurs because screening tests generally can more easily detect slow-growing, less aggressive cancers than fast-growing cancers. Cancers diagnosed due to the onset of symptoms between scheduled screenings are on average more aggressive, and treatment outcomes are not as favorable. An extreme form of length bias sampling is termed overdiagnosis, the detection of "pseudo disease." The reservoir of some undetected slow-growing tumors is large. Many of these tumors fulfill the histologic criteria of cancer but will never become clinically significant or cause death. This problem is compounded by the fact that the most common cancers appear most frequently at ages when competing causes of death are more frequent.

Selection bias must be considered in assessing the results of any screening effort. The population most likely to seek screening may differ from the general population to which the screening test might be applied. In general, volunteers for studies are more health conscious and likely to have a better prognosis or lower mortality rate, irrespective of the screening result. This is termed the healthy volunteer effect.

Potential Drawbacks of Screening

Risks associated with screening include harm caused by the screening intervention itself, harm due to the further investigation of persons with positive tests (both true and false positives), and harm from the treatment of persons with a true-positive result, even if life is extended by treatment. The diagnosis and treatment of cancers that would never have caused medical problems can lead to the harm of unnecessary treatment and give patients the anxiety of a cancer diagnosis. The psychosocial impact of cancer screening can also be substantial when applied to the entire population.

Assessment of Screening Tests

Good clinical trial design can offset some biases of screening and demonstrate the relative risks and benefits of a screening test. A randomized controlled screening trial with cause-specific mortality as the endpoint provides the strongest support for a screening intervention. Overall mortality should also be reported to detect an adverse effect of screening and treatment on other disease outcomes (e.g., cardiovascular disease). In a randomized trial, two like populations are randomly established. One is given the usual standard of care (which may be no screening at all) and the other receives the screening intervention being assessed. The two populations are compared over time. Efficacy for the population studied is established when the group receiving the screening test has a better cause-specific mortality rate than the control group. Studies showing a reduction in the incidence of advanced-stage disease, an improved survival, or a stage shift are weaker (and possibly misleading) evidence of benefit. These latter criteria are necessary but not sufficient to establish the value of a screening test.

Although a randomized, controlled screening trial provides the strongest evidence to support a screening test, it is not perfect. Unless the trial is population-based, it does not remove the question of generalizability to the target population. Screening trials generally involve thousands of persons and last for years. Less definitive study designs are therefore often used to estimate the effectiveness of screening practices. However, every non-randomized study design is subject to strong confounders. In descending order of strength, evidence may also be derived from the findings of internally controlled trials using intervention allocation methods other than randomization (e.g., allocation by birth date, date of clinic visit); the findings of cohort or case-control analytic observational studies; or the results of multiple time series studies with or without the intervention.

Screening for Specific Cancers

Widespread screening for cervical, colon, and breast cancer is beneficial for certain age groups. A number of organizations have considered whether or not to endorse routine use of certain screening tests. Because these groups have not used the same criteria to judge whether a screening test should be endorsed, they have arrived at different recommendations. The American Cancer Society (ACS) and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) publish screening guidelines (Table 82每3); the American College of Physicians (ACP) and the American Academy of Family Practitioners (AAFP) generally follow/endorse the USPSTF recommendations. Special surveillance of those at high risk for a specific cancer because of a family history or a genetic risk factor may be prudent, but few studies have assessed the influence on mortality.

Table 82每3 Screening Recommendations for Asymptomatic Normal-Risk Subjectsa

 
 
Test or Procedure USPSTF ACS 
Sigmoidoscopy Adults 50每75 years: every 5 years ("A")b

Adults 76每85 years: "C"

Adults 85 years: "D"
 Adults 50 years: Screen every 5 years 
Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) Adults 50每75 years: Annually ("A")

Adults 76每85 years: "C"

Adults 85 years: "D"
 Adults 50 years: Screen every year 
Colonoscopy Adults 50每75 years: every 10 years ("A")

Adults 76每85 years: "C"

Adults 85 years: "D"
 Adults 50 years: Screen every 10 years 
Fecal DNA testing "I" Adults 50 years: Screen, but interval uncertain 
Fecal immunochemical testing (FIT) "I" Adults 50 years: Screen every year 
CT colonography "I" Adults 50 years: Screen every 5 years 
Digital rectal examination (DRE) No recommendation Men 50 years, with a 10-year life expectancy; men 45 years, if African-American, or men with a first-degree relative diagnosed with prostate cancer <65 years; 40, if has several relatives with prostate cancer <65 years: Discuss and offer (with PSA testing) annually 
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) Men <75 years: "I"

Men 75 years: "D"
 As for DRE 
Pap test Women <65 years: Beginning 3 years after first intercourse or by age 21, screen at least every 3 years ("A")

Women 65 years, with adequate, normal recent Pap screenings: "D"

Women after total hysterectomy for noncancerous causes: "D"
 Women <30 years: Beginning 3 years after first intercourse or by age 21. Yearly for standard Pap; every 2 years with liquid test.

Women 30每70 years: Every 2每3 years if last 3 tests normal

Women 70 years: May stop screening if no abnormal Pap in past 10 years

Women after total hysterectomy for noncancerous causes: Do not screen
 
Breast self-examination "D" Women 20 years: Breast self-exam is an option 
Breast clinical examination Women 40 years: "I" (as a stand-alone without mammography) Women 20每40 years: Perform every 3 years

Women 40 years: Perform annually
 
Mammography Women 40每49 years: The decision should be an individual one, and take patient context into account ("C")

Women 50每74 years: every 2 years ("B") Women 75 years: ("I")
 Women 40 years: Screen annually 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) "I" Women >20% lifetime risk of breast cancer: Screen with MRI plus mammography annually

Women 15每20% lifetime risk of breast cancer: Discuss option of MRI plus mammography annually

Women <15% lifetime risk of breast cancer: Do not screen annually with MRI
 
Complete skin examination "I" Self-examination monthly; clinical exam as part of routine cancer-related checkup 
 


aSummary of the screening procedures recommended for the general population by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the American Cancer Society. These recommendations refer to asymptomatic persons who have no risk factors, other than age or gender, for the targeted condition. bUSPSTF lettered recommendations are defined as follows: "A": The USPSTF strongly recommends that clinicians provide (the service) to eligible patients; "B": The USPSTF recommends that clinicians provide (this service) to eligible patients; "C": The USPSTF makes no recommendation for or against routine provision of (the service); "D": The USPSTF recommends against routinely providing [the service] to asymptomatic patients; "I": The USPSTF concludes that the evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against routinely providing (the service). Abbreviations: ACS, American Cancer Society; USPSTF, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
 

Breast Cancer

Breast self-examination, clinical breast examination by a caregiver, mammography, and MRI have all been variably advocated as useful screening tools.

A number of trials have suggested that annual or biennial screening with mammography or mammography plus clinical breast examination in normal-risk women older than age 50 years decreases breast cancer mortality. Each trial has been criticized for design flaws. In most trials, breast cancer mortality rate is decreased by 15每30%. Experts disagree on whether average-risk women aged 40每49 years should receive regular screening (Table 82每3). The U.K. Age Trial, the only randomized trial of breast cancer screening to specifically evaluate the impact of mammography in women aged 40每49 years, found no statistically significant difference in breast cancer mortality for screened women versus controls after about 11 years of follow-up (RR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.66每1.04); however, less than 70% of women received screening in the intervention arm, potentially diluting the observed effect. A meta-analysis of eight large randomized trials showed a 15% relative reduction in mortality (RR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.75每0.96) from mammography screening for women aged 39每49 years after 11每20 years of follow-up. This is equivalent to a number needed to invite to screening of 1904 over 10 years to prevent one breast cancer death. At the same time, nearly half of women aged 40每49 years screened annually will have false-positive mammograms necessitating further evaluation, often including biopsy. Estimates of overdiagnosis range from 10 to 40% of diagnosed invasive cancers.

No study of breast self-examination has shown it to decrease mortality. A randomized controlled trial of approximately 266,000 women in China demonstrated no difference in mortality between a group that received intensive breast self-exam instruction and reinforcement/reminders and controls at 10 years of follow-up. However, more benign breast lesions were discovered and more breast biopsies were performed in the self-examination arm.

Genetic screening for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations and other markers of breast cancer risk has identified a group of women at high risk for breast cancer. Unfortunately, when to begin and the optimal frequency of screening have not been defined. Mammography is less sensitive at detecting breast cancers in women carrying BRCA1 and -2 mutations, possibly because such cancers occur in younger women, in whom mammography is known to be less sensitive. MRI screening may be more sensitive than mammography in women at high risk due to genetic predisposition or in women with very dense breast tissue, but specificity may be lower. An increase in overdiagnosis may accompany the higher sensitivity. The impact of MRI on breast cancer mortality with or without concomitant use of mammography has not been evaluated in a randomized controlled trial.

Cervical Cancer

Screening with Papanicolaou smears decreases cervical cancer mortality. The cervical cancer mortality rate has fallen substantially since the widespread use of the Pap smear. Screening guidelines recommend regular Pap testing for all women who have reached the age of 21; some organizations advocate beginning earlier depending on sexual history. With the onset of sexual activity comes the risk of sexual transmission of HPV, the most common etiologic factor for cervical cancer. The recommended interval for Pap screening varies from 1 to 3 years. At age 30, women who have had three normal test results in a row may get screened every 2每3 years. An upper age limit at which screening ceases to be effective is not known, but women aged 65每70 years with no abnormal results in the previous 10 years may choose to stop screening. Screening should be discontinued in women who have undergone a hysterectomy for non-cancerous reasons.

Although the efficacy of the Papanicolaou smear in reducing cervical cancer mortality has never been directly confirmed in a randomized, controlled setting, a clustered randomized trial in India evaluated the impact of one-time cervical visual inspection and immediate colposcopy, biopsy, and/or cryotherapy (where indicated) versus counseling on cervical cancer deaths in women aged 30每59 years. After 7 years of follow-up, the age-standardized rate of death due to cervical cancer was 39.6 per 100,000 person-years in the intervention group versus 56.7 per 100,000 person-years in controls.

Colorectal Cancer

Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT), digital rectal examination (DRE), rigid and flexible sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, and CT colonography have been considered for colorectal cancer screening. Annual FOBT could reduce colorectal cancer mortality by a third. The sensitivity for fecal occult blood is increased if specimens are re-hydrated before testing, but at the cost of lower specificity. The false-positive rate for rehydrated FOBT is high; 1每5% of persons tested have a positive test. Only 2每10% of those with occult blood in the stool have cancer and 20每30% have adenomas. The high false-positive rate of FOBT dramatically increases the number of colonoscopies performed.

Fecal immunochemical tests appear to have higher sensitivity for colorectal cancer than nonrehydrated FOBT tests. Fecal DNA testing is an emerging testing modality; it appears to have increased sensitivity and comparable specificity to FOBT and could potentially reduce harms associated with follow-up of false-positive tests. The body of evidence on the operating characteristics and effectiveness of fecal DNA tests in reducing colorectal cancer mortality is limited.

Two case-control studies suggest that regular screening of those older than age 50 years with sigmoidoscopy decreases mortality. This type of study is prone to selection biases. A quarter to a third of polyps can be discovered with the rigid sigmoidoscope; half are found with a 35-cm flexible scope and two-thirds to three-quarters are found with a 60-cm scope. Diagnosis of adenomatous polyps by sigmoidoscopy should lead to evaluation of the entire colon with colonoscopy. The most efficient interval for screening sigmoidoscopy is unknown, but 5 years is often recommended. Case-control studies suggest that intervals of up to 15 years may confer benefit.

One-time colonoscopy detects 25% more advanced lesions (polyps >10 mm, villous adenomas, adenomatous polyps with high-grade dysplasia, invasive cancer) than one-time FOBT with sigmoidoscopy. Perforation rates are about 3/1000 for colonoscopy and 1/1000 for sigmoidoscopy. Debate continues on whether colonoscopy is too expensive and invasive for widespread use as a screening tool in standard-risk populations. Two observational studies suggest that efficacy of colonoscopy to decrease colorectal cancer mortality is restricted to the left side of the colon. CT colonography, if done at expert centers, appears to have a sensitivity for polyps 6 mm comparable to colonoscopy. However, the rate of extracolonic findings of abnormalities of uncertain significance that must nevertheless be worked up is high (15每30%); the long-term cumulative radiation risk of repeated colonography screenings is also a concern.

Lung Cancer

Chest x-ray and sputum cytology have been evaluated in randomized lung cancer screening trials. No reduction in lung cancer mortality has been seen, although all controlled trials have had low statistical power. Preliminary (unpublished) findings from the National Lung Screening Trial, a randomized controlled trial of screening for lung cancer in approximately 53,000 persons aged 55-74 years with a 30+ pack-year smoking history, have shown a statistically significant 20% reduction in lung cancer mortality in the spiral CT arm (354 deaths) compared to the chest x-ray arm (442 deaths). However, the mortality benefits must be weighed against the disadvantages of spiral CT for a given population. These include the potential radiation risks associated with multiple scans, the discovery of incidental findings of unclear significance, and a high rate of false-positive test results. Both incidental findings and false-positive tests can lead to invasive diagnostic procedures associated with anxiety, expense, and complications (e.g., pneumo- or hemothorax after lung biopsy).

Ovarian Cancer

Adnexal palpation, transvaginal ultrasound, and serum CA-125 assay have been considered for ovarian cancer screening. These tests alone and in combination do not have sufficiently high sensitivity or specificity to be recommended for routine screening of ovarian cancer. The risks and costs associated with the high number of false-positive results is an impediment to routine use of these modalities for screening. A large randomized controlled trial has shown that of female participants receiving at least one false-positive serum CA-125 test, 14% underwent a major surgical procedure (e.g., laparotomy with oophorectomy) for benign disease. For transvaginal ultrasound, the rate was close to 40%.

Prostate Cancer

The most common prostate cancer screening modalities are DRE and serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) assay. Newer serum tests, such as measurement of bound to free serum PSA, have yet to be fully evaluated. An emphasis on PSA screening has caused prostate cancer to become the most common non-skin cancer diagnosed in American males. This disease is prone to lead-time bias, length bias, and overdiagnosis, and substantial debate rages among experts as to whether it is effective. Prostate cancer screening clearly detects many asymptomatic cancers, but the ability to distinguish tumors that are lethal but still curable from those that pose little or no threat to health is limited. Men older than age 50 years have a high prevalence of indolent, clinically insignificant prostate cancers.

Two randomized controlled trials of the impact of PSA screening on prostate cancer mortality have been published. The Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial was a multicenter U.S. trial that randomized almost 77,000 men ages 55每74 years to receive annual PSA testing for 6 years or usual care. At 7 years of follow-up, no statistically significant difference in the number of prostate cancer deaths were noted between the arms (rate ratio, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.75每1.90). The data at 10 years (67% complete) showed similar results. Approximately 44% of men in the control arm received at least one PSA test during the trial, which may have potentially diluted an observed effect.

The European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) was a multinational study that randomized approximately 162,000 men between ages 50 and 74 years (with a predefined "core" screening group of men ages 55每69 years) to receive PSA testing every 4 years or no screening. Recruitment and randomizationprocedures and actual frequency of PSA testing varied by country. After a median follow-up of 9 years, a 20% relative reduction in the risk of prostate cancer death in the screened arm was noted in the "core" screening group (no difference in mortality was observed in the overall study population). The trial also found that 1140 men would need to be screened, and 48 additional cases treated to avert 1 death from prostate cancer.

The effectiveness of treatments for low-stage prostate cancer is under study. However, both surgery and radiation therapy may cause significant morbidity, such as impotence and urinary incontinence. Comparison of radical prostatectomy to "watchful waiting" in clinically diagnosed (not screen-detected) prostate cancers showed a small decrease in prostate cancer death rate in the surgery arm, but no statistically significant decrease in overall mortality was seen after 11 years of follow-up. Benefits were restricted to men younger than age 65 years. Urinary incontinence and sexual impotence were more common in the surgery arm. A man should have a life expectancy of at least 10 years to be eligible for screening. The USPSTF has found insufficient evidence to recommend prostate cancer screening for men younger than age 75 years; it recommends against screening for prostate cancer in men age 75 years or older ("D" recommendation) (Table 82每3).

Endometrial Cancer

Transvaginal ultrasound and endometrial sampling have been advocated as screening tests for endometrial cancer. Benefit from routine screening has not been shown. Transvaginal ultrasound and endometrial sampling are indicated for workup of vaginal bleeding in postmenopausal women but are not considered as screening tests in symptomatic women.

Skin Cancer

Visual examination of all skin surfaces by the patient or by a health care provider is used in screening for basal and squamous cell cancers and melanoma. No prospective randomized study has been performed to look for a mortality decrease. Unfortunately, screening is associated with a substantial rate of overdiagnosis.
 
Further Readings

Andriole GL et al: Mortality results from a randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl J Med 360:1310, 2009[PMID: 19297565] 

 
Atkin WS et al: Once-only flexible sigmoidoscopy screening in prevention of colorectal cancer: A multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet 375:1624, 2010[PMID: 20430429] 

 
Bach PB et al: Computed tomography screening and lung cancer outcomes. JAMA 297:953, 2007[PMID: 17341709] 

 
Barrett-Connor E et al: Effects of raloxifene on cardiovascular events and breast cancer in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med 355:125, 2006[PMID: 16837676] 

 
Kramer BS et al: Cancer screening: The clash of science and intuition. Annu Rev Med 60:125, 2009.[PMID: 18803476] 

 
Nelson HD et al: Screening for breast cancer: An update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 151:727, 2009[PMID: 19920273] 

 
Prentice RL et al: Low-fat dietary pattern and risk of invasive breast cancer. The Women's Health Initiative randomized controlled dietary modification trial. JAMA 295:629, 2006[PMID: 16467232] 

 
Schroeder FH et al: Screening and prostate-cancer mortality in a randomized European study. N Engl J Med 360: 1320, 2009 

 

Web Sites

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/uspstfix.htm 

 
The National Cancer Institute Cancernet: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics 

 
 

^^
Cancer Is a Genetic Disease

Cancer arises through a series of somatic alterations in DNA that result in unrestrained cellular proliferation. Most of these alterations involve actual sequence changes in DNA (i.e., mutations). They may originate as a consequence of random replication errors, exposure to carcinogens (e.g., radiation), or faulty DNA repair processes. While most cancers arise sporadically, familial clustering of cancers occurs in certain families that carry a germline mutation in a cancer gene.
 
Historical Perspective

The idea that cancer progression is driven by sequential somatic mutations in specific genes has only gained general acceptance in the past 25 years. Before the advent of the microscope, cancer was believed to be composed of aggregates of mucus or other noncellular matter. By the middle of the nineteenth century, it became clear that tumors were masses of cells and that these cells arose from the normal cells of the tissue from which the cancer originated. However, the molecular basis for the uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells was to remain a mystery for another century. During that time, a number of theories for the origin of cancer were postulated. The great biochemist Otto Warburg proposed the combustion theory of cancer, which stipulated that cancer was due to abnormal oxygen metabolism. In addition, some believed that all cancers were caused by viruses, and that cancer was in fact a contagious disease.

In the end, observations of cancer occurring in chimney sweeps, studies of x-rays, and the overwhelming data demonstrating cigarette smoke as a causative agent in lung cancer, together with Ames's work on chemical mutagenesis, provided convincing evidence that cancer originated through changes in DNA. Although the viral theory of cancer did not prove to be generally accurate (with the exception of human papillomaviruses, which can cause cervical cancer in human), the study of retroviruses led to the discovery of the first human oncogenes in the late 1970s. Soon after, the study of families with genetic predisposition to cancer was instrumental in the discovery of tumor-suppressor genes. The field that studies the type of mutations, as well as the consequence of these mutations in tumor cells, is now known as cancer genetics.
 
The Clonal Origin and Multistep Nature of Cancer

Nearly all cancers originate from a single cell; this clonal origin is a critical discriminating feature between neoplasia and hyperplasia. Multiple cumulative mutational events are invariably required for the progression of a tumor from normal to fully malignant phenotype. The process can be seen as Darwinian microevolution in which, at each successive step, the mutated cells gain a growth advantage resulting in an increased representation relative to their neighbors (Fig. 83-1). Based on observations of cancer frequency increases during aging, as well as recent molecular genetics work, it is believed that 5 to 10 accumulated mutations are necessary for a cell to progress from the normal to the fully malignant phenotype.

Figure 83-1

 
 
 
Multistep clonal development of malignancy. In this diagram a series of five cumulative mutations (T1, T2, T4, T5, T6), each with a modest growth advantage acting alone, eventually results in a malignant tumor. Note that not all such alterations result in progression; for example, the T3 clone is a dead end. The actual number of cumulative mutations necessary to transform from the normal to the malignant state is unknown in most tumors. (After P Nowell: Science 194:23, 1976, with permission.)
 
 


We are beginning to understand the precise nature of the genetic alterations responsible for some malignancies and to get a sense of the order in which they occur. The best studied example is colon cancer, in which analyses of DNA from tissues extending from normal colon epithelium through adenoma to carcinoma have identified some of the genes mutated in the process (Fig. 83-2). Other malignancies are believed to progress in a similar step-wise fashion, although the order and identity of genes affected may be different.

Figure 83-2

 
 
 
Progressive somatic mutational steps in the development of colon carcinoma. The accumulation of alterations in a number of different genes results in the progression from normal epithelium through adenoma to full-blown carcinoma. Genetic instability (microsatellite or chromosomal) accelerates the progression by increasing the likelihood of mutation at each step. Patients with familial polyposis are already one step into this pathway, since they inherit a germline alteration of the APC gene. TGF, transforming growth factor.
 
 

Figure 83-3

 
 
 
Specific translocation seen in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) is derived from a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 with the breakpoint joining the sequences of the ABL oncogene with the BCR gene. The fusion of these DNA sequences allows the generation of an entirely novel fusion protein with modified function.
 
 
 
Two Types of Cancer Genes: Oncogenes and Tumor-Suppressor Genes

There are two major types of cancer genes. The first type comprises genes that positively influence tumor formation and are known as oncogenes. The second type of cancer genes negatively impact tumor growth and have been named tumor-suppressor genes. Both oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes exert their effects on tumor growth through their ability to control cell division (cell birth) or cell death (apoptosis), although the mechanisms can be extremely complex. While tightly regulated in normal cells, oncogenes acquire mutations in cancer cells, and the mutations typically relieve this control and lead to increased activity of the gene products. This mutational event typically occurs in a single allele of the oncogene and acts in a dominant fashion. In contrast, the normal function of tumor-suppressor genes is usually to restrain cell growth, and this function is lost in cancer. Because of the diploid nature of mammalian cells, both alleles must be inactivated for a cell to completely lose the function of a tumor-suppressor gene, leading to a recessive mechanism at the cellular level. From these ideas and studies on the inherited form of retinoblastoma, Knudson and others formulated the two-hit hypothesis, which in its modern version states that both copies of a tumor-suppressor gene must be inactivated in cancer.

There is a subset of tumor-suppressor genes, the caretaker genes, which do not affect cell growth directly, but rather control the ability of the cell to maintain the integrity of its genome. Cells with a deficiency in these genes have an increased rate of mutations throughout their genomes, including in oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes. This "mutator" phenotype was first hypothesized by Loeb to explain how the multiple mutational events required for tumorigenesis can occur in the lifetime of an individual. A mutator phenotype has now been observed in some forms of cancer, such as those associated with deficiencies in DNA mismatch repair. The great majority of cancers, however, do not harbor repair deficiencies, and their rate of mutation is similar to that observed in normal cells. Many of these cancers, however, appear to harbor a different kind of genetic instability, affecting the loss or gains of whole chromosomes or large parts thereof (as explained in more detail below).
 
Oncogenes in Human Cancer

Work by Peyton Rous in the early 1900s revealed that a chicken sarcoma could be transmitted from animal to animal in cell-free extracts, suggesting that cancer could be induced by an agent acting positively to promote tumor formation. The agent responsible for the transmission of the cancer was a retrovirus (Rous sarcoma virus, RSV) and the oncogene responsible was identified 75 years later as v-src. Other oncogenes were also discovered through their presence in the genomes of retroviruses that are capable of causing cancers in chickens, mice, and rats. The cellular homologues of these viral genes are called protooncogenes and are often targets of mutation or aberrant regulation in human cancer. Whereas many oncogenes were discovered because of their presence in retroviruses, other oncogenes, particularly those involved in translocations characteristic of particular leukemias and lymphomas, were isolated through genomic approaches. Investigators cloned the sequences surrounding the chromosomal translocations observed cytogenetically and then deduced the nature of the genes that were the targets of these translocations (see below). Some of these were oncogenes known from retroviruses (like ABL, involved in chronic myeloid leukemia [CML]), while others were new (like BCL2, involved in B cell lymphoma). In the normal cellular environment, protooncogenes have crucial roles in cell proliferation and differentiation. Table 83每1 is a partial list of oncogenes known to be involved in human cancer.

Table 83每1 Common Oncogenes Altered in Human Cancers

 
 
Oncogene Function Alteration in Cancer Neoplasm 
AKT1  Serine/threonine kinase Amplification Stomach 
AKT2  Serine/threonine kinase Amplification Ovarian, breast, pancreatic 
BRAF  Serine/threonine kinase Point mutation Melanoma, lung, colorectal 
CTNNB1  Signal transduction Point mutation Colon, prostate, melanoma, skin, others 
FOS  Transcription factor Overexpression Osteosarcomas 
ERBB2  Receptor tyrosine kinase Point mutation, amplification Breast, ovary, stomach, neuroblastoma 
JUN  Transcription factor Overexpression Lung 
MET  Receptor tyrosine kinase Point mutation, rearrangement Osteocarcinoma, kidney, glioma 
MYB  Transcription factor Amplification AML, CML, colorectal, melanoma 
C-MYC  Transcription factor Amplification Breast, colon, gastric, lung 
L-MYC  Transcription factor Amplification Lung, bladder 
N-MYC  Transcription factor Amplification Neuroblastoma, lung 
HRAS  GTPase Point mutation Colon, lung, pancreas 
KRAS  GTPase Point mutation Melanoma, colorectal, AML 
NRAS  GTPase Point mutation Various carcinomas, melanoma 
REL  Transcription factor Rearrangement, amplification Lymphomas 
WNT1  Growth factor Amplification Retinoblastoma 
 


Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia.
 

The normal growth and differentiation of cells is controlled by growth factors that bind to receptors on the surface of the cell. The signals generated by the membrane receptors are transmitted inside the cells through signaling cascades involving kinases, G proteins, and other regulatory proteins. Ultimately, these signals affect the activity of transcription factors in the nucleus, which regulate the expression of genes crucial in cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and cell death. Oncogene products have been found to function at critical steps in these pathways (Chap. 84), and inappropriate activation of these pathways can lead to tumorigenesis.
 
Mechanisms of Oncogene Activation

Point Mutation

Point mutation is a common mechanism of oncogene activation. For example, mutations in one of the RAS genes (HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS) are present in up to 85% of pancreatic cancers and 45% of colon cancers but are less common in other cancer types, although they can occur at significant frequencies in leukemia, lung, and thyroid cancers. Remarkably〞and in contrast to the diversity of mutations found in tumor-suppressor genes (see below)〞most of the activated RAS genes contain point mutations in codons 12, 13, or 61 (these mutations reduce RAS GTPase activity, leading to constitutive activation of the mutant RAS protein). The restricted pattern of mutations observed in oncogenes compared to that of tumor-suppressor genes reflects the fact that gain-of-function mutations are less likely to occur than mutations that simply lead to loss of activity. Indeed, inactivation of a gene can in theory be accomplished through the introduction of a stop codon anywhere in the coding sequence, whereas activations require precise substitutions at residues that can somehow lead to an increase in the activity of the encoded protein. Importantly, the specificity of oncogene mutations provides diagnostic opportunities, as tests that identify mutations at defined positions are easier to design than tests aimed at detecting random changes in a gene.

DNA Amplification

The second mechanism for activation of oncogenes is DNA sequence amplification, leading to overexpression of the gene product. This increase in DNA copy number may cause cytologically recognizable chromosome alterations referred to as homogeneous staining regions (HSRs) if integrated within chromosomes, or double minutes (dmins) if extrachromosomal. The recognition of DNA amplification is accomplished through various cytogenetic techniques such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), which allow the visualization of chromosomal aberrations using fluorescent dyes. In addition, noncytogenetic, microarray-based approaches are now available for identifying changes in copy number at high resolution. Newer short-tag每based sequencing approaches have been used to evaluate amplifications. When paired with next-generation sequencing instruments, this approach offers the highest degree of resolution and quantification available. With both microarray and sequencing technologies, the entire genome can be surveyed for gains and losses of DNA sequences, thus pinpointing chromosomal regions likely to contain genes important in the development or progression of cancer.

Numerous genes have been reported to be amplified in cancer. Several of these genes, including NMYC and LMYC, were identified through their presence within the amplified DNA sequences of a tumor and had homology to known oncogenes. Because the region amplified often includes hundreds of thousands of base pairs, multiple oncogenes may be amplified in a single amplicon in some cancers (particularly in sarcomas). Indeed, MDM2, GLI, CDK4, and SAS at chromosomal location 12q13-15 have been shown to be simultaneously amplified in several types of sarcomas and other tumors. Amplification of a cellular gene is often a predictor of poor prognosis; for example, ERBB2/HER2 and NMYC are often amplified in aggressive breast cancers and neuroblastoma, respectively.

Chromosomal Rearrangement

Chromosomal alterations provide important clues to the genetic changes in cancer. The chromosomal alterations in human solid tumors such as carcinomas are heterogeneous and complex and occur as a result of the frequent chromosomal instability (CIN) observed in these tumors (see below). In contrast, the chromosome alterations in myeloid and lymphoid tumors are often simple translocations, i.e., reciprocal transfers of chromosome arms from one chromosome to another. Consequently, many detailed and informative chromosome analyses have been performed on hematopoietic cancers. The breakpoints of recurring chromosome abnormalities usually occur at the site of cellular oncogenes. Table 83每2 lists representative examples of recurring chromosome alterations in malignancy and the associated gene(s) rearranged or deregulated by the chromosomal rearrangement. Translocations are particularly common in lymphoid tumors, probably because these cell types have the capability to rearrange their DNA to generate antigen receptors. Indeed, antigen receptor genes are commonly involved in the translocations, implying that an imperfect regulation of receptor gene rearrangement may be involved in the pathogenesis. An interesting example is Burkitt's lymphoma, a B cell tumor characterized by a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 8 and 14. Molecular analysis of Burkitt's lymphomas demonstrated that the breakpoints occurred within or near the MYC locus on chromosome 8 and within the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus on chromosome 14, resulting in the transcriptional activation of MYC. Enhancer activation by translocation, although not universal, appears to play an important role in malignant progression. In addition to transcription factors and signal transduction molecules, translocation may result in the overexpression of cell cycle regulatory proteins or proteins such as cyclins and of proteins that regulate cell death.

Table 83每2 Representative Oncogenes at Chromosomal Translocations

 
 
Gene (Chromosome) Translocation Malignancy 
ABL (9q34.1)每BCR (22q11)  (9;22)(q34;q11) Chronic myeloid leukemia 
ATF1 (12q13)每EWS (22q12)  (12;22)(q13;q12) Malignant melanoma of soft parts 
BCL1 (11q13.3)每IgH (14q32)  (11;14)(q13;q32) Mantle cell lymphoma 
BCL2 (18q21.3)每IgH (14q32)  (14;18)(q32;q21) Follicular lymphoma 
FLI1 (11q24)每EWS (22q12)  (11;22)(q24;q12) Ewing's sarcoma 
LCK (1p34)每TCRB (7q35)  (1;7)(p34;q35) T cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 
MYC (8q24)每IgH (14q32)  (8;14)(q24;q32) Burkitt's lymphoma, B cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 
PAX3 (2q35)每FKHR/ALV (13q14)  (2;13)(q35;q14) Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma 
PAX7 (1p36)每KHR/ALV(13q14)  (1;13)(p36;q14) Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma 
REL (2p13)每NRG (2p11.2-14)  Inv(2(p13;p11.2-14) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
RET (10q11.2)每PKAR1A (17q23)  (10;17)(q11.2;q23) Thyroid carcinoma 
TAL1(1p32)每TCTA (3p21)  (1;3)(p34;p21) Acute T cell leukemia 
TRK (1q23-1q24)每TPM3 (1q31)  Inv1(q23;q31) Colon carcinoma 
WT1 (11p13)每EWS (22q12)  (11;22)(p13;q12) Desmoplastic small round cell tumor 
 


Source: From Hesketh R: The Oncogene and Tumour Suppressor Gene Facts Book, 2nd ed. San Diego, Academic Press, 1997; with permission.
 

The first reproducible chromosome abnormality detected in human malignancy was the Philadelphia chromosome detected in CML. This cytogenetic abnormality is generated by reciprocal translocation involving the ABL oncogene on chromosome 9, encoding a tyrosine kinase, being placed in proximity to the BCR (breakpoint cluster region) gene on chromosome 22. Figure 83-3 illustrates the generation of the translocation and its protein product. The consequence of expression of the BCR-ABL gene product is the activation of signal transduction pathways leading to cell growth independent of normal external signals. Imatinib (marketed as Gleevec), a drug that specifically blocks the activity of BCR-ABL, has shown remarkable efficacy with little toxicity in patients with CML. It is hoped that knowledge of genetic alterations in other cancers will likewise lead to mechanism-based design and development of a new generation of chemotherapeutic agents.
 
Chromosomal Instability in Solid Tumors

Solid tumors are generally highly aneuploid, containing an abnormal number of chromosomes; these chromosomes also exhibit structural alterations such as translocations, deletions, and amplifications. These abnormalities are collectively referred to as chromosomal instability (CIN). Normal cells possess several cell cycle checkpoints, essentially quality-control requirements that have to be met before subsequent events are allowed to take place. The mitotic checkpoint, which ensures proper chromosome attachment to the mitotic spindle before allowing the sister chromatids to separate, is altered in certain cancers. The molecular basis of CIN remains unclear, although a number of mitotic checkpoint genes are found mutated or abnormally expressed in various tumors. The exact effects of these changes on the mitotic checkpoint are unknown, and both weakening and overactivation of the checkpoint have been proposed. The identification of the cause of CIN in tumors will likely be a formidable task, considering that several hundred genes are thought to control the mitotic checkpoint and other cellular processes ensuring proper chromosome segregation. Regardless of the mechanisms underlying CIN, the measurement of the number of chromosomal alterations present in tumors is now possible with both cytogenetic and molecular techniques, and several studies have shown that this information can be useful for prognostic purposes. In addition, since the mitotic checkpoint is essential for cellular viability, it may become a target for novel therapeutic approaches.
 
Tumor-Suppressor Gene Inactivation in Cancer

The first indication of the existence of tumor-suppressor genes came from experiments showing that fusion of mouse cancer cells with normal mouse fibroblasts led to a nonmalignant phenotype in the fused cells. The normal role of tumor-suppressor genes is to restrain cell growth, and the function of these genes is inactivated in cancer. The two major types of somatic lesions observed in tumor-suppressor genes during tumor development are point mutations and large deletions. Point mutations in the coding region of tumor-suppressor genes will frequently lead to truncated protein products or otherwise nonfunctional proteins. Similarly, deletions lead to the loss of a functional product and sometimes encompass the entire gene or even the entire chromosome arm, leading to loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the tumor DNA compared to the corresponding normal tissue DNA (Fig. 83-4). LOH in tumor DNA is considered a hallmark for the presence of a tumor-suppressor gene at a particular chromosomal location, and LOH studies have been useful in the positional cloning of many tumor-suppressor genes.

Figure 83-4

 
 
 
Diagram of possible mechanisms for tumor formation in an individual with hereditary (familial) retinoblastoma. On the left is shown the pedigree of an affected individual who has inherited the abnormal (Rb) allele from her affected mother. The normal allele is shown as a (+). The four chromosomes of her two parents are drawn to indicate their origin. Flanking the retinoblastoma locus are microsatellite markers (A and B) also analyzed in this family. Markers A3 and B3 are on the chromosome carrying the -retinoblastoma disease gene. Tumor formation results when the normal allele, which this patient inherited from her father, is inactivated. On the right are shown four possible ways in which this could occur. In each case, the resulting chromosome 13 arrangement is shown, as well as the results of PCR typing using the microsatellite markers comparing normal tissue (N) with tumor tissue (T). Note that in the first three situations the normal allele (B1) has been lost in the tumor tissue, which is referred to as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at this locus.
 
 

Gene silencing, an epigenetic change that leads to the loss of gene expression and occurs in conjunction with hypermethylation of the promoter and histone deacetylation, is another mechanism of tumor-suppressor gene inactivation. (An epigenetic modification refers to a change in the genome, heritable by cell progeny, that does not involve a change in the DNA sequence. The inactivation of the second X chromosome in female cells is an example of an epigenetic silencing that prevents gene expression from the inactivated chromosome). During embryologic development, regions of chromosomes from one parent are silenced and gene expression proceeds from the chromosome of the other parent. For most genes, expression occurs from both alleles or randomly from one allele or the other. The preferential expression of a particular gene exclusively from the allele contributed by one parent is called parental imprinting and is thought to be regulated by covalent modifications of chromatin protein and DNA (often methylation) of the silenced allele.

The role of epigenetic control mechanisms in the development of human cancer is unclear. However, a general decrease in the level of DNA methylation has been noted as a common change in cancer. In addition, numerous genes, including some tumor-suppressor genes, appear to become hypermethylated and silenced during tumorigenesis. VHL and p16INK4 are well-studied examples of such tumor-suppressor genes. Overall, epigenetic mechanisms may be responsible for reprogramming the expression of a large number of genes in cancer and, together with the mutation of specific genes, are likely to be crucial in the development of human malignancies.
 
Familial Cancer Syndromes

A small fraction of cancers occur in patients with a genetic predisposition. In these families, the affected individuals have a predisposing loss-of-function mutation in one allele of a tumor-suppressor gene. The tumors in these patients show a loss of the remaining normal allele as a result of somatic events (point mutations or deletions), in agreement with the two-hit hypothesis (Fig. 83-4). Thus, most cells of an individual with an inherited loss-of-function mutation in a tumor-suppressor gene are functionally normal, and only the rare cells that develop a mutation in the remaining normal allele will exhibit uncontrolled regulation.

Roughly 100 syndromes of familial cancer have been reported, although many are rare. The majority are inherited as autosomal dominant traits, although some of those associated with DNA repair abnormalities (xeroderma pigmentosum, Fanconi's anemia, ataxia telangiectasia) are autosomal recessive. Table 83每3 shows a number of cancer predisposition syndromes and the responsible genes. The current paradigm states that the genes mutated in familial syndromes can also be targets for somatic mutations in sporadic (noninherited) tumors. The study of cancer syndromes has thus provided invaluable insights into the mechanisms of progression for many tumor types. This section examines the case of inherited colon cancer in detail, but similar general lessons can be applied to many of the cancer syndromes listed in Table 83每3. In particular, the study of inherited colon cancer will clearly illustrate the difference between two types of tumor-suppressor genes: the gatekeepers, which directly regulate the growth of tumors, and the caretakers, which, when mutated, lead to genetic instability and therefore act indirectly on tumor growth.

Table 83每3 Cancer Predisposition Syndromes and Associated Genes

 
 
Syndrome Gene Chromosome Inheritance Tumors 
Ataxia telangiectasia ATM  11q22-q23 AR Breast 
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome FAS FASL  10q24 1q23 AD Lymphomas 
Bloom syndrome BLM  15q26.1 AR Several types 
Cowden syndrome PTEN  10q23 AD Breast, thyroid 
Familial adenomatous polyposis APC  5q21 AD Intestinal adenoma, colorectal 
Familial melanoma p16INK4  9p21 AD Melanoma, pancreatic 
Familial Wilms' tumor WT1  11p13 AD Kidney (pediatric) 
Hereditary breast/ovarian cancer BRCA1 BRCA2  17q21 13q12.3 AD Breast, ovarian, colon, prostate 
Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer CDH1  16q22 AD Stomach 
Hereditary multiple exostoses EXT1 EXT2  8q24 11p11-12 AD Exostoses, chondrosarcoma 
Hereditary prostate cancer HPC1  1q24-25 AD Prostate 
Hereditary retinoblastoma RB1  13q14.2 AD Retinoblastoma, osteosarcoma 
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) MSH2

MLH1

MSH6

PMS2
 2p16

3p21.3

2p16

7p22
 AD Colon, endometrial, ovarian, stomach, small bowel, ureter carcinoma 
Hereditary papillary renal carcinoma MET  7q31 AD Papillary kidney 
Juvenile polyposis SMAD4  18q21 AD Gastrointestinal, pancreatic 
Li-Fraumeni TP53  17p13.1 AD Sarcoma, breast 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 MEN1  11q13 AD Parathyroid, endocrine, pancreas, and pituitary 
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a RET  10q11.2 AD Medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma 
Neurofibromatosis type 1 NF1  17q11.2 AD Neurofibroma, neurofibrosarcoma, brain 
Neurofibromatosis type 2 NF2  22q12.2 AD Vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, spine 
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin's syndrome) PTCH  9q22.3 AD Basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma, jaw cysts 
Tuberous sclerosis TSC1

TSC2
 9q34

16p13.3
 AD Angiofibroma, renal angiomyolipoma 
von Hippel每Lindau VHL  3p25-26 AD Kidney, cerebellum, pheochromocytoma 
 


Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
 

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited colon cancer syndrome due to germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor-suppressor gene on chromosome 5. Patients with this syndrome develop hundreds to thousands of adenomas in the colon. Each of these adenomas has lost the normal remaining allele of APC but has not yet accumulated the required additional mutations to generate fully malignant cells (Fig. 83-2). The loss of the second functional APC allele in tumors from FAP families often occurs through loss of heterozygosity. However, out of these thousands of benign adenomas, several will invariably acquire further abnormalities and a subset will even develop into fully malignant cancers. APC is thus considered to be a gatekeeper for colon tumorigenesis: in the absence of mutation of this gatekeeper (or a gene acting within the same pathway), a colorectal tumor simply cannot form. Figure 83-5 shows germline and somatic mutations found in the APC gene. The function of the APC protein is still not completely understood, but it likely provides differentiation and apoptotic cues to colonic cells as they migrate up the crypts. Defects in this process may lead to abnormal accumulation of cells that should normally undergo apoptosis.

Figure 83-5

 
 
 
Germline and somatic mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene APC. APC encodes a 2843-amino-acid protein with 6 major domains: an oligomerization region (O), armadillo repeats (ARM), 15-amino-acid repeats (15 aa), 20-amino-acid repeats (20 aa), a basic region, and a domain involved in binding EB1 and the Drosophila discs large homologue (E/D). Shown are the positions within the APC gene of a total of 650 somatic and 826 germline mutations (from the APC database at http://www.umd.be/APC). The vast majority of these mutations result in the truncation of the APC protein. Germline mutations are found to be relatively evenly distributed up to codon 1600 except for two mutation hotspots at amino acids 1061 and 1309, which together account for one-third of the mutations found in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) families. Somatic APC mutations in colon tumors cluster in an area of the gene known as the mutation cluster region (MCR). The location of the MCR suggests that the 20-amino-acid domain plays a crucial role in tumor suppression.
 
 

In contrast to patients with FAP, patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC, or Lynch syndrome) do not develop multiple polyposis but instead develop only one or a small number of adenomas that rapidly progress to cancer. Most HNPCC cases are due to mutations in one of four DNA mismatch repair genes (Table 83每3), which are components of a repair system that is normally responsible for correcting errors in freshly replicated DNA. Germline mutations in MSH2 and MLH1 account for more than 90% of HNPCC cases, while mutations in MSH6 and PMS2 are much less frequent. When a somatic mutation inactivates the remaining wild-type allele of a mismatch repair gene, the cell develops a hypermutable phenotype characterized by profound genomic instability, especially for the short repeated sequences called microsatellites. This microsatellite instability (MSI) favors the development of cancer by increasing the rate of mutations in many genes, including oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes (Fig. 83-2). These genes can thus be considered caretakers. Interestingly, chromosomal instability (CIN) can also be found in colon cancer, but MSI and CIN appear to be mutually exclusive, suggesting that they represent alternative mechanisms for the generation of a mutator phenotype in this cancer (Fig. 83-2). Other cancer types rarely exhibit MSI but most exhibit CIN.

While most autosomal dominant inherited cancer syndromes are due to mutations in tumor-suppressor genes (Table 83每3), there are a few interesting exceptions. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type II, a dominant disorder characterized by pituitary adenomas, medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, and (in some pedigrees) pheochromocytoma, is due to gain-of-function mutations in the protooncogene RET on chromosome 10. Similarly, gain-of-function mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene lead to hereditary papillary renal carcinoma. Interestingly, loss-of-function mutations in the RET gene cause a completely different disease, Hirschsprung's disease (aganglionic megacolon [Chaps. 297 and 351]).

Although the Mendelian forms of cancer have taught us much about the mechanisms of growth control, most forms of cancer do not follow simple patterns of inheritance. In many instances (e.g., lung cancer), a strong environmental contribution is at work. Even in such circumstances, however, some individuals may be more genetically susceptible to developing cancer, given the appropriate exposure, due to the presence of modifier alleles.
 
Genetic Testing for Familial Cancer

The discovery of cancer susceptibility genes raises the possibility of DNA testing to predict the risk of cancer in individuals of affected families. An algorithm for cancer risk assessment and decision making in high-risk families using genetic testing is shown in Fig. 83-6. Once a mutation is discovered in a family, subsequent testing of asymptomatic family members can be crucial in patient management. A negative gene test in these individuals can prevent years of anxiety in the knowledge that their cancer risk is no higher than that of the general population. On the other hand, a positive test may lead to alteration of clinical management, such as increased frequency of cancer screening and, when feasible and appropriate, prophylactic surgery. Potential negative consequences of a positive test result include psychological distress (anxiety, depression) and discrimination, although the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) makes it illegal for predictive genetic information to be used to discriminate in health insurance or employment. Testing should therefore not be conducted without counseling before and after disclosure of the test result. In addition, the decision to test should depend on whether effective interventions exist for the particular type of cancer to be tested. Despite these caveats, genetic cancer testing for some cancer syndromes already appears to have greater benefits than risks, and many companies now offer testing for various genes associated with the predisposition to breast cancer (BRCA1 and BRCA2), melanoma (p16INK4), and colon cancer (APC and the HNPCC genes).

Figure 83-6

 
 
 
Algorithm for genetic testing in a family with cancer predisposition. The key step is the identification of a mutation in a cancer patient, which allows testing of asymptomatic family members. Asymptomatic family members who test positive may require increased screening or surgery, whereas others are at no greater risk for cancer than the general population.
 
 

Because of the inherent problems of genetic testing such as cost, specificity, and sensitivity, it is not yet appropriate to offer these tests to the general population. However, testing may be appropriate in some subpopulations with a known increased risk, even without a defined family history. For example, two mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1, 185delAG and 5382insC, exhibit a sufficiently high frequency in the Ashkenazi Jewish population that genetic testing of an individual of this ethnic group may be warranted.

As noted above, it is important that genetic test results be communicated to families by trained genetic counselors, especially for high-risk high-penetrance conditions such as the hereditary breast/ovarian cancer syndrome (BRCA1/BRCA2). To ensure that the families clearly understand its advantages and disadvantages and the impact it may have on disease management and psyche, genetic testing should never be done before counseling. Significant expertise is needed to communicate the results of genetic testing to families. For example, one common mistake is to misinterpret the result of negative genetic tests. For many cancer predisposition genes, the sensitivity of genetic testing is less than 70% (i.e., of 100 kindreds tested, disease-causing mutations can be identified in 70 at most). Therefore, such testing should in general begin with an affected member of the kindred (the youngest family member still alive who has had the cancer of interest). If a mutation is not identified in this individual, then the test should be reported as noninformative (Fig. 83-6) rather than negative (because it is possible that, for technical reasons, the mutation in this individual is not detectable by standard genetic assays). On the other hand, if a mutation can be identified in this individual, then testing of other family members can be performed, and the sensitivity of such subsequent tests will be 100% (because the mutation in the family is in this case known to be detectable by the method used).
 
Micrornas and Cancer

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs 20每22 nucleotides in length that are involved in posttranscriptional gene regulation. Studies in chronic lymphocytic leukemia first suggested a link between miRNAs and cancer when miR-15 and miR-16 were found to be deleted or downregulated in the vast majority of tumors. Various miRNAs have since been found abnormally expressed in several human malignancies. Aberrant expression of miRNAs in cancer has been attributed to several mechanisms, such as chromosomal rearrangements, genomic copy number change, epigenetic modifications, defects in miRNA biogenesis pathway, and regulation by transcriptional factors.

Functionally, miRNAs have been suggested to contribute to tumorigenesis through their ability to regulate oncogenic signaling pathways. For example, miR-15 and miR-16 have been shown to target the BCL2 oncogene, leading to its downregulation in leukemic cells and apoptosis. As another example of miRNAs' involvement in oncogenic pathways, the p53 tumor suppressor can transcriptionally induce miR-34 following genotoxic stress, and this induction is important in mediating p53 function. The expression of miRNAs is extremely specific and there is evidence that miRNA expression patterns may be useful in distinguishing lineage and differentiation state, as well as cancer diagnosis and outcome prediction. However, no miRNA gene has ever been observed to be mutated in a cancer, either in the germline or somatically. At present, the only absolutely reliable way to causally implicate a gene in the human neoplastic process is through evidence of its mutant status. Hundreds of other genes, besides miRNAs, are expressed at higher or lower levels in cancers compared to corresponding normal tissues, and the roles of any of these genes in human cancer remain conjectural.
 
Viruses in Human Cancer

Certain human malignancies are associated with viruses. Examples include Burkitt's lymphoma (Epstein-Barr virus), hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatitis viruses), cervical cancer [human papillomavirus (HPV)], and T cell leukemia (retroviruses). The mechanisms of action of these viruses are varied but always involve activation of growth-promoting pathways or inhibition of tumor-suppressor products in the infected cells. For example, HPV proteins E6 and E7 bind and inactivate cellular tumor suppressors p53 and pRB, respectively. Viruses are not sufficient for cancer development, but constitute one alteration in the multistep process of cancer progression.
 
Gene Expression in Cancer

The tumorigenesis process, driven by alterations in tumor suppressors, oncogenes, and epigenetic regulation, is accompanied by changes in gene expression. The advent of powerful techniques for high-throughput gene expression profiling, based on sequencing or microarrays, has allowed the comprehensive study of gene expression in neoplastic cells. It is indeed possible to identify the expression levels of thousands of genes expressed in normal and cancer tissues. Figure 83-7 shows a typical microarray experiment examining gene expression in cancer. This global knowledge of gene expression allows the identification of differentially expressed genes and, in principle, the understanding of the complex molecular circuitry regulating normal and neoplastic behaviors. Such studies have led to molecular profiling of tumors, which has suggested general methods for distinguishing tumors of various biologic behaviors (molecular classification), elucidating pathways relevant to the development of tumors, and identifying molecular targets for the detection and therapy of cancer. The first practical applications of this technology have suggested that global gene expression profiling can provide prognostic information not evident from other clinical or laboratory tests. The Sanger Cancer Genome Project (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/) maintains a database dedicated to collect data on gene expression in normal and malignant tissues and make it available on the Internet. The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) is another online data repository for expression profiling experiments.

Figure 83-7

 
 
 
A microarray experiment. RNA is prepared from cells, reverse transcribed to cDNA, and labeled with fluorescent dyes (typically green for normal cells and red for cancer cells). The fluorescent probes are mixed and hybridized to a cDNA array. Each spot on the array is an oligonucleotide (or cDNA fragment) that represents a different gene. The image is then captured with a fluorescence camera; red spots indicate higher expression in tumor cells compared with reference, while green spots represent the lower expression in tumor cells. Yellow signals indicate equal expression levels in normal and tumor specimens. After clustering analysis of multiple arrays, the results are typically represented graphically using a visualization software, which shows, for each sample, a color-coded representation of gene expression for every gene on the array.
 
 
 
Genomewide Mutational Profiling in Cancer

With the completion of the Human Genome Project and advances in sequencing technologies, systematic mutational analysis of the cancer genome has become possible. All protein-encoding genes known to be present in the human genome have been sequenced in breast, pancreatic, brain, and colorectal tumors. Interestingly it was found that there are generally 40 to 100 genetic alterations that affect protein sequence in a typical cancer, although statistical analyses suggested that only 8每15 are functionally involved in tumorigenesis. The picture that emerges from these studies is that most genes found mutated in tumors are actually mutated at relatively low frequencies (<5%), while a small number of genes (such as p53, KRAS) are mutated in a large proportion of tumors (Fig. 83-8). In the past, the focus of research has been on the frequently mutated genes, but it appears that the large number of genes that are infrequently mutated in cancer are major contributors to the cancer phenotype. Understanding the signaling pathways altered by mutations in these genes, as well as the functional relevance of these different mutations, represents the next challenge in the field. The Cancer Genome Atlas (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) is a coordinated effort from the National Cancer Institute and the National Human Genome Research Institute to systematically characterize the entire spectrum of genomic changes involved in human cancers.

Figure 83-8

 
 
 
A two-dimensional maps of genes mutated in colo-rectal cancer. The two-dimensional landscape represent the positions of the RefSeq genes along the chromosomes and the height of the peaks represent the mutation frequency. On the top map, the taller peaks represent the genes that are commonly mutated in colon cancer while the large number of smaller hills indicates the genes that are mutated at lower frequency. On the lower map, the mutations of two individual tumors are indicated. Note that there is little overlap between the mutated genes of the two colorectal tumors shown. These differences may represent the basis for the heterogeneity in terms of behavior and responsiveness to therapy observed in human cancer. (From Wood et al: Science 318:1108, 2007, with permission.)
 
 
 
Personalized Cancer Treatment Based on Molecular Profiles

Gene expression profiling and genomewide sequencing approaches have allowed for an unprecedented understanding of cancer at the molecular level. It has been suggested that individualized knowledge of pathways or genes deregulated in a given tumor (personalized genomics) may provide a guide for therapeutic options on this tumor, thus leading to personalized therapy. As tumor behavior is highly heterogeneous, even within a tumor type, personalized information-based medicine may provide a viable alternative to current one-size-fits-all therapy, especially in the case of tumors resistant to conventional therapeutic approaches. The success of this approach will be dependent on accumulated information on cancer behavior and phenotypes. For example, the identification of a particular mutation, such as that in BRAF, can indicate whether a certain tumor (such as melanoma) is likely to be susceptible to a specific drug that targets the mutant BRAF gene. Similarly, the identification of another mutation, in KRAS, can indicate that tumor is unlikely to be sensitive to an antibody targeting EGFR. Gene expression also offers the potential to predict drug sensitivities as well as provide prognostic information. Commercial diagnostic tests, such as Mammaprint and Oncotype DX for breast cancer, are available to help the patients and their physicians make treatment decisions. Personalized medicine is an exciting new avenue for cancer treatment based on molecular profiling, and this approach is in the process of changing our approaches to cancer therapy in fundamental ways.
 
The Future

A revolution in cancer genetics has occurred in the past 25 years. Identification of cancer genes has led to a deep understanding of the tumorigenesis process and has had important repercussions on all fields of cancer biology. In particular, the advancement of powerful techniques for genomewide expression profiling and mutation analyses has provided a detailed picture of the molecular defects present in individual tumors. In addition, individualized treatment based on the specific genetic alterations within some tumor types has already become possible. While these advances have not yet translated into overall changes in cancer prevention, prognosis, or treatment, it is expected that breakthroughs in these areas will continue to emerge and be applicable to an ever-increasing number of cancers.
 
Further Readings

Foulkes WD: Inherited susceptibility to common cancers. N Engl J Med 359:2148, 2008 

 
Ley TJ et al: DNA sequencing of a cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukaemia genome. Nature 456:66, 2008[PMID: 18987736] 

 
Markowitz SD, Bertagnolli M: Molecular basis of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 361:2449, 2009[PMID: 20018966] 

 
Mousses S et al: Using biointelligence to search the cancer genome: an epistemological perspective on knowledge recovery strategies to enable precision medical genomics. Oncogene 27:S58, 2009 

 
Schvartzman JM et al: Mitotic chromosomal instability and cancer: mouse modelling of the human disease. Nat Rev Cancer 10:102, 2010[PMID: 20094045] 

 
Timp W et al: A new link between epigenetic progenitor lesions in cancer and the dynamics of signal transduction. Cell Cycle 8:383, 2009[PMID: 19177016] 

 
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW: The multistep nature of cancer. Trends Genet 9:138, 1993[PMID: 8516849] 

 
Wood LD et al: The genomic landscapes of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 318:1108, 2007[PMID: 17932254] 

 
 

^^
Cancer Cell Biology

Cancers are characterized by unregulated cell growth, tissue invasion, and metastasis. A neoplasm is benign when it grows in an unregulated fashion without tissue invasion. The presence of both features is characteristic of malignant neoplasms. Cancers are named based on their origin: those derived from epithelial tissue are called carcinomas, those derived from mesenchymal tissues are sarcomas, and those derived from hematopoietic tissue are leukemias or lymphomas.

Cancers nearly always arise as a consequence of genetic alterations. Choriocarcinoma may be an exception to this rule in that experimental insertion of a choriocarcinoma cell into an animal blastocyst can result in the neoplastic cell giving rise to normal body structures under the inductive influence of the developing embryo. Such an occurrence would be unlikely in the setting of irreversible genetic damage.

Occasional cancers appear to be caused by an alteration in a dominant gene that drives uncontrolled cell proliferation. Examples include chronic myeloid leukemia (abl) and Burkitt's lymphoma (c-myc). The genes that can promote cell growth when altered are often called oncogenes. They were first identified as critical elements of viruses that cause animal tumors; later it was found that the viral genes had normal counterparts with important functions in the cell and had been captured and mutated by viruses as they passed from host to host.

However, the vast majority of human cancers are characterized by multiple genetic abnormalities, each of which contributes to the loss of control of cell proliferation and differentiation and the acquisition of capabilities, such as tissue invasion and angiogenesis. Many cancers go through recognizable steps of progressively more abnormal phenotypes: hyperplasia, to adenoma, to dysplasia, to carcinoma in situ, to invasive cancer (Table 84每1). These properties are not found in the normal adult cell from which the tumor is derived. Indeed, normal cells have a large number of safeguards against uncontrolled proliferation and invasion.

Table 84每1 Phenotypic Characteristics of Malignant Cells

 
 
Deregulated cell proliferation: Loss of function of negative growth regulators (suppressor oncogenes, i.e., Rb, p53), and increased action of positive growth regulators (oncogenes, i.e., Ras, Myc). Leads to aberrant cell cycle control and includes loss of normal checkpoint responses.  
Failure to differentiate: Arrest at a stage before terminal differentiation. May retain stem cell properties. (Frequently observed in leukemias due to transcriptional repression of developmental programs by the gene products of chromosomal translocations.) 
Loss of normal apoptosis pathways: Inactivation of p53, increases in Bcl-2 family members. This defect enhances the survival of cells with oncogenic mutations and genetic instability and allows clonal expansion and diversification within the tumor without activation of physiologic cell death pathways.  
Genetic instability: Defects in DNA repair pathways leading to either single or oligo-nucleotide mutations (as in microsatellite instability, MIN) or more commonly chromosomal instability (CIN) leading to aneuploidy. Caused by loss of function of p53, BRCA1/2, mismatch repair genes, DNA repair enzymes, and the spindle checkpoint. 
Loss of replicative senescence: Normal cells stop dividing in vitro after 25每50 population doublings. Arrest is mediated by the Rb, p16INK4a, and p53 pathways. Further replication leads to telomere loss, with crisis. Surviving cells often harbor gross chromosomal abnormalities. Relevance to human in vivo cancer remains uncertain. Many human cancers express telomerase.
  
Increased angiogenesis: Due to increased gene expression of proangiogenic factors (VEGF, FGF, IL-8) by tumor or stromal cells, or loss of negative regulators (endostatin, tumstatin, thrombospondin).  
Invasion: Loss of cell-cell contacts (gap junctions, cadherins) and increased production of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Often takes the form of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), with anchored epithelial cells becoming more like motile fibroblasts. 
Metastasis: Spread of tumor cells to lymph nodes or distant tissue sites. Limited by the ability of tumor cells to survive in a foreign environment.  
Evasion of the immune system: Downregulation of MHC class I and II molecules; induction of T cell tolerance; inhibition of normal dendritic cell and/or T cell function; antigenic loss variants and clonal heterogeneity; increase in regulatory T cells. 
 


Abbreviations: FGF, fibroblast growth factor; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.
 

In most organs, only primitive nonfunctional cells are capable of proliferating and the cells lose the capacity to proliferate as they differentiate and acquire functional capability. The expansion of the primitive cells is linked to some functional need in the host through receptors that receive signals from the local environment or through hormonal influences delivered by the vascular supply. In the absence of such signals, the cells are at rest. We have a poor understanding of the signals that keep the primitive cells at rest. These signals, too, must be environmental, based on the observations that a regenerating liver stops growing when it has replaced the portion that has been surgically removed and regenerating bone marrow stops growing when the peripheral blood counts return to normal. Cancer cells clearly have lost responsiveness to such controls and do not recognize when they have overgrown the niche normally occupied by the organ from which they are derived. We know very little about this mechanism of growth regulation.

Cell Cycle Checkpoints

Normal cells have a number of control mechanisms that are targeted by specific genetic alterations in cancer. The progression of a cell through the cell division cycle is regulated at a number of checkpoints by a wide array of genes. In the first phase, G1, preparations are made to replicate the genetic material. The cell stops before entering the DNA synthesis phase or S phase to take inventory. Are we ready to replicate our DNA? Is the DNA repair machinery in place to fix any mutations that are detected? Are the DNA replicating enzymes available? Is there an adequate supply of nucleotides? Is there sufficient energy? The main brake on the process is the retinoblastoma protein, Rb. When the cell determines that it is prepared to move ahead, sequential activation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) results in the inactivation of the brake, Rb, by phosphorylation. Phosphorylated Rb releases the S-phase-regulating transcription factor, E2F/DP1, and genes required for S phase progression are expressed. If the cell determines that it is unready to move ahead with DNA replication, a number of inhibitors are capable of blocking the action of the CDKs, including p21Cip2/Waf1, p16Ink4a, and p27Kip1. Nearly every cancer has one or more genetic lesions in the G1 checkpoint that permits progression to S phase.

At the end of S phase, when the cell has exactly duplicated its DNA content, a second inventory is taken at the S checkpoint. Have all of the chromosomes been fully duplicated? Were any segments of DNA copied more than once? Do we have the right number of chromosomes and the right amount of DNA? If so, the cell proceeds to G2, in which the cell prepares for division by synthesizing mitotic spindle and other proteins needed to produce two daughter cells. When DNA damage is detected, the p53 pathway is normally activated. Called the guardian of the genome, p53 is a transcription factor that is normally present in the cell in very low levels. Its level is generally regulated through its rapid turnover. Normally p53 is bound to mdm2, which transports p53 out of the nucleus for degradation in the proteosome. When damage is sensed, the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) pathway is activated; ATM phosphorylates mdm2, which no longer binds to p53, and p53 then stops cell cycle progression, directs the synthesis of repair enzymes, or if the damage is too great, initiates apoptosis of the cell to prevent the propagation of a damaged cell (Fig. 84-1).

Figure 84-1

 
 
 
Induction of p53 by the DNA damage and oncogene checkpoints. In response to noxious stimuli, p53 and mdm2 are phosphor-ylated by the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and related ATR serine/threonine kinases, as well as the immediate downstream checkpoint kinases, Chk1 and Chk2. This causes dissociation of p53 from mdm2, leading to increased p53 protein levels and transcription of genes leading to cell cycle arrest (p21Cip1/Waf1) or apoptosis (e.g., the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members Noxa and Puma). Inducers of p53 include hypoxemia, DNA damage (caused by ultraviolet radiation, gamma irradiation, or chemotherapy), ribonucleotide depletion, and telomere shortening. A second mechanism of p53 induction is activated by oncogenes such as Myc, which promote aberrant G1/S transition. This pathway is regulated by a second product of the Ink4a locus, p14ARF (p19 in mice), which is encoded by an alternative reading frame of the same stretch of DNA that codes for p16Ink4a. Levels of ARF are upregulated by Myc and E2F, and ARF binds to mdm2 and rescues p53 from its inhibitory effect. This oncogene checkpoint leads to the death or senescence (an irreversible arrest in G1 of the cell cycle) of renegade cells that attempt to enter S phase without appropriate physiologic signals. Senescent cells have been identified in patients whose premalignant lesions harbor activated oncogenes, for instance, dysplastic nevi that encode an activated form of BRAF (see below), demonstrating that induction of senescence is a protective mechanism that operates in humans to prevent the outgrowth of neoplastic cells.
 
 

A second method of activating p53 involves the induction by oncogenes of p14ARF (p19 in the mouse). ARF competes with p53 for binding to mdm2, allowing p53 to escape the effects of mdm2 and accumulate in the cell. Then p53 stops cell cycle progression by activating CDK inhibitors such as p21 and/or initiating the apoptosis pathway. Mutations in the gene for p53 on chromosome 17p are found in more than 50% of human cancers. Most commonly these mutations are acquired in the malignant tissue in one allele and the second allele is deleted, leaving the cell unprotected from DNA-damaging agents. Some environmental exposures produce signature mutations in p53; for example, aflatoxin exposure leads to mutation of arginine to serine at codon 249 and leads to hepatocellular carcinoma. In rare instances, p53 mutations are in the germ line (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) and produce a familial cancer syndrome. The absence of p53 leads to chromosome instability and the accumulation of DNA damage including the acquisition of properties that give the abnormal cell a proliferative and survival advantage. Like Rb dysfunction, most cancers have mutations that disable the p53 pathway. Indeed, the importance of p53 and Rb in the development of cancer is underscored by the neoplastic transformation mechanism of human papillomavirus. This virus has two main oncogenes, E6 and E7. E6 acts to increase the rapid turnover of p53, and E7 acts to inhibit Rb function; inhibition of these two targets is sufficient to lead to neoplasia.

Another cell cycle checkpoint exists when the cell is undergoing division, the spindle checkpoint. The details of this checkpoint are still being discovered; however, it appears that if the spindle apparatus does not properly align the chromosomes for division, if the chromosome number is abnormal (i.e., greater or less than 4n), if the centromeres are not properly paired with their duplicated partners, the cell initiates a cell death pathway to prevent the production of aneuploid progeny. Abnormalities in the spindle checkpoint facilitate the development of aneuploidy. In some tumors, aneuploidy is a predominant genetic feature. In others, microsatellite instability is the primary genetic lesion. Microsatellite instability arises from defects in DNA mismatch repair genes. In general, tumors either have defects in chromosome number or microsatellite instability, but not both. Defects that lead to cancer include abnormal cell cycle checkpoints, inadequate DNA repair, and failure to preserve genome integrity.

Efforts are underway to therapeutically restore the defects in cell cycle regulation that characterize cancer.

Cancer as an Organ that Ignores Its Niche

The fundamental cellular defects that create a malignantneoplasm act at the cellular level. However, that is not the entire story. Cancers behave as organs that have lost their specialized function and stopped responding to signals that normally limit their growth. Human cancers usually become clinically detectable when a primary mass is at least 1 cm in diameter〞such a mass consists of about 109 cells. More commonly patients present with tumors that are 1010 cells or greater. A lethal tumor burden is about 1012 cells. If all tumor cells were dividing at the time of diagnosis, patients would reach a lethal tumor burden in a very short time. However, human tumors grow by Gompertzian kinetics〞this means that not every daughter cell produced by a cell division is itself capable of dividing. The growth fraction of a tumor declines exponentially with time. The growth fraction of the first malignant cell is 100%, and by the time a patient presents for medical care, the growth fraction is 2每3% or less. This fraction is similar to the growth fraction of normal bone marrow and normal intestinal epithelium, the most highly proliferative normal tissues in the human body, a fact that may explain the dose-limiting toxicities of agents that target dividing cells.

The implication of these data is that the tumor is slowing its own growth over time. How does it do this? The tumor cells have multiple genetic lesions that tend to promote proliferation, yet by the time the tumor is clinically detectable, its capacity for proliferation has declined. We need to better understand how a tumor stops its own growth. A number of factors can contribute to the failure of tumor cells to proliferate in vivo. Some cells are hypoxemic and have inadequate supply of nutrients and energy. Some have sustained too much genetic damage to complete the cell cycle and have lost the capacity to undergo apoptosis. However, an important subset is not actively dividing but retains the capacity to divide and starts dividing again when the tumor mass is reduced by treatments. Just as the bone marrow increases its rate of proliferation in response to bone marrow每damaging agents, so too does the tumor seem to sense when the tumor cell numbers have been reduced and responds by increasing growth rate. However, the marrow stops growing when it has reached its production goals. Tumors do not.

It is not in the long-term interest of a cancer to kill its host. It errs when it overshoots the limits imposed by the organ niche it occupies. Additional tumor cell vulnerabilities are likely to be detected when we learn more about how normal cells respond to "stop" signals from their environment and how tumor cells fail to heed such signals.

Is In Vitro Senescence Relevant to Carcinogenesis?

When normal cells are placed in culture in vitro, most are not capable of sustained growth. Fibroblasts are an exception to this rule. When they are cultured, fibroblasts may divide 30每50 times and then they undergo what has been termed a "crisis" during which the majority of cells stop dividing (usually due to an increase in p21 expression, a CDK inhibitor), many die, and a small fraction emerge that have acquired genetic changes that permit their uncontrolled growth. The cessation of growth of normal cells in culture has been termed "senescence" and whether this phenomenon is relevant to any physiologic event in vivo is debated.

Among the cellular changes during in vitro propagation is telomere shortening. DNA polymerase is unable to replicate the tips of chromosomes, resulting in the loss of DNA at the specialized ends of chromosomes (called telomeres) with each replication cycle. At birth, human telomeres are 15- to 20-kb pairs long and are composed of tandem repeats of a six-nucleotide sequence (TTAGGG) that associates with specialized telomere-binding proteins to form a T-loop structure that protects the ends of chromosomes from being mistakenly recognized as damaged. The loss of telomeric repeats with each cell division cycle causes gradual telomere shortening, leading to growth arrest (called senescence) when one or more critically short telomeres trigger a p53-regulated DNA-damage checkpoint response. Cells can bypass this growth arrest if pRb and p53 are nonfunctional, but cell death ensues when the unprotected ends of chromosomes lead to chromosome fusions or other catastrophic DNA rearrangements. The ability to bypass telomere-based growth limitations is thought to be a critical step in the evolution of most malignancies. This occurs by the reactivation of telomerase expression in cancer cells. Telomerase is an enzyme that adds TTAGGG repeats onto the 3' ends of chromosomes. It contains a catalytic subunit with reverse transcriptase activity (hTERT) and an RNA component that provides the template for telomere extension. Most normal somatic cells do not express sufficient telomerase to prevent telomere attrition with each cell division. Exceptions include stem cells (such as those found in hematopoietic tissues, gut and skin epithelium, and germ cells) that require extensive cell division to maintain tissue homeostasis. More than 90% of human cancers express high levels of telomerase that prevent telomere shortening to critical levels and allow indefinite cell proliferation. In vitro experiments indicate that inhibition of telomerase activity leads to tumor cell apoptosis. Major efforts are underway to develop methods to inhibit telomerase activity in cancer cells. The reverse transcriptase activity of telomerase is a prime target for small-molecule pharmaceuticals. In addition, the protein component of telomerase (hTERT) may act as a tumor-associated antigen and be targeted by vaccine approaches.

All of the known functions of telomerase relate to cell division. Thus, it is unclear how short telomeres interfere with the differentiated functions of normal cells. Nevertheless, a major growth industry in medical research has been discovering an association between short telomeres and human diseases ranging from diabetes and coronary artery disease to Alzheimer's disease. The picture is further complicated by the fact that rare genetic defects in the telomerase enzyme seem to cause pulmonary fibrosis, but not hematopoietic failure or defects in nutrient absorption in the gut, the sites that might be presumed to be most sensitive to defective cell proliferation. Much remains to be learned about how telomere shortening and telomere maintenance is related to human illness in general and cancer in particular.

Signal Transduction Pathways in Cancer Cells

Signals that affect cell behavior come from adjacent cells, the stroma in which the cells are located, hormonal signals that originate remotely, and from the cells themselves (autocrine signaling). These signals generally exert their influence on the receiving cell through activation of signal transduction pathways that have as their end result the induction of activated transcription factors that mediate a change in cell behavior or function or the acquisition of effector machinery to accomplish a new task. Although signal transduction pathways can lead to a wide variety of outcomes, many such pathways rely on cascades of signals that sequentially activate different proteins or glycoproteins and lipids or glycolipids, and the activation steps often involve the addition or removal of one or more phosphate groups on a downstream target. Other chemical changes can result from signal transduction pathways, but phosphorylation and dephosphorylation play a major role. The protein kinases are generally of two distinct classes; one class acts on tyrosine residues and the other acts on serine/threonine residues. The tyrosine kinases often play critical roles in signal transduction pathways; they may be receptor tyrosine kinases or they may be linked to other cell-surface receptors through associated docking proteins (Fig. 84-2).

Figure 84-2

 
 
 
Therapeutic targeting of signal transduction pathways in cancer cells. Three major signal transduction pathways are activated by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK). 1. The protooncogene Ras is activated by the Grb2/mSOS guanine nucleotide exchange factor, which induces an association with Raf and activation of downstream kinases (MEK and ERK1/2). 2. Activated PI3K phosphorylates the membrane lipid PIP2 to generate PIP3, which acts as a membrane-docking site for a number of cellular proteins including the serine/threonine kinases PDK1 and Akt. PDK1 has numerous cellular targets, including Akt and mTOR. Akt phosphorylates target proteins that promote resistance to apoptosis and enhance cell cycle progression, while mTOR and its target p70S6K upregulate protein synthesis to potentiate cell growth. 3. Activation of PLC- leads the formation of diacylglycerol (DAG) and increased intracellular calcium, with activation of multiple isoforms of PKC and other enzymes regulated by the calcium/calmodulin system. Other important signaling pathways involve non-RTKs that are activated by cytokine or integrin receptors. Janus kinases (JAK) phosphorylate STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) transcription factors, which translocate to the nucleus and activate target genes. Integrin receptors mediate cellular interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM), inducing activation of FAK (focal adhesion kinase) and c-Src, which activate multiple downstream pathways, including modulation of the cell cytoskeleton. Many activated kinases and transcription factors migrate into the nucleus, where they regulate gene transcription, thus completing the path from extracellular signals, such as growth factors, to a change in cell phenotype, such as induction of differentiation or cell proliferation. The nuclear targets of these processes include transcription factors (e.g., Myc, AP-1, and serum response factor) and the cell cycle machinery (CDKs and cyclins). Inhibitors of many of these pathways have been developed for the treatment of human cancers. Examples of inhibitors that are currently being evaluated in clinical trials are shown in purple type.
 
 


Normally, tyrosine kinase activity is short-lived and reversed by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). However, in many human cancers, tyrosine kinases or components of their downstream pathways are activated by mutation, gene amplification, or chromosomal translocations. Because these pathways regulate proliferation, survival, migration, and angiogenesis, they have been identified as important targets for cancer therapeutics.

Inhibition of kinase activity is effective in the treatment of a number of neoplasms. Lung cancers with mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor are highly responsive to erlotinib and gefitinib (Table 84每2). Lung cancers with activation of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) respond to crizotinib, an ALK inhibitor. A BRAF inhibitor is highly effective in melanomas and thyroid cancers in which BRAF is overexpressed. Janus kinase inhibitors are active in myeloproliferative syndromes in which JAK2 activation is a pathogenetic event. Imatinib is an effective agent in tumors that overexpress c-Abl (such as chronic myeloid leukemia), c-Kit (gastrointestinal stromal cell tumors), or platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR; chronic myelomonocytic leukemia); second-generation congeners, dasatinib, and nilotinib are even more effective. Sorafenib and sunitinib, agents that inhibit a large number of kinases, are being widely tested and have shown promising antitumor activity in renal cell cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. Inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) such as temsirolimus are also active in renal cell cancer. The list of active agents and treatment indications is growing rapidly. These new agents have ushered in a new era of personalized therapy. It is becoming more routine for resected tumors to be assessed for specific molecular changes that predict response and to have clinical decision-making guided by those results.

Table 84每2 Some FDA-Approved Molecularly Targeted Agents for the Treatment of Cancer

 
 
Drug Molecular Target Disease Mechanism of Action 
All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) PML-RAR oncogene Acute promyelocytic leukemia M3 AML; t(15;17) Inhibits transcriptional repression by PML-RAR 
Imatinib (Gleevec)

Dasatinib

(Sprycel)

Nilotinib

(Tasigna)
 Bcr-Abl, c-Abl, c-Kit, PDGFR-/ Chronic myeloid leukemia; GIST Blocks ATP binding to tyrosine kinase active site 
Sunitinib (Sutent) c-Kit, VEGFR-2, PDGFR-, Flt-3 GIST; renal cell cancer Inhibits activated c-Kit and PDGFR in GIST; inhibits VEGFR in RCC 
Sorafenib (Nexavar) RAF, VEGFR-2, PDGFR-/, Flt-3, c-Kit RCC; hepatocellular carcinoma Targets VEGFR pathways in RCC. Possible activity against BRAF in melanoma, colon cancer, and others 
Erlotinib (Tarceva) EGFR Non-small cell lung cancer; pancreatic cancer Competitive inhibitor of the ATP-binding site of the EGFR 
Gefitinib (Iressa) EGFR Non-small cell lung cancer Inhibitor of EGFR tyrosine kinase 
Bortezomib (Velcade) Proteasome Multiple myeloma Inhibits proteolytic degradation of multiple cellular proteins 
Monoclonal Antibodies  
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) HER2/neu (ERBB2) Breast cancer Binds HER2 on tumor cell surface and induces receptor internalization 
Cetuximab (Erbitux) EGFR Colon cancer, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck Binds extracellular domain of EGFR and blocks binding of EGF and TGF-; induces receptor internalization. Potentiates the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
Panitumumab (Vectibix) EGFR Colon cancer Like cetuximab; likely to be very similar in clinical activity 
Rituximab (Rituxan) CD20 B cell lymphomas and leukemias that express CD20 Multiple potential mechanisms, including direct induction of tumor cell apoptosis and immune mechanisms 
Alemtuzumab (Campath) CD52 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia and CD52-expressing lymphoid tumors Immune mechanisms 
Bevacizumab (Avastin) VEGF Colon, lung, breast cancers; data pending in other tumors Inhibits angiogenesis by high-affinity binding to VEGF 
 


Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; Flt-3, fms-like tyrosine kinase-3; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PML-RAR, promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor-alpha; RCC, renal cell cancer; t(15;17), translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17; TGF-, transforming growth factor-alpha; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
 

However, it must be acknowledged that none of these therapies is curative in any malignancy. The reasons for the failure to cure are not all defined. However, at least some causes of resistance are known. In some tumors, resistance to kinase inhibitors is related to an acquired mutation in the target kinase that inhibits drug binding. Many of these kinase inhibitors act as competitive inhibitors of the ATP-binding pocket. ATP is the phosphate donor in these phosphorylation reactions. Mutation in the BCR-ABL kinase in the ATP-binding pocket (such as the tyrosine to isoleucine change at codon 315) can prevent imatinib binding. Other resistance mechanisms include altering other signal transduction pathways to bypass the inhibited pathway. Some kinase inhibitors are less specific for an oncogenic target than was hoped, and toxicities related to off-target kinase inhibition limit the use of the agent at a dose that would inhibit the cancer-relevant kinase. As resistance mechanisms become better defined, rational strategies to overcome resistance will emerge.

Another strategy to enhance the antitumor effects of targeted agents is to use them in rational combinations with each other and in empiric combinations with chemotherapy agents that kill cells in ways distinct from targeted agents. For example, in the c-Kit overexpressing gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), resistance to imatinib develops due to secondary mutations in c-Kit, and many of these tumors are susceptible to treatment with the multitargeted tyrosine kinase (TK) inhibitor sunitinib that has activity against c-Kit as well as the PDGF and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors. Sunitinib is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment of patients with imatinib-resistant GIST or who are intolerant of imatinib (Table 84每2). Interestingly, tumors with mutations in exon 11 of c-Kit's juxtamembrane region are particularly sensitive to imatinib, whereas those with exon 9 mutations (extracellular domain) respond better to sunitinib than imatinib. In the future, primary therapy for GIST may be determined by the specific molecular defect in c-Kit.

While targeted therapies have not yet resulted in cures when used alone, their use in the adjuvant setting and when combined with other effective treatments has substantially increased the fraction of patients cured. For example, the addition of rituximab, an anti-CD20 antibody, to combination chemotherapy in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma improves cure rates by 15每20%. The addition of trastuzumab, antibody to HER2, to combination chemotherapy in the adjuvant treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer reduces relapse rates by 50%.

Targeted therapies are being developed for the ras/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways, the hedgehog pathway, various angiogenesis pathways, and phospholipid signaling pathways such as the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase C-gamma pathways, which are involved in a large number of cellular processes that are important in cancer development and progression.

One of the strategies for new drug development is to take advantage of so-called oncogene addiction. This situation (Fig. 84-3) is created when a tumor cell develops an activating mutation in an oncogene that becomes a dominant pathway with reduced contributions from auxiliary pathways. This dependency on a single pathway creates a cell that is vulnerable to inhibitors of the oncogene pathway. For example, cells harboring mutations in BRAF are very sensitive to MEK inhibitors.

Figure 84-3

 
 
 
 
Oncogene addiction and synthetic lethality: keys to discovery of new anticancer drugs. Panel A. Normal cells receive environmental signals that activate signaling pathways (pathways A, B, and C) that together promote G1 to S phase transition and passage through the cell cycle. Inhibition of one pathway (such as pathway A by a targeted inhibitor) has no significant effect due to redundancy provided by pathways B and C. In cancer cells, oncogenic mutations lead over time to dependency on the activated pathway, with loss of significant input from pathways B and C. The dependency or addiction of the cancer cell to pathway A makes it highly vulnerable to inhibitors that target components of this pathway. Clinically relevant examples include Bcr-Abl (CML), amplified HER2/neu (breast cancer), overexpressed or mutated EGF receptors (lung cancer), and mutated BRAF (melanoma). Panel B. Genes are said to have a synthetic lethal relationship when mutation of either gene alone is tolerated by the cell, but mutation of both genes leads to lethality. Thus, in the example, mutant gene a and gene b have a synthetic lethal relationship, implying that the loss of one gene makes the cell dependent on the function of the other gene. In cancer cells, loss of function of a tumor-suppressor gene (wild-type designated gene A; mutant designated gene a) may render the cancer cells dependent on an alternative pathway of which gene B is a component. As shown in the figure, if an inhibitor of gene B can be identified, this can cause death of the cancer cell, without harming normal cells (which maintain wild-type function for gene A). High-throughput screens can now be performed using isogenic cell line pairs in which one cell line has a defined defect in a tumor-suppressor pathway. Compounds can be identified that selectively kill the mutant cell line; targets of these compounds have a synthetic lethal relationship to the tumor-suppressor pathway, and are potentially important targets for future therapeutics. Note that this approach allows discovery of drugs that indirectly target deleted tumor-suppressor genes and hence greatly expands the list of physiologically relevant cancer targets.
 
 

Many transcription factors are activated by phosphorylation, which can be prevented by tyrosine- or serine/threonine kinase inhibitors. The transcription factor NF-B is a heterodimer composed of p65 and p50 subunits that associate with an inhibitor, IB, in the cell cytoplasm. In response to growth factor or cytokine signaling, a multi-subunit kinase called IKK (IB-kinase) phosphorylates IB and directs its degradation by the ubiquitin/proteasome system. NF-B, free of its inhibitor, translocates to the nucleus and activates target genes, many of which promote the survival of tumor cells. Novel drugs called proteasome inhibitors block the proteolysis of IB, thereby preventing NF-B activation. For unexplained reasons, this is selectively toxic to tumor cells. The antitumor effects of proteasome inhibitors are more complicated and involve the inhibition of the degradation of multiple cellular proteins. Proteasome inhibitors [bortezomib (Velcade)] have activity in patients with multiple myeloma, including partial and complete remissions. Inhibitors of IKK are also in development, with the hope of more selectively blocking the degradation of IB, thus "locking" NF-B in an inhibitory complex and rendering the cancer cell more susceptible to apoptosis-inducing agents.

Estrogen receptors (ERs) and androgen receptors, members of the steroid hormone family of nuclear receptors, are targets of inhibition by drugs used to treat breast and prostate cancers, respectively. Tamoxifen, a partial agonist and antagonist of ER function, can mediate tumor regression in metastatic breast cancer and can prevent disease recurrence in the adjuvant setting. Tamoxifen binds to the ER and modulates its transcriptional activity, inhibiting activity in the breast but promoting activity in bone and uterine epithelium. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have been developed with the hope of a more beneficial modulation of ER activity, i.e., antiestrogenic activity in the breast, uterus, and ovary, but estrogenic for bone, brain, and cardiovascular tissues. Aromatase inhibitors, which block the conversion of androgens to estrogens in breast and subcutaneous fat tissues, have demonstrated improved clinical efficacy compared with tamoxifen and are often used as first-line therapy in patients with ER-positive disease (Chap. 90).
 
Epigenetic Influences on Cancer Gene Transcription

Chromatin structure regulates the hierarchical order of sequential gene transcription that governs differentiation and tissue homeostasis. Disruption of chromatin remodeling leads to aberrant gene expression and can induce proliferation of undifferentiated cells. Epigenetics is defined as changes that alter the pattern of gene expression that persist across at least one cell division but are not caused by changes in the DNA code. Epigenetic changes include alterations of chromatin structure mediated by methylation of cytosine residues in CpG dinucleotides, modification of histones by acetylation or methylation, or changes in higher-order chromosome structure (Fig. 84-4). The transcriptional regulatory regions of active genes often contain a high frequency of CpG dinucleotides (referred to as CpG islands), which are normally unmethylated. Expression of these genes is controlled by transient association with repressor or activator proteins that regulate transcriptional activation. However, hypermethylation of promoter regions is a common mechanism by which tumor-suppressor loci are epigenetically silenced in cancer cells. Thus one allele may be inactivated by mutation or deletion (as occurs in loss of heterozygosity), while expression of the other allele is epigenetically silenced. The mechanisms that target tumor-suppressor genes for this form of gene silencing are unknown.

Figure 84-4

 
 
 
Epigenetic regulation of gene expression in cancer cells. Tumor-suppressor genes are often epigenetically silenced in cancer cells. In the upper portion, a CpG island within the promoter and enhancer regions of the gene has been methylated, resulting in the recruitment of methyl-cytosine binding proteins (MeCP) and complexes with histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. Chromatin is in a condensed, nonpermissive conformation that inhibits transcription. Clinical trials are under way utilizing the combination of demethylating agents such as 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine plus HDAC inhibitors, which together confer an open, permissive chromatin structure (lower portion). Transcription factors bind to specific DNA sequences in promoter regions and, through protein-protein interactions, recruit coactivator complexes containing histone acetyl transferase (HAT) activity. This enhances transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II and associated general transcription factors. The expression of the tumor-suppressor gene commences, with phenotypic changes that may include growth arrest, -differentiation, or apoptosis.
 
 

Acetylation of the amino terminus of the core histones H3 and H4 induces an open chromatin conformation that promotes transcription initiation. Histone acetylases are components of coactivator complexes recruited to promoter/enhancer regions by sequence-specific transcription factors during the activation of genes (Fig. 84-4). Histone deacetylases (HDACs; at least 17 are encoded in the human genome) are recruited to genes by transcriptional repressors and prevent the initiation of gene transcription. Methylated cytosine residues in promoter regions become associated with methyl cytosine每binding proteins that recruit protein complexes with HDAC activity. The balance between permissive and inhibitory chromatin structure is therefore largely determined by the activity of transcription factors in modulating the "histone code" and the methylation status of the genetic regulatory elements of genes.

The pattern of gene transcription is aberrant in all human cancers, and in many cases, epigenetic events are responsible. Unlike genetic events that alter DNA primary structure (e.g., deletions), epigenetic changes are potentially reversible and appear amenable to therapeutic intervention. In certain human cancers, including pancreatic cancer and multiple myeloma, the p16Ink4a promoter is inactivated by methylation, thus permitting the unchecked activity of CDK4/cyclin D and rendering pRb nonfunctional. In sporadic forms of renal, breast, and colon cancer, the von Hippel每Lindau (VHL), breast cancer 1 (BRCA1), and serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11) genes, respectively, are epigenetically silenced. Other targeted genes include the p15Ink4b CDK inhibitor, glutathione-S-transferase (which detoxifies reactive oxygen species), and the E-cadherin molecule (important for junction formation between epithelial cells). Epigenetic silencing can occur in premalignant lesions and can affect genes involved in DNA repair, thus predisposing to further genetic damage. Examples include MLH1 (mut L homologue) in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC, also called Lynch's syndrome), which is critical for repair of mismatched bases that occur during DNA synthesis, and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, which removes alkylated guanine adducts from DNA and is often silenced in colon, lung, and lymphoid tumors.

Human leukemias often have chromosomal translocations that code for novel fusion proteins with enzymatic activities that alter chromatin structure. The promyelocytic leukemia每retinoic acid receptor (PML-RAR) fusion protein, generated by the t(15;17) observed in most cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), binds to promoters containing retinoic acid response elements and recruits HDAC to these promoters, effectively inhibiting gene expression. This arrests differentiation at the promyelocyte stage and promotes tumor cell proliferation and survival. Treatment with pharmacologic doses of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the ligand for RAR, results in the release of HDAC activity and the recruitment of coactivators, which overcome the differentiation block. This induced differentiation of APL cells has improved treatment of these patients but also has led to a novel treatment toxicity when newly differentiated tumor cells infiltrate the lungs. However, ATRA represents a treatment paradigm for the reversal of epigenetic changes in cancer. For other leukemia-associated fusion proteins, such as acute myeloid leukemia (AML)-eight-twenty-one (ETO) and the MLL fusion proteins seen in AML and ALL, no ligand is known. Therefore, efforts are ongoing to determine the structural basis for interactions between translocation fusion proteins and chromatin-remodeling proteins and to use this information to rationally design small molecules that will disrupt specific protein-protein associations. Drugs that block the enzymatic activity of HDAC are being tested. HDAC inhibitors have demonstrated antitumor activity in clinical studies against cutaneous T cell lymphoma (e.g., vorinostat) and some solid tumors. HDAC inhibitors may target cancer cells via a number of mechanisms, including upregulation of death receptors (DR4/5, FAS, and their ligands) and p21Cip1/Waf1, as well as inhibition of cell cycle checkpoints.

Efforts are also under way to reverse the hypermethylation of CpG islands that characterizes many solid tumors. Drugs that induce DNA demethylation, such as 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, can lead to reexpression of silenced genes in cancer cells with restoration of function. However, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine has limited aqueous solubility and is myelosuppressive. Other inhibitors of DNA methyltransferases are in development. In ongoing clinical trials, inhibitors of DNA methylation are being combined with HDAC inhibitors. The hope is that by reversing coexisting epigenetic changes, the deregulated patterns of gene transcription in cancer cells will be at least partially reversed.

Another epigenetic form of gene regulation is microRNAs. These are short (average 22 nucleotides in length) RNA molecules that silence gene expression after transcription by binding and inhibiting the translation or promoting the degradation of mRNA transcripts. It is estimated that more than 1000 microRNAs are encoded in the human genome. Each tissue has a distinctive repertoire of microRNA expression and this pattern is altered in specific ways in cancers. However, specific correlations between microRNA expression and tumor biology and clinical behavior are just now emerging. Therapies targeting microRNAs are not currently at hand but represent a novel area of treatment development.
 
Apoptosis

Tissue homeostasis requires a balance between the death of aged, terminally differentiated cells and their renewal by proliferation of committed progenitors. Genetic damage to growth-regulating genes of stem cells could lead to catastrophic results for the host as a whole. However, genetic events causing activation of oncogenes or loss of tumor suppressors, which would be predicted to lead to unregulated cell proliferation, may instead activate signal transduction pathways that block aberrant cell proliferation. These pathways can lead to programmed cell death (apoptosis) or irreversible growth arrest (senescence). Much as a panoply of intra- and extracellular signals impinge upon the core cell cycle machinery to regulate cell division, so too these signals are transmitted to a core enzymatic machinery that regulates cell death and survival.

Apoptosis is induced by two main pathways (Fig. 84-5). The extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is activated by cross-linking members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily, such as CD95 (Fas) and death receptors DR4 and DR5, by their ligands, Fas ligand or TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand), respectively. This induces the association of FADD (Fas-associated death domain) and procaspase-8 to death domain motifs of the receptors. Caspase-8 is activated and then cleaves and activates effector caspases-3 and -7, which then target cellular constituents (including caspase-activated DNAse, cytoskeletal proteins, and a number of regulatory proteins), inducing the morphologic appearance characteristic of apoptosis, which pathologists term "karyorrhexis." The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis is initiated by the release of cytochrome c and SMAC (second mitochondrial activator of caspases) from the mitochondrial intermembrane space in response to a variety of noxious stimuli, including DNA damage, loss of adherence to the extracellular matrix (ECM), oncogene-induced proliferation, and growth factor deprivation. Upon release into the cytoplasm, cytochrome c associates with dATP, procaspase-9, and the adaptor protein APAF-1, leading to the sequential activation of caspase-9 and effector caspases. SMAC binds to and blocks the function of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAP), negative regulators of caspase activation.

Figure 84-5

 
 
 
Therapeutic strategies to overcome aberrant survival pathways in cancer cells.1. The extrinsic pathway of apoptosis can be selectively induced in cancer cells by TRAIL (the ligand for death receptors 4 and 5) or by agonistic monoclonal antibodies. 2. Inhibition of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members with antisense oligonucleotides or inhibitors of the BH3-binding pocket will promote formation of Bak- or Bax-induced pores in the mitochondrial outer membrane. 3. Epigenetic silencing of APAF-1, caspase-8, and other proteins can be overcome using demethylating agents and inhibitors of histone deacetylases. 4. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAP) blocks activation of caspases; small-molecule inhibitors of IAP function (mimicking SMAC action) should lower the threshold for apoptosis. 5. Signal transduction pathways originating with activation of receptor tyrosine kinase receptors (RTKs) or cytokine receptors promote survival of cancer cells by a number of mechanisms. Inhibiting receptor function with monoclonal antibodies, such as trastuzumab or cetuximab, or inhibiting kinase activity with small-molecule inhibitors can block the pathway. 6. The Akt kinase phosphorylates many regulators of apoptosis to promote cell survival; inhibitors of Akt may render tumor cells more sensitive to apoptosis-inducing signals; however, the possibility of toxicity to normal cells may limit the therapeutic value of these agents. 7 and 8. Activation of the transcription factor NF-B (composed of p65 and p50 subunits) occurs when its inhibitor, IB, is phosphorylated by IB-kinase (IKK), with subsequent degradation of IB by the proteasome. Inhibition of IKK activity should selectively block the activation of NF-B target genes, many of which promote cell survival. Inhibitors of proteasome function are FDA approved and may work in part by preventing destruction of IB, thus blocking NF-B nuclear localization. NF-B is unlikely to be the only target for proteasome inhibitors.
 
 

The release of apoptosis-inducing proteins from the mitochondria is regulated by pro- and antiapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Antiapoptotic members (e.g., Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, and Mcl-1) associate with the mitochondrial outer membrane via their carboxyl termini, exposing to the cytoplasm a hydrophobic binding pocket composed of Bcl-2 homology (BH) domains 1, 2, and 3 that is crucial for their activity. Perturbations of normal physiologic processes in specific cellular compartments lead to the activation of BH3-only proapoptotic family members (such as Bad, Bim, Bid, Puma, Noxa, and others) that can alter the conformation of the outer-membrane proteins Bax and Bak, which then oligomerize to form pores in the mitochondrial outer membrane resulting in cytochrome c release. If proteins comprised only by BH3 domains are sequestered by Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, or Mcl-1, pores do not form and apoptosis-inducing proteins are not released from the mitochondria. The ratio of levels of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members and the levels of proapoptotic BH3-only proteins at the mitochondrial membrane determines the activation state of the intrinsic pathway. The mitochondrion must therefore be recognized not only as an organelle with vital roles in intermediary metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation but also as a central regulatory structure of the apoptotic process.

The evolution of tumor cells to a more malignant phenotype requires the acquisition of genetic changes that subvert apoptosis pathways and promote cancer cell survival and resistance to anticancer therapies. However, cancer cells may be more vulnerable than normal cells to therapeutic interventions that target the apoptosis pathways that cancer cells depend upon. For instance, overexpression of Bcl-2 as a result of the t(14;18) translocation contributes to follicular lymphoma. Upregulation of Bcl-2 expression is also observed in prostate, breast, and lung cancers and melanoma. Targeting of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members has been accomplished by the identification of several low-molecular-weight compounds that bind to the hydrophobic pockets of either Bcl-2 or Bcl-XL and block their ability to associate with death-inducing BH3-only proteins. These compounds inhibit the antiapoptotic activities of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL at nanomolar concentrations in the laboratory and are entering clinical trials.

Preclinical studies targeting death receptors DR4 and -5 have demonstrated that recombinant, soluble, human TRAIL or humanized monoclonal antibodies with agonist activity against DR4 or -5 can induce apoptosis of tumor cells while sparing normal cells. The mechanisms for this selectivity may include expression of decoy receptors or elevated levels of intracellular inhibitors (such as FLIP, which competes with caspase-8 for FADD) by normal cells but not tumor cells. Synergy has been shown between TRAIL-induced apoptosis and chemotherapeutic agents. For instance, some colon cancers encode mutated Bax protein as the result of mismatch repair (MMR) defects and are resistant to TRAIL. However, upregulation of Bak by chemotherapy restores the ability of TRAIL to activate the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. However, clinical studies have not yet shown that clinical activity correlates with activation of the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis.

Many of the signal transduction pathways perturbed in cancer promote tumor cell survival (Fig. 84-5). These include activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway, increased levels of the NF-B transcription factor, and epigenetic silencing of genes such as APAF-1 and caspase-8. Each of these pathways is a target for therapeutic agents that, in addition to affecting cancer cell proliferation or gene expression, may render cancer cells more susceptible to apoptosis, thus promoting synergy when combined with other chemotherapeutic agents.

Some tumor cells resist drug-induced apoptosis by expression of one or more members of the ABC family of ATP-dependent efflux pumps that mediate the multidrug-resistance (MDR) phenotype. The prototype, P-glycoprotein (PGP), spans the plasma membrane 12 times and has two ATP-binding sites. Hydrophobic drugs (e.g., anthracyclines and vinca alkaloids) are recognized by PGP as they enter the cell and are pumped out. Numerous clinical studies have failed to demonstrate that drug resistance can be overcome using inhibitors of PGP. However, ABC transporters have different substrate specificities, and inhibition of a single family member may not be sufficient to overcome the MDR phenotype. Efforts to reverse PGP-mediated drug resistance continue.

Metastasis

The three major features of tissue invasion are cell adhesion to the basement membrane, local proteolysis of the membrane, and movement of the cell through the rent in the membrane and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Malignant cells that gain access to the circulation must then repeat those steps at a remote site, find a hospitable niche in a foreign tissue, avoid detection by host defenses, and induce the growth of new blood vessels. Few drugs directly target the process of metastasis. Metalloproteinase inhibitors (see "Tumor Angiogenesis," below) represent an initial attempt to inhibit the migration of tumor cells into blood and lymphatic vessels. The rate-limiting step for metastasis is the ability for tumor cells to survive and expand in the novel microenvironment of the metastatic site, and multiple host-tumor interactions determine the ultimate outcome (Fig. 84-6).

Figure 84-6

 
 
 
Oncogene signaling pathways are activated during tumor progression and promote metastatic potential. This figure shows a cancer cell that has undergone epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) under the influence of several environmental signals. Critical components include activated transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) and the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met pathways, as well as changes in the expression of adhesion molecules that mediate cell-cell and cell每extracellular matrix interactions. Important changes in gene expression are mediated by the Snail and Twist family of transcriptional repressors (whose expression is induced by the oncogenic pathways), leading to reduced expression of E-cadherin, a key component of adherens junctions between epithelial cells. This, in conjunction with upregulation of N-cadherin, a change in the pattern of expression of integrins (which mediate cell每extracellular matrix associations that are important for cell motility), and a switch in intermediate filament expression from cytokeratin to vimentin, results in the phenotypic change from adherent highly organized epithelial cells to motile and invasive cells with a fibroblast or mesenchymal morphology. EMT is thought to be an important step leading to metastasis in some human cancers. Host stromal cells, including tumor-associated fibroblasts and macrophages, play an important role in modulating tumor cell behavior through secretion of growth factors and proangiogenic cytokines, and matrix metalloproteinases that degrade the basement membrane. VEGF-A, -C, and -D are produced by tumor cells and stromal cells in response to hypoxemia or oncogenic signals, and induce production of new blood vessels and lymphatic channels through which tumor cells metastasize to lymph nodes or tissues.
 
 

The metastatic phenotype is likely restricted to a small fraction of tumor cells (Fig. 84-6). Some data suggest that cells with the appropriate capability express chemokine receptors. A number of candidate metastasis-suppressor genes have been identified. The loss of function of these genes enhances metastasis, and although the molecular mechanisms are in many cases uncertain, one common theme is enhancing the ability of the metastatic tumor cells to overcome apoptosis signals. Gene expression profiling is being used to study the metastatic process and other properties of tumor cells that may predict susceptibilities.

Bone metastases are extremely painful, cause fractures of weight-bearing bones, can lead to hypercalcemia, and are a major cause of morbidity for cancer patients. Osteoclasts and their monocyte-derived precursors express the surface receptor RANK (receptor activator of NF-B), which is required for terminal differentiation and activation of osteoclasts. Osteoblasts and other stromal cells express RANK ligand, as both a membrane-bound and soluble cytokine. Osteoprotegerin (OPG), a soluble receptor for RANK ligand produced by stromal cells, acts as a decoy receptor to inhibit RANK activation. The relative balance of RANK ligand and OPG determines the activation state of RANK on osteoclasts. Many tumors increase osteoclast activity by secretion of substances such as parathyroid hormone (PTH), PTH-related peptide, interleukin (IL)-1, or Mip1 that perturb the homeostatic balance of bone remodeling by increasing RANK signaling. One example is multiple myeloma, where tumor cell每stromal cell interactions activate osteoclasts and inhibit osteoblasts, leading to the development of multiple lytic bone lesions. Inhibition of RANK ligand by an antibody (denosumab) can prevent further bone destruction. Bisphosphonates are also effective inhibitors of osteoclast function that are used in the treatment of cancer patients with bone metastases.

Cancer Stem Cells

Only a small proportion of the cells within a tumor are capable of initiating colonies in vitro or forming tumors at high efficiency when injected into immunocompromised NOD/SCID mice. Acute and chronic myeloid leukemias (AML and CML) have a small population of cells (<1%) that have properties of stem cells, such as unlimited self-renewal and the capacity to cause leukemia when serially transplanted in mice. These cells have an undifferentiated phenotype (Thy1每CD34+CD38每 and do not express other differentiation markers) and resemble normal stem cells in many ways, but are no longer under homeostatic control (Fig. 84-7). Solid tumors may also contain a population of stem cells. Cancer stem cells, like their normal counterparts, have unlimited proliferative capacity and paradoxically traverse the cell cycle at a very slow rate; cancer growth occurs largely due to expansion of the stem cell pool, the unregulated proliferation of an amplifying population, and failure of apoptosis pathways (Fig. 84-7). Slow cell cycle progression and high levels of expression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members and drug efflux pumps of the MDR family render cancer stem cells less vulnerable to cancer chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Implicit in the cancer stem cell hypothesis is the idea that failure to cure most human cancers is due to the fact that current therapeutic agents do not kill the stem cells. If cancer stem cells can be identified and isolated, then aberrant signaling pathways that distinguish these cells from normal tissue stem cells can be identified and targeted.

Figure 84-7

 
 
 
Cancer stem cells play a critical role in the initiation, progression, and resistance to therapy of malignantneoplasms. In normal tissues (left), homeostasis is maintained by asymmetric division of stem cells leading to one progeny cell that will differentiate and one cell that will maintain the stem cell pool. This occurs within highly specific niches unique to each tissue, such as in close apposition to osteoblasts in bone marrow, or at the base of crypts in the colon. Here, paracrine signals from stromal cells, such as sonic hedgehog or Notch-ligands, as well as upregulation of -catenin and telomerase, help to maintain stem cell features of unlimited self-renewal while preventing differentiation or cell death. This occurs in part through upregulation of the transcriptional repressor Bmi-1 and inhibition of the p16Ink4a/Arf and p53 pathways. Daughter cells leave the stem cells niche and enter a proliferative phase (referred to as transit-amplifying) for a specified number of cell divisions, during which time a developmental program is activated, eventually giving rise to fully differentiated cells that have lost proliferative potential. Cell renewal equals cell death, and homeostasis is maintained. In this hierarchical system, only stem cells are long-lived. The hypothesis is that cancers harbor stem cells that make up a small fraction (i.e., 0.001每1%) of all cancer cells. These cells share several features with normal stem cells, including an undifferentiated phenotype, unlimited self-renewal potential, a capacity for some degree of differentiation; however, due to initiating mutations (mutations are indicated by lightning bolts), they are no longer regulated by environmental cues. The cancer stem cell pool is expanded, and rapidly proliferating progeny, through additional mutations, may attain stem cell properties, although most of this population is thought to have a limited proliferative capacity. Differentiation programs are dysfunctional due to reprogramming of the pattern of gene transcription by oncogenic signaling pathways. Within the cancer transit-amplifying population, genomic instability generates aneuploidy and clonal heterogeneity as cells attain a fully malignant phenotype with metastatic potential. The cancer stem cell hypothesis has led to the idea that current cancer therapies may be effective at killing the bulk of tumor cells but do not kill tumor stem cells, leading to a regrowth of tumors that is manifested as tumor recurrence or disease progression. Research is in progress to identify unique molecular features of cancer stem cells that can lead to their direct targeting by novel therapeutic agents.
 
 

Oncogene Addiction and Synthetic Lethality

The concepts of oncogene addiction and synthetic lethality have spurred new drug development targeting oncogene- and tumor-suppressor pathways. As discussed earlier in this chapter and outlined in Fig. 84-3, cancer cells become dependent upon signaling pathways containing activated oncogenes; this can effect proliferation (i.e., mutated Ras, BRAF, overexpressed Myc, or activated tyrosine kinases), survival (overexpression of Bcl-2 or NF-B), cell metabolism (as occurs when hypoxemia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 and Akt increase dependence on glycolysis), and perhaps angiogenesis (production of VEGF, e.g., renal cell cancer). In such cases, targeted inhibition of the pathway can lead to specific killing of the cancer cells. However, targeting defects in tumor-suppressor genes has been much more difficult, since the target of the mutation is often deleted. However, identifying genes that have a synthetic lethal relationship to tumor-suppressor pathways may allow targeting of proteins required uniquely by the tumor cells (Fig. 84-3, panel B). Several examples of this have been identified. For instance, the von Hippel每Lindau tumor-suppressor protein is inactivated in 60% of renal cell cancers, leading to overexpression of HIF-1 and the subsequent activation of downstream genes that promote angiogenesis, proliferation, survival, and altered glucose metabolism. HIF-1 mRNA has a complex 5'-terminus that indirectly requires the activity of mTOR (via activation of p70S6K and inhibition of 4E-BP) for efficient protein translation. Inhibitors of mTOR block HIF-1 translation and have significant clinical activity in renal cell cancer. In this case, mTOR is synthetic lethal to VHL loss (Fig. 84-3), and its inhibition results in selective killing of cancer cells. Conceptually, this provides a framework for genetic screens to identify other synthetic lethal combinations involving known tumor-suppressor genes, and development of novel therapeutic agents to target dependent pathways.
 
Tumor Angiogenesis

The growth of primary and metastatic tumors to larger than a few millimeters requires the recruitment of blood vessels and vascular endothelial cells to support their metabolic requirements. The diffusion limit for oxygen in tissues is 100 mm. A critical element in the growth of primary tumors and formation of metastatic sites is the angiogenic switch: the ability of the tumor to promote the formation of new capillaries from preexisting host vessels. The angiogenic switch is a phase in tumor development when the dynamic balance of pro- and antiangiogenic factors is tipped in favor of vessel formation by the effects of the tumor on its immediate environment. Stimuli for tumor angiogenesis include hypoxemia, inflammation, and genetic lesions in oncogenes or tumor suppressors that alter tumor cell gene expression. Angiogenesis consists of several steps, including the stimulation of endothelial cells (ECs) by growth factors, the degradation of the ECM by proteases, proliferation of ECs and migration into the tumor, and the eventual formation of new capillary tubes.

Tumor blood vessels are not normal; they have chaotic architecture and blood flow. Due to an imbalance of angiogenic regulators such as VEGF and angiopoietins (see below), tumor vessels are tortuous and dilated with an uneven diameter, excessive branching, and shunting. Tumor blood flow is variable, with areas of hypoxemia and acidosis leading to the selection of variants that are resistant to hypoxemia-induced apoptosis (often due to the loss of p53 expression). Tumor vessel walls have numerous openings, widened interendothelial junctions, and discontinuous or absent basement membrane; this contributes to the high vascular permeability of these vessels and, together with lack of functional intratumoral lymphatics, causes increased interstitial pressure within the tumor (which also interferes with the delivery of therapeutics to the tumor; Figs. 84-8, 84-9, and 84-10). Tumor blood vessels lack perivascular cells such as pericytes and smooth-muscle cells that normally regulate flow in response to tissue metabolic needs.

Unlike normal blood vessels, the vascular lining of tumor vessels is not a homogeneous layer of ECs but often consists of a mosaic of ECs and tumor cells; the concept of cancer cell每derived vascular channels, which may be lined by ECM secreted by the tumor cells, is referred to as vascular mimicry. It is unclear whether tumor cells actually form structural elements of vascular channels or represent tumor cells in transit into or out of the vessel. However, the former is supported by evidence that in some human colon cancers, tumor cells can comprise up to 15% of vessel walls. The ECs of angiogenic blood vessels are unlike quiescent ECs found in adult vessels, where only 0.01% of ECs are dividing. During tumor angiogenesis, ECs are highly proliferative and express a number of plasma membrane proteins that are characteristic of activated endothelium, including growth factor receptors and adhesion molecules such as integrins.

Mechanisms of Tumor Vessel Formation

Tumors use a number of mechanisms to promote vascularization, subverting normal angiogenic processes for this purpose (Fig. 84-8). Primary or metastatic tumor cells sometimes arise in proximity to host blood vessels and grow around these vessels, parasitizing nutrients by co-opting the local blood supply. However, most tumor blood vessels arise by the process of sprouting, in which tumors secrete trophic angiogenic molecules, the most potent being VEGF, that induce the proliferation and migration of host ECs into the tumor. Sprouting in normal and pathogenic angiogenesis is regulated by three families of transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) expressed on ECs and their ligands (VEGFs, angiopoietins, ephrins; Fig. 84-9), which are produced by tumor cells, inflammatory cells, or stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment.

Figure 84-8

 
 
 
Tumor angiogenesis is a complex process involving many different cell types that must proliferate, migrate, invade, and differentiate in response to signals from the tumor microenvironment. Endothelial cells (ECs) sprout from host vessels in response to VEGF, bFGF, Ang2, and other proangiogenic stimuli. Sprouting is stimulated by VEGF/VEGFR2, Ang2/Tie-2, and integrin/extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. Bone marrow每derived circulating endothelial precursors (CEPs) migrate to the tumor in response to VEGF and differentiate into ECs, while hematopoietic stem cells differentiate into leukocytes, including tumor-associated macrophages that secrete angiogenic growth factors and produce MMPs that remodel the ECM and release bound growth factors. Tumor cells themselves may directly form parts of vascular channels within tumors. The pattern of vessel formation is haphazard: vessels are tortuous, dilated, leaky, and branch in random ways. This leads to uneven blood flow within the tumor, with areas of acidosis and hypoxemia (which stimulate release of angiogenic factors) and high intratumoral pressures that inhibit delivery of therapeutic agents.
 
 

Figure 84-9

 
 
 
Critical molecular determinants of endothelial cell biology. Angiogenic endothelium expresses a number of receptors not found on resting endothelium. These include receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and integrins that bind to the extracellular matrix and mediate endothelial cell (EC) adhesion, migration, and invasion. ECs also express RTK (i.e., the FGF and PDGF receptors) that are found on many other cell types. Critical functions mediated by activated RTK include proliferation, migration, and enhanced survival of endothelial cells, as well as regulation of the recruitment of perivascular cells and bloodborne circulating endothelial precursors and hematopoietic stem cells to the tumor. Intracellular signaling via EC-specific RTK utilizes molecular pathways that may be targets for future antiangiogenic therapies.
 
 

Figure 84-10

 
 
 
 
 
 
Normalization of tumor blood vessels due to inhibition of VEGF signaling.A. Blood vessels in normal tissues exhibit a regular hierarchical branching pattern that delivers blood to tissues in a spatially and temporally efficient manner to meet the metabolic needs of the tissue (top). At the microscopic level, tight junctions are maintained between endothelial cells (ECs), which are adherent to a thick and evenly distributed basement membrane (BM). Pericytes form a surrounding layer that provides trophic signals to the EC and helps maintain proper vessel tone. Vascular permeability is regulated, interstitial fluid pressure is low, and oxygen tension and pH are physiologic. B. Tumors have abnormal vessels with tortuous branching and dilated, irregular interconnecting branches, causing uneven blood flow with areas of hypoxemia and acidosis. This harsh environment selects genetic events that result in resistant tumor variants, such as the loss of p53. High levels of VEGF (secreted by tumor cells) disrupt gap junction communication, tight junctions, and adherens junctions between EC via src-mediated phosphor-ylation of proteins such as connexin 43, zonula occludens-1, VE-cadherin, and /-catenins. Tumor vessels have thin, irregular BM, and pericytes are sparse or absent. Together, these molecular abnormalities result in a vasculature that is permeable to serum macromolecules, leading to high tumor interstitial pressure, which can prevent the delivery of drugs to the tumor cells. This is made worse by the binding and activation of platelets at sites of exposed BM, with release of stored VEGF and microvessel clot formation, creating more abnormal blood flow and regions of hypoxemia. C. In experimental systems, treatment with bevacizumab or blocking antibodies to VEGFR2 leads to changes in the tumor vasculature that has been termed vessel normalization. During the first week of treatment, abnormal vessels are eliminated or pruned (dotted lines), leaving a more normal branching pattern. ECs partially regain features such as cell-cell junctions, adherence to a more normal BM, and pericyte coverage. These changes lead to a decrease in vascular permeability, reduced interstitial pressure, and a transient increase in blood flow within the tumor. Note that in murine models, this normalization period lasts only for ~5每6 days. D. After continued anti-VEGF/VEGFR therapy (which is often combined with chemo- or radiotherapy), ECs die, leading to tumor cell death (either due to direct effects of the chemotherapy or lack of blood flow).
 
 

When tumor cells arise in or metastasize to an avascular area, they grow to a size limited by hypoxemia and nutrient deprivation. Hypoxemia, a key regulator of tumor angiogenesis, causes the transcriptional induction of the gene encoding VEGF by a process that involves stabilization of HIF-1. Under normoxemic conditions, HIF-1 levels are maintained at a low level by proteasome-mediated destruction regulated by a ubiquitin E3-ligase encoded by the VHL tumor-suppressor locus. However, under hypoxemic conditions, HIF-1 is not hydroxylated and association with VHL does not occur; therefore HIF-1 levels increase, and target genes including VEGF, nitric oxide synthetase (NOS), and Ang2 are induced. Loss of the VHL genes, as occurs in familial and sporadic renal cell carcinomas, results in HIF-1 stabilization and induction of VEGF. Most tumors have hypoxemic regions due to poor blood flow, and tumor cells in these areas stain positive for HIF-1 expression; in renal cancers with VHL deletion, all of the tumor cells express high levels of HIF-1, and VEGF-induced angiogenesis leads to high microvascular density.

VEGF and its receptors are required for embryonic vasculogenesis, and normal (wound healing, corpus luteum formation) and pathologic angiogenesis (tumor angiogenesis, inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis). VEGF-A is a heparin-binding glycoprotein with at least four isoforms (splice variants) that regulates blood vessel formation by binding to the RTKs VEGFR1 and VEGFR2, which are expressed on all ECs in addition to a subset of hematopoietic cells (Fig. 84-8). VEGFR2 regulates EC proliferation, migration, and survival, while VEGFR1 may act as an antagonist of R2 in ECs but is probably also important for angioblast differentiation during embryogenesis. Tumor vessels may be more dependent on VEGFR signaling for growth and survival than normal ECs. While VEGF signaling is a critical initiator of angiogenesis, this is a complex process regulated by additional signaling pathways (Fig. 84-9). The angiopoietin, Ang1, produced by stromal cells, binds to the EC RTK Tie-2 and promotes the interaction of ECs with the ECM and perivascular cells, such as pericytes and smooth-muscle cells, to form tight, nonleaky vessels. PDGF and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) help to recruit these perivascular cells. Ang1 is required for maintaining the quiescence and stability of mature blood vessels and prevents the vascular permeability normally induced by VEGF and inflammatory cytokines.

For tumor cell每derived VEGF to initiate sprouting from host vessels, the stability conferred by the Ang1/Tie2 pathway must be perturbed; this occurs by the secretion of Ang2 by ECs that are undergoing active remodeling. Ang2 binds to Tie2 and is a competitive inhibitor of Ang1 action: under the influence of Ang2, preexisting blood vessels become more responsive to remodeling signals, with less adherence of ECs to stroma and associated perivascular cells and more responsiveness to VEGF. Therefore, Ang2 is required at early stages of tumor angiogenesis for destabilizing the vasculature by making host ECs more sensitive to angiogenic signals. Since tumor ECs are blocked by Ang2, there is no stabilization by the Ang1/Tie2 interaction, and tumor blood vessels are leaky, hemorrhagic, and have poor association of ECs with underlying stroma. Sprouting tumor ECs express high levels of the transmembrane protein ephrin-B2 and its receptor, the RTK EPH, whose signaling appears to work with the angiopoietins during vessel remodeling. During embryogenesis, EPH receptors are expressed on the endothelium of primordial venous vessels while the transmembrane ligand ephrin-B2 is expressed by cells of primordial arteries; the reciprocal expression may regulate differentiation and patterning of the vasculature.

A number of ubiquitously expressed host molecules play critical roles in normal and pathologic angiogenesis. Proangiogenic cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors secreted by stromal cells or inflammatory cells make important contributions to neovascularization, including bFGF, transforming growth factor- (TGF-), TNF-, and IL-8. In contrast to normal endothelium, angiogenic endothelium overexpresses specific members of the integrin family of ECM-binding proteins that mediate EC adhesion, migration, and survival. Specifically, expression of integrins v3, v5, and 51 mediates spreading and migration of ECs and is required for angiogenesis induced by VEGF and bFGF, which in turn can upregulate EC integrin expression. The v3 integrin physically associates with VEGFR2 in the plasma membrane and promotes signal transduction from each receptor to promote EC proliferation (via focal adhesion kinase, src, PI3K, and other pathways) and survival (by inhibition of p53 and increasing the Bcl-2/Bax expression ratio). In addition, v3 forms cell-surface complexes with matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), zinc-requiring proteases that cleave ECM proteins, leading to enhanced EC migration and the release of heparin-binding growth factors, including VEGF and bFGF. EC adhesion molecules can be upregulated (i.e., by VEGF, TNF-) or downregulated (by TGF-); this, together with chaotic blood flow, explains poor leukocyte-endothelial interactions in tumor blood vessels and may help tumor cells avoid immune surveillance.

Cells derived from hematopoietic progenitors in the host bone marrow contribute to tumor angiogenesis in a process linked to the secretion of VEGF and PlGF (placenta-derived growth factor) by tumor cells and their surrounding stroma. VEGF promotes the mobilization and recruitment of circulating endothelial cell precursors (CEPs) and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to tumors where they co-localize and appear to cooperate in neovessel formation. CEPs express VEGFR2, while HSCs express VEGFR1, a receptor for VEGF and PlGF. Both CEPs and HSCs are derived from a common precursor, the hemangioblast. CEPs are thought to differentiate into ECs, whereas the role of HSC-derived cells (such as tumor-associated macrophages) may be to secrete angiogenic factors required for sprouting and stabilization of ECs (VEGF, bFGF, angiopoietins) and to activate MMPs, resulting in ECM remodeling and growth factor release. In mouse tumor models and in human cancers, increased numbers of CEPs and subsets of VEGFR-expressing HSCs can be detected in the circulation, which may correlate with increased levels of serum VEGF. It is not yet known whether levels of these cells have prognostic value or if changes during treatment correlate with inhibition of tumor angiogenesis. Whether CEPs and VEGFR1-expressing HSCs are required to maintain the long-term integrity of established tumor vessels is also unknown.

Lymphatic vessels also exist within tumors. Development of tumor lymphatics is associated with expression of VEGFR3 and its ligands VEGF-C and VEGF-D. The role of these vessels in tumor cell metastasis to regional lymph nodes remains to be determined, since, as discussed above, interstitial pressures within tumors are high and most lymphatic vessels may exit in a collapsed and nonfunctional state. However, VEGF-C levels correlate significantly with metastasis to regional lymph nodes in lung, prostate, and colorectal cancers.

Antiangiogenic Therapy

ECs comprising the tumor vasculature are genetically stable and do not share genetic changes with tumor cells; the EC apoptosis pathways are therefore intact. Each EC of a tumor vessel helps provide nourishment to many tumor cells, and although tumor angiogenesis can be driven by a number of exogenous proangiogenic stimuli, experimental data indicate that at least in some tumor types, blockade of a single growth factor (e.g., VEGF) may inhibit tumor-induced vascular growth. Angiogenesis inhibitors function by targeting the critical molecular pathways involved in EC proliferation, migration, and/or survival, many of which are unique to the activated endothelium in tumors. Inhibition of growth factor and adhesion-dependent signaling pathways can induce EC apoptosis with concomitant inhibition of tumor growth. Different types of tumors use distinct molecular mechanisms to activate the angiogenic switch. Therefore, it is doubtful that a single antiangiogenic strategy will suffice for all human cancers; rather, a number of agents will be needed, each responding to distinct programs of angiogenesis used by different human cancers.

Bevacizumab, an antibody to VEGF, appears to potentiate the effects of many different types of active chemotherapeutic regimens used to treat a variety of different tumor types. It lacks single-agent antitumor activity and its strategy, the sopping up of locally produced VEGF after systemic administration, does not seem as likely to be effective as a therapy that interferes with the VEGF receptor on target cells. Bevacizumab appears to augment the antitumor effects of chemotherapy in colon cancer and additional testing in other tumor types is underway.

Bevacizumab is administered IV every 2每3 weeks (its half-life is nearly 20 days) and is generally well tolerated. Hypertension has been noted in most trials that utilize inhibitors of VEGF receptors, but only 10% of patients require treatment with antihypertensive agents and this rarely requires discontinuation of therapy. A mechanism for the hypertension may be a bevacizumab-induced decrease in vessel production of nitric oxide, resulting in vasoconstriction and increased blood pressure. Rare but serious side effects of bevacizumab include an increased risk of arterial thromboembolic events including stroke and myocardial infarction, usually in patients older than age 65 with a history of cardiovascular disease. An increased risk of hemorrhage was noted in lung cancer patients with a squamous histology and large central tumors near the major mediastinal blood vessels. Cavitation of the tumor with vessel rupture and massive hemoptysis lead to the exclusion of squamous cell cancers from treatment with bevacizumab. This potentially fatal side effect may actually reflect an increased activity of bevacizumab plus chemotherapy in squamous cell cancers. Other serious complications include bowel perforations that have been observed in 1每3% of patients (mainly those with colon and ovarian cancers).

The bevacizumab experience suggests that inhibition of the VEGF pathway will be most efficacious when combined with agents that directly target tumor cells. This also appears to be the case in the development of small-molecule inhibitors (SMI) that target VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase activity but are also inhibitory to other kinases that are expressed by tumor cells and important for their proliferation and survival. Sunitinib, FDA approved for the treatment of GIST (see above and Table 84每2), has activity directed against mutant c-Kit receptors, but also targets VEGFR and PDGFR, and has shown significant antitumor activity against metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), presumably on the basis of its antiangiogenic activity. Similarly, sorafenib, originally developed as a Raf kinase inhibitor but with potent activity against VEGF and PDGF receptors, increases progression-free survival in RCC. Thus, agents that target both angiogenesis and tumor-specific signaling pathways may have greater efficacy against a broad range of cancers. A caveat is that RCC and GIST are highly dependent upon single signaling pathways (VEGF and c-Kit, respectively), whereas most solid tumors use a panoply of interconnected proliferation and survival pathways that are redundant and likely to be less amenable to single-agent targeting.

The success in targeting tumor angiogenesis has led to enhanced enthusiasm for the development of drugs that target other aspects of the angiogenic process; some of these therapeutic approaches are outlined in Fig. 84-11.

Figure 84-11

 
 
 
Knowledge of the molecular events governing tumor angiogenesis has led to a number of therapeutic strategies to block tumor blood vessel formation. The successful therapeutic targeting of VEGF is described in the text. Other endothelial cell每specific receptor tyrosine kinase pathways (e.g., angiopoietin/Tie2 and ephrin/EPH) are likely targets for the future. Ligation of the v3 integrin is required for EC survival. Integrins are also required for EC migration and are important regulators of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, which modulates EC movement through the ECM as well as release of bound growth factors. Targeting of integrins includes development of blocking antibodies, small peptide inhibitors of integrin signaling, and arg-gly-asp每containing peptides that prevent integrin:ECM binding. Peptides derived from normal proteins by proteolytic cleavage, including endostatin and tumstatin, inhibit angiogenesis by mechanisms that include interfering with integrin function. Signal transduction pathways that are dysregulated in tumor cells indirectly regulate EC function. Inhibition of EGF-family receptors, whose signaling activity is upregulated in a number of human cancers (e.g., breast, colon, and lung cancers), results in downregulation of VEGF and IL-8, while increasing expression of the antiangiogenic protein thrombospondin-1. The Ras/MAPK, PI3K/Akt, and Src kinase pathways constitute important antitumor targets that also regulate the proliferation and survival of tumor-derived EC. The discovery that EC from normal tissues express tissue-specific "vascular addressins" on their cell surface suggests that targeting specific EC subsets may be possible.
 
 
 
Summary

The explosion of information on tumor cell biology, metastasis, and angiogenesis has ushered in a new era of rational targeted therapy for cancer. Furthermore, it has become clear that specific molecular factors detected in individual tumors (specific gene mutations, gene-expression profiles, microRNA expression) can be used to tailor therapy and maximize antitumor effects.
 
Acknowledgement

Robert G. Fenton contributed to this chapter in prior editions and important material from those prior chapters has been included here.
 
Further Readings

Bild AH et al: Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies. Nature 439:353, 2006[PMID: 16273092] 

 
Brough R et al: Searching for synthetic lethality in cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev 21:34, 2011[PMID: 21255997] 

 
Dai y, Grant S: Targeting multiple arms of the apoptotic regulatory machinery. Cancer Res 67:2908, 2007[PMID: 17409392] 

 
Finkel T et al: The common biology of cancer and ageing. Nature 448:767, 2007[PMID: 17700693] 

 
Flaherty KT et al: Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 363:809, 2010[PMID: 20818844] 

 
Huber MA et al: Molecular requirements for epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumor progression. Curr Opin Cell Biol 17:548, 2005[PMID: 16098727] 

 
Nana-Sinkam SP, Croce CM: MicroRNA in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: Transitioning from laboratory-based investigation to clinical application. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 203:127, 2010[PMID: 21156224] 

 
Panares RL, Garcia AA: Bevacizumab in the management of solid tumors. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 7:434, 2007 

 
Sharma SV et al: Epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 7:169, 2007[PMID: 17318210] 

 
Sherbenou DW, Drucker BJ: Applying the discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome. J Clin Invest 117:2068, 2007 

 
Vousden KH, Lane DP: p53 in health and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:275, 2007[PMID: 17380161] 
 
 

^^
Principles of Cancer Treatment: Introduction

The goal of cancer treatment is first to eradicate the cancer. If this primary goal cannot be accomplished, the goal of cancer treatment shifts to palliation, the amelioration of symptoms, and preservation of quality of life while striving to extend life. The dictum primum non nocere may not always be the guiding principle of cancer therapy. When cure of cancer is possible, cancer treatments may be undertaken despite the certainty of severe and perhaps life-threatening toxicities. Every cancer treatment has the potential to cause harm, and treatment may be given that produces toxicity with no benefit. The therapeutic index of many interventions is quite narrow, and most treatments are given to the point of toxicity. Conversely, when the clinical goal is palliation, careful attention to minimizing the toxicity of potentially toxic treatments becomes a significant goal. Irrespective of the clinical scenario, the guiding principle of cancer treatment should be primum succerrere, "first hasten to help." Radical surgical procedures, large-field hyperfractionated radiation therapy, high-dose chemotherapy, and maximum tolerable doses of cytokines such as interleukin (IL) 2 are all used in certain settings where 100% of the patients will experience toxicity and side effects from the intervention and only a fraction of the patients will experience benefit. One of the challenges of cancer treatment is to use the various treatment modalities alone and together in a fashion that maximizes the chances for patient benefit.

Cancer treatments are divided into four main types: surgery, radiation therapy (including photodynamic therapy), chemotherapy (including hormonal therapy and molecularly targeted therapy), and biologic therapy (including immunotherapy and gene therapy). The modalities are often used in combination, and agents in one category can act by several mechanisms. For example, cancer chemotherapy agents can induce differentiation, and antibodies (a form of immunotherapy) can be used to deliver radiation therapy. Surgery and radiation therapy are considered local treatments, though their effects can influence the behavior of tumor at remote sites. Chemotherapy and biologic therapy are usually systemic treatments. Oncology, the study of tumors including treatment approaches, is a multidisciplinary effort with surgical-, radiotherapy-, and internal medicine每related areas of expertise. Treatments for patients with hematologicmalignancies are often shared by hematologists and medical oncologists.

In many ways, cancer mimics an organ attempting to regulate its own growth. However, cancers have not set an appropriate limit on how much growth should be permitted. Normal organs and cancers share the property of having (1) a population of cells in cycle and actively renewing and (2) a population of cells not in cycle. In cancers, cells that are not dividing are heterogeneous; some have sustained too much genetic damage to replicate but have defects in their death pathways that permit their survival, some are starving for nutrients and oxygen, and some are out of cycle but poised to be recruited back into cycle and expand if needed (i.e., reversibly growth-arrested). Severely damaged and starving cells are unlikely to kill the patient. The problem is that the cells that are reversibly not in cycle are capable of replenishing tumor cells physically removed or damaged by radiation and chemotherapy. These include cancer stem cells, whose properties are being elucidated. The stem cell fraction may define new targets for therapies that will retard their ability to reenter the cell cycle.

Tumors follow a Gompertzian growth curve (Fig. 85-1); the growth fraction of a neoplasm starts at 100% with the first transformed cell and declines exponentially over time until at the time of diagnosis, with a tumor burden of 1每5 x 109 tumor cells, the growth fraction is usually 1每4%. Thus, peak growth rate occurs before the tumor is detectable. A key feature of a successful tumor is the ability to stimulate the development of a new supporting stroma through angiogenesis and production of proteases to allow invasion through basement membranes and normal tissue barriers (Chap. 84). Specific cellular mechanisms promote entry or withdrawal of tumor cells from the cell cycle. For example, when a tumor recurs after surgery or chemotherapy, frequently its growth is accelerated and the growth fraction of the tumor is increased. This pattern is similar to that seen in regenerating organs. Partial resection of the liver results in the recruitment of cells into the cell cycle, and the resected liver volume is replaced. Similarly, chemotherapy-damaged bone marrow increases its growth to replace cells killed by chemotherapy. However, cancers do not recognize a limit on their expansion. Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance may be an example of a clonal neoplasm with intrinsic features that stop its growth before a lethal tumor burden is reached. A fraction of patients with this disorder go on to develop fatal multiple myeloma, but probably this occurs because of the accumulation of additional genetic lesions. Elucidation of the mechanisms that regulate this "organ-like" behavior of tumors may provide additional clues to cancer control and treatment.

Figure 85-1

 
 
 
Gompertzian tumor growth. The growth fraction of a tumor declines exponentially over time (top). The growth rate of a tumor peaks before it is clinically detectable (middle). Tumor size increases slowly, goes through an exponential phase, and slows again as the tumor reaches the size at which limitation of nutrients or auto- or host regulatory influences can occur. The maximum growth rate occurs at 1/e, the point at which the tumor is about 37% of its maximum size (marked with an X). Tumor becomes detectable at a burden of about 109 (1 cm3) cells and kills the patient at a tumor cell burden of about 1012 (1 kg). Efforts to treat the tumor and reduce its size can result in an increase in the growth fraction and an increase in growth rate.
 
 

Figure 85-2

 
 
 
Steps in cancer drug discovery and development. Preclinical activity (top) in animal models of cancers may be used as evidence to support the entry of the drug candidate into phase I trials in humans to define a correct dose and observe any clinical antitumor effect that may occur. The drug may then be advanced to phase II trials directed against specific cancer types, with rigorous quantitation of antitumor effects (middle). Phase III trials then may reveal activity superior to standard or no treatment (lowest panel).
 
 
 
Principles of Cancer Surgery

Surgery is used in cancer prevention, diagnosis, staging, treatment (for both localized and metastatic disease), palliation, and rehabilitation.

Prophylaxis

Cancer can be prevented by surgery in people who have premalignant lesions resected (e.g., premalignant lesions of skin, colon, cervix) and in those who are at increased risk of cancer from either an underlying disease (colectomy in those with pancolonic involvement with ulcerative colitis), the presence of genetic lesions (colectomy for familial polyposis, thyroidectomy for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, bilateral mastectomy or oophorectomy for familial breast or ovarian cancer syndromes), or a developmental anomaly (orchiectomy in those with an undescended testis). In some cases, prophylactic surgery is more radical than the surgical procedures used to treat the cancer after it develops. The assessment of risk involves many factors and should be undertaken with care before advising a patient to undergo such a major procedure. For breast cancer prevention, many experts use a 20% risk of developing breast cancer over the next 5 years as a threshold. However, patient fears play a major role in defining candidates for cancer prevention surgery. Counseling and education may not be enough to allay the fears of someone who has lost close family members to a malignancy.

Diagnosis

The underlying principle in cancer diagnosis is to obtain as much tissue as safely possible. Owing to tumor heterogeneity, pathologists are better able to make the diagnosis when they have more tissue to examine. In addition to light-microscopic inspection of a tumor for pattern of growth, degree of cellular atypia, invasiveness, and morphologic features that aid in the differential diagnosis, sufficient tissue is of value in searching for genetic abnormalities and protein expression patterns, such as hormone receptor expression in breast cancers, that may aid in differential diagnosis or provide information about prognosis or likely response to treatment. Efforts to define "personalized" information from the biology of each patient's tumor and pertinent to each patient's treatment plan are becoming increasingly important in selecting treatment options. Histologically similar tumors may have very different gene expression patterns when assessed by such techniques as microarray analysis using gene chips, with important differences in response to treatment. Such testing requires that the tissue be handled properly (e.g., immunologic detection of proteins is more effective in fresh-frozen tissue rather than in formalin-fixed tissue). Coordination among the surgeon, pathologist, and primary care physician is essential to ensure that the amount of information learned from the biopsy material is maximized.

These goals are best met by an excisional biopsy in which the entire tumor mass is removed with a small margin of normal tissue surrounding it. If an excisional biopsy cannot be performed, incisional biopsy is the procedure of second choice. A wedge of tissue is removed, and an effort is made to include the majority of the cross-sectional diameter of the tumor in the biopsy to minimize sampling error. The biopsy techniques that involve cutting into tumor carry with them a risk of facilitating the spread of the tumor. Core-needle biopsy usually obtains considerably less tissue, but this procedure often provides enough information to plan a definitive surgical procedure. Fine-needle aspiration generally obtains only a suspension of cells from within a mass. This procedure is minimally invasive, and if positive for cancer it may allow inception of systemic treatment when metastatic disease is evident, or it can provide a basis for planning a more meticulous and extensive surgical procedure.

Staging

As noted in Chap. 81, an important component of patient management is defining the extent of disease. Radiographic and other imaging tests can be helpful in defining the clinical stage; however, pathologic staging requires defining the extent of involvement by documenting the histologic presence of tumor in tissue biopsies obtained through a surgical procedure. Axillary lymph node sampling in breast cancer and lymph node sampling at laparotomy for testicular, colon, and other intraabdominal cancers may provide crucial information for treatment planning and may determine the extent and nature of primary cancer treatment.

Treatment

Surgery is the most effective means of treating cancer. Today about 40% of cancer patients are cured by surgery. Unfortunately, a large fraction of patients with solid tumors (perhaps 60%) have metastatic disease that is not accessible for removal. However, even when the disease is not curable by surgery alone, the removal of tumor can obtain important benefits, including local control of tumor, preservation of organ function, debulking that permits subsequent therapy to work better, and staging information on extent of involvement. Cancer surgery aiming for cure is usually planned to excise the tumor completely with an adequate margin of normal tissue (the margin varies with the tumor and the anatomy), touching the tumor as little as possible to prevent vascular and lymphatic spread, and minimizing operative risk. Extending the procedure to resect draining lymph nodes obtains prognostic information, but such resections alone generally do not improve survival.

Increasingly, laparoscopic approaches are being used to address primary abdominal and pelvic tumors. Lymph node spread may be assessed using the sentinel node approach, in which the first draining lymph node a spreading tumor would encounter is defined by injecting a dye into the tumor site at operation and then resecting the first node to turn blue. The sentinel node assessment is continuing to undergo clinical evaluation but appears to provide reliable information without the risks (lymphedema, lymphangiosarcoma) associated with resection of all the regional nodes. Advances in adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy following surgery have permitted a substantial decrease in the extent of primary surgery necessary to obtain the best outcomes. Thus, lumpectomy with radiation therapy is as effective as modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer, and limb-sparing surgery followed by adjuvant radiation therapy and chemotherapy has replaced radical primary surgical procedures involving amputation and disarticulation for childhood rhabdomyosarcomas. More limited surgery is also being employed to spare organ function, as in larynx and bladder cancer. The magnitude of operations necessary to optimally control and cure cancer has also been diminished by technical advances; for example, the circular anastomotic stapler has allowed narrower (<2-cm) margins in colon cancer without compromise of local control rates, and many patients who would have had colostomies are able to maintain normal anatomy.

In some settings〞e.g., bulky testicular cancer or stage III breast cancer〞surgery is not the first treatment modality employed. After an initial diagnostic biopsy, chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy is delivered to reduce the size of the tumor and clinically control undetected metastatic disease. Such therapy is followed by a surgical procedure to remove residual masses; this is called neoadjuvant therapy. Because the sequence of treatment is critical to success and is different from the standard surgery-first approach, coordination among the surgical oncologist, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist is crucial.

Surgery may be curative in a subset of patients with metastatic disease. Patients with lung metastases from osteosarcoma may be cured by resection of the lung lesions. In patients with colon cancer who have fewer than five liver metastases restricted to one lobe and no extrahepatic metastases, hepatic lobectomy may produce long-term disease-free survival in 25% of selected patients. Surgery can also be associated with systemic antitumor effects. In the setting of hormonally responsive tumors, oophorectomy and/or adrenalectomy may control estrogen production, and orchiectomy may reduce androgen production; both have effects on metastatic tumor growth. If resection of the primary lesion takes place in the presence of metastases, acceleration of metastatic growth may occur, perhaps based on the removal of a source of angiogenesis inhibitors and mass-related growth regulators in the tumor.

In selecting a surgeon or center for primary cancer treatment, consideration must be given to the volume of cancer surgeries undertaken by the site. Studies in a variety of cancers have shown that increased annual procedure volume appears to correlate with outcome. In addition, facilities with extensive support systems〞e.g., for joint thoracic and abdominal surgical teams with cardiopulmonary bypass, if needed〞may allow resection of certain tumors that would otherwise not be possible.

Palliation

Surgery is employed in a number of ways for supportive care: insertion of central venous catheters, control of pleural and pericardial effusions and ascites, caval interruption for recurrent pulmonary emboli, stabilization of cancer-weakened weight-bearing bones, and control of hemorrhage, among others. Surgical bypass of gastrointestinal, urinary tract, or biliary tree obstruction can alleviate symptoms and prolong survival. Surgical procedures may provide relief of otherwise intractable pain or reverse neurologic dysfunction (cord decompression). Splenectomy may relieve symptoms and reverse hypersplenism. Intrathecal or intrahepatic therapy relies on surgical placement of appropriate infusion portals. Surgery may correct other treatment-related toxicities such as adhesions or strictures.

Rehabilitation

Surgical procedures are also valuable in restoring a cancer patient to full health. Orthopedic procedures may be necessary to ensure proper ambulation. Breast reconstruction can make an enormous impact on the patient's perception of successful therapy. Plastic and reconstructive surgery can correct the effects of disfiguring primary treatment.
 
Principles of Radiation Therapy

Physical Properties and Biologic Effects

Radiation is a physical form of treatment that damages any tissue in its path; its selectivity for cancer cells may be due to defects in a cancer cell's ability to repair sublethal DNA and other damage. Radiation causes breaks in DNA and generates free radicals from cell water that may damage cell membranes, proteins, and organelles. Radiation damage is augmented dependent on only oxygen; hypoxemic cells are more resistant. Augmentation of oxygen is the basis for radiation sensitization. Sulfhydryl compounds interfere with free radical generation and may act as radiation protectors.

Most radiation-induced cell damage is due to the formation of hydroxyl radicals:

The dose-response curve for cells has both linear and exponential components. The linear component is from double-strand DNA breaks produced by single hits. The exponential component represents breaks produced by multiple hits. Plotting the fraction of surviving cells against doses of x-rays or gamma radiation, the curve has a shoulder that reflects the cell's repair of sublethal damage, followed by a linear portion reflecting greater cell kill with larger doses. The features that make a particular cell more sensitive or more resistant to the biologic effects of radiation are not completely defined.

Therapeutic radiation is delivered in three ways: (1) teletherapy, with beams of radiation generated at a distance and aimed at the tumor within the patient; (2) brachytherapy, with encapsulated sources of radiation implanted directly into or adjacent to tumor tissues; and (3) systemic therapy, with radionuclides targeted in some fashion to a site of tumor. Teletherapy is the most commonly used form of radiation therapy.

X-rays and gamma rays are the forms of radiation most commonly used to treat cancer. They are both electromagnetic, nonparticulate waves that cause the ejection of an orbital electron when absorbed. This orbital electron ejection is called ionization. X-rays are generated by linear accelerators; gamma rays are generated from decay of atomic nuclei in radioisotopes such as cobalt and radium. These waves behave biologically as packets of energy, called photons. Particulate forms of radiation are also used in certain circumstances. Electron beams have a very low tissue penetrance and are used to treat skin conditions such as mycosis fungoides. Proton beams are becoming more widely available, and may be more able to delimit dose to tumor in certain anatomic locations. However, aside from these specialized uses, particulate forms of radiation such as neutrons, protons, and negative mesons, which should do more tissue damage because of their higher linear energy transfer and lesser dependence on oxygen, are in most applications not superior to X- or gamma rays in clinical studies reported thus far.

A number of parameters influence the damage done to tissue by radiation. Hypoxemic cells are relatively resistant. Nondividing cells are more resistant than dividing cells. In addition to these biologic parameters, physical parameters of the radiation are also crucial. The energy of the radiation determines its ability to penetrate tissue. Low-energy orthovoltage beams (150每400 kV) scatter when they strike the body, much like light diffuses when it strikes particles in the air. Such beams result in more damage to adjacent normal tissues and less radiation delivered to the tumor. Megavoltage radiation (>1 MeV) has very low lateral scatter; this produces a skin-sparing effect, more homogeneous distribution of the radiation energy, and greater deposit of the energy in the tumor, or target volume. The tissues that the beam passes through to get to the tumor are called the transit volume. The maximum dose in the target volume is often the cause of complications to tissues in the transit volume, and the minimum dose in the target volume influences the likelihood of tumor recurrence. Dose homogeneity in the target volume is the goal. Computational approaches and delivery of many beams to converge on a target lesion are the basis for "gamma knife" and related approaches to deliver high dose to small volumes of tumor, sparing normal tissue.

Radiation is quantitated on the basis of the amount of radiation absorbed in the patient; it is not based on the amount of radiation generated by the machine. The rad (radiation absorbed dose) is defined as 100 ergs of energy per gram of tissue. The International System (SI) unit for rad is the Gray (Gy); 1 Gy = 100 rad. Radiation dose is measured by placing detectors at the body surface or calculating the dose based on radiating phantoms that resemble human form and substance. Radiation dose has three determinants: total absorbed dose, number of fractions, and time. A frequent error is to omit the number of fractions and the duration of treatment. This is analogous to saying that a runner completed a race in 20 s; without knowing how far he or she ran, the result is difficult to interpret. The time could be very good for a 200-m race or very poor for a 100-m race. Thus, a typical course of radiation therapy should be described as 4500 cGy delivered to a particular target (e.g., mediastinum) over 5 weeks in 180-cGy fractions. Most curative radiation treatment programs are delivered once a day, 5 days a week in 150- to 200-cGy fractions.

Certain drugs used in cancer treatment may also act as radiation sensitizers. For example, compounds that incorporate into DNA and alter its stereochemistry (e.g., halogenated pyrimidines, cisplatin) augment radiation effects, as does hydroxyurea, another DNA synthesis inhibitor.

Application to Patients Teletherapy

Radiation therapy can be used alone or together with chemotherapy to produce cure of localized tumors and control of the primary site of disease in tumors that have disseminated. Therapy is planned based on the use of a simulator with the treatment field or fields designed to accommodate an individual patient's anatomic features. Individualized treatment planning employs lead shielding tailored to shape the field and limit the radiation exposure of normal tissue. Often the radiation is delivered from two or three different positions. Conformal three-dimensional treatment planning permits the delivery of higher doses of radiation to the target volume without increasing complications in the transit volume.

Radiation therapy is a component of curative therapy for a number of diseases, including breast cancer, Hodgkin's disease, head and neck cancer, prostate cancer, and gynecologic cancers. Radiation therapy can also palliate disease symptoms in a variety of settings: relief of bone pain from metastatic disease, control of brain metastases, reversal of spinal cord compression and superior vena caval obstruction, shrinkage of painful masses, and opening of threatened airways. In high-risk settings, radiation therapy can prevent the development of leptomeningeal disease and brain metastases in acute leukemia and lung cancer.

Brachytherapy

Brachytherapy involves placing a sealed source of radiation into or adjacent to the tumor and withdrawing the radiation source after a period of time precisely calculated to deliver a chosen dose of radiation to the tumor. This approach is often used to treat prostate tumors and cervical cancer. The difficulty with brachytherapy is the short range of radiation effects (the inverse square law) and the inability to shape the radiation to fit the target volume. Normal tissue may receive toxic exposure to the radiation, with attendant radiation enteritis or cystitis in cervix cancer or brain injury in brain tumors.

Radionuclides and Radioimmunotherapy

Nuclear medicine physicians or radiation oncologists may administer radionuclides with therapeutic effects. Iodine 131 is used to treat thyroid cancer since iodine is naturally taken up preferentially by the thyroid; it emits gamma rays that destroy the normal thyroid as well as the tumor. Strontium 89 and samarium 153 are two radionuclides that are preferentially taken up in bone, particularly sites of new bone formation. Both are capable of controlling bone metastases and the pain associated with them, but the dose-limiting toxicity is myelosuppression.

Monoclonal antibodies and other ligands can be attached to radioisotopes by conjugation (for nonmetal isotopes) or by chelation (for metal isotopes), and the targeting moiety can result in the accumulation of the radionuclide preferentially in tumor. Iodine 131每labeled anti-CD20 and yttrium 90每labeled anti-CD20 are active in B cell lymphoma, and other labeled antibodies are being evaluated. Thyroid uptake of labeled iodine is blocked by cold iodine. Dose-limiting toxicity is myelosuppression.

Photodynamic Therapy

Some chemical structures (porphyrins, phthalocyanines) are selectively taken up by cancer cells by mechanisms not fully defined. When light, usually delivered by a laser, is shone on cells containing these compounds, free radicals are generated and the cells die. Hematoporphyrins and light are being used with increasing frequency to treat skin cancer; ovarian cancer; and cancers of the lung, colon, rectum, and esophagus. Palliation of recurrent locally advanced disease can sometimes be dramatic and last many months.

Toxicity

Though radiation therapy is most often administered to a local region, systemic effects, including fatigue, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, may develop that are related in part to the volume of tissue irradiated, dose fractionation, radiation fields, and individual susceptibility. Bone is among the most radioresistant organs, radiation effects being manifested mainly in children through premature fusion of the epiphyseal growth plate. By contrast, the male testis, female ovary, and bone marrow are the most sensitive organs. Any bone marrow in a radiation field will be eradicated by therapeutic irradiation. Organs with less need for cell renewal, such as heart, skeletal muscle, and nerves, are more resistant to radiation effects. In radiation-resistant organs, the vascular endothelium is the most sensitive component. Organs with more self-renewal as a part of normal homeostasis, such as the hematopoietic system and mucosal lining of the intestinal tract, are more sensitive. Acute toxicities include mucositis, skin erythema (ulceration in severe cases), and bone marrow toxicity. Often these can be alleviated by interruption of treatment.

Chronic toxicities are more serious. Radiation of the head and neck region often produces thyroid failure. Cataracts and retinal damage can lead to blindness. Salivary glands stop making saliva, which leads to dental caries and poor dentition. Taste and smell can be affected. Mediastinal irradiation leads to a threefold increased risk of fatal myocardial infarction. Other late vascular effects include chronic constrictive pericarditis, lung fibrosis, viscus stricture, spinal cord transection, and radiation enteritis. A serious late toxicity is the development of second solid tumors in or adjacent to the radiation fields. Such tumors can develop in any organ or tissue and occur at a rate of about 1% per year beginning in the second decade after treatment. Some organs vary in susceptibility to radiation carcinogenesis. A woman who receives mantle field radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease at age 25 years has a 30% risk of developing breast cancer by age 55 years. This is comparable in magnitude to genetic breast cancer syndromes. Women treated after age 30 years have little or no increased risk of breast cancer. No data suggest that a threshold dose of therapeutic radiation exists below which the incidence of second cancers is decreased. High rates of second tumors occur in people who receive as little as 1000 cGy.
 
Principles of Chemotherapy

Medical oncology is the subspecialty of internal medicine that cares for and designs treatment approaches to patients with cancer, in conjunction with surgical and radiation oncologists. The core skills of the medical oncologist include the use of drugs that may have a beneficial effect on the natural history of the patient's illness or favorably influence the patient's quality of life.

Endpoints of Drug Action

The concept that systemically administered drugs may have a useful effect on cancers was historically derived from three sets of observations. Paul Ehrlich in the nineteenth century observed that different dyes reacted with different cell and tissue components. He hypothesized the existence of compounds that would be "magic bullets" that might bind to tumors, owing to the affinity of the agent for the tumor. A second observation was the toxic effects of certain mustard gas derivatives on the bone marrow during World War I, leading to the idea that smaller doses of these agents might be used to treat tumors of marrow-derived cells. Finally, the observation that certain tumors from hormone-responsive tissues, e.g. breast tumors, could shrink after oophorectomy led to the idea that endogenous substances promoting the growth of a tumor might be antagonized. Chemicals achieving each of the goals are actually or intellectually the forbearers of the currently used cancer chemotherapy agents.

Chemotherapy agents may be used for the treatment of active, clinically apparent cancer. Table 85每1, A lists those tumors considered curable by conventionally available chemotherapeutic agents when used to address disseminated or metastatic cancers. If a tumor is localized to a single site, serious consideration of surgery or primary radiation therapy should be given, as these treatment modalities may be curative as local treatments. Chemotherapy may be employed after the failure of these modalities to eradicate a local tumor or as part of multimodality approaches to offer primary treatment to a clinically localized tumor. In this event, it can allow organ preservation when given with radiation, as in the larynx or other upper airway sites; or sensitize tumors to radiation when given, e.g., to patients concurrently receiving radiation for lung or cervix cancer (Table 85每1, B). Chemotherapy can be administered as an adjuvant, i.e., in addition to surgery (Table 85每1, C) or radiation, after all clinically apparent disease has been removed. This use of chemotherapy may have curative potential in breast and colorectal neoplasms, as it attempts to eliminate clinically unapparent tumor that may have already disseminated. As noted above, small tumors frequently have high growth fractions and therefore may be intrinsically more susceptible to the action of antiproliferative agents. Chemotherapy is routinely used in "conventional" dose regimens. In general, these doses produce reversible acute side effects, primarily consisting of transient myelosuppression with or without gastrointestinal toxicity (usually nausea), which are readily managed. High-dose chemotherapy regimens are predicated on the observation that the dose-response curve for many anticancer agents is rather steep, and increased dose can produce markedly increased therapeutic effect, although at the cost of potentially life-threatening complications that require intensive support, usually in the form of hematopoietic stem cell support from the patient (autologous) or from donors matched for histocompatibility loci (allogeneic). High-dose regimens have definite curative potential in defined clinical settings (Table 85每1, D).

Table 85每1 Curability of Cancers with Chemotherapy

 
 
A. Advanced Cancers With Possible Cure

Acute lymphoid and acute myeloid leukemia (pediatric/adult)

Hodgkin's disease (pediatric/adult)

Lymphomas〞certain types (pediatric/adult)

Germ cell neoplasms

Embryonal carcinoma

Teratocarcinoma

Seminoma or dysgerminoma

Choriocarcinoma

Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia

Pediatric neoplasms

Wilms' tumor

Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma

Ewing's sarcoma

Peripheral neuroepithelioma

Neuroblastoma

Small cell lung carcinoma

Ovarian carcinoma

B. Advanced Cancers Possibly Cured by Chemotherapy and Radiation

Squamous carcinoma (head and neck)

Squamous carcinoma (anus)

Breast carcinoma

Carcinoma of the uterine cervix

Non-small cell lung carcinoma (stage III)

Small cell lung carcinoma

C. Cancers Possibly Cured With Chemotherapy as Adjuvant to Surgery

Breast carcinoma

Colorectal carcinomaa

Osteogenic sarcoma

Soft tissue sarcoma

D. Cancers Possibly Cured with "High-Dose" Chemotherapy With Stem Cell Support

Relapsed leukemias, lymphoid and myeloid

Relapsed lymphomas, Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's

Chronic myeloid leukemia

Multiple myeloma

E. Cancers Responsive With Useful Palliation, But Not Cure, by Chemotherapy

Bladder carcinoma

Chronic myeloid leukemia

Hairy cell leukemia

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

Lymphoma〞certain types

Multiple myeloma

Gastric carcinoma

Cervix carcinoma

Endometrial carcinoma

Soft tissue sarcoma

Head and neck cancer

Adrenocortical carcinoma

Islet-cell neoplasms

Breast carcinoma

Colorectal carcinoma

Renal carcinoma

F. Tumor Poorly Responsive in Advanced Stages to Chemotherapy

Pancreatic carcinoma

Biliary-tract neoplasms

Thyroid carcinoma

Carcinoma of the vulva

Non-small cell lung carcinoma

Prostate carcinoma

Melanoma

Hepatocellular carcinoma

Salivary gland cancer
 
 

 

Karnofsky was among the first to champion the evaluation of a chemotherapeutic agent's benefit by carefully quantitating its effect on tumor size and using these measurements to objectively decide the basis for further treatment of a particular patient or further clinical evaluation of a drug's potential. A partial response (PR) is defined conventionally as a decrease by at least 50% in a tumor's bidimensional area; a complete response (CR) connotes disappearance of all tumor; progression of disease signifies an increase in size of existing lesions by >25% from baseline or best response or development of new lesions; and "stable" disease fits into none of the above categories. Newer evaluation systems such as RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors) utilize unidimensional measurement, but the intent is similar in rigorously defining evidence for the activity of the agent in assessing its value to the patient.

If cure is not possible, chemotherapy may be undertaken with the goal of palliating some aspect of the tumor's effect on the host. Common tumors that may be meaningfully addressed with palliative intent are listed in Table 85每1, E. Usually, tumor-related symptoms may manifest as pain, weight loss, or some local symptom related to the tumor's effect on normal structures. Patients treated with palliative intent should be aware of their diagnosis and the limitations of the proposed treatments, have access to supportive care, and have suitable "performance status," according to assessment algorithms such as the one developed by Karnofsky or by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). ECOG performance status 0 (PS0) patients are without symptoms; PS1 patients are ambulatory but restricted in strenuous physical activity; PS2 patients are ambulatory but unable to work and are up and about 50% or more of the time; PS3 patients are capable of limited self-care and are up <50% of the time; PS4 patients are totally confined to bed or chair and incapable of self-care. Only PS0, PS1, and PS2 patients are generally considered suitable for palliative (noncurative) treatment. If there is curative potential, even poor每performance status patients may be treated, but their prognosis is usually inferior to that of good每performance status patients treated with similar regimens.

An important perspective the primary care provider may bring to patients and their families facing incurable cancer is that, given the limited value of chemotherapeutic approaches at some point in the natural history, palliative care or hospice-based approaches, with meticulous and ongoing attention to symptom relief and with family, psychological, and spiritual support, should receive prominent attention as a valuable therapeutic plan (Chap. 9). Optimizing the quality of life rather than attempting to extend it becomes a valued intervention. Patients facing the impending progression of disease in a life-threatening way frequently choose to undertake toxic treatments of little to no potential value, and support provided by the primary caregiver in accessing palliative and hospice-based options in contrast to receiving toxic and ineffective regimen can be critical in providing a basis for patients to make sensible choices.

Cancer Drugs: Overview and Principles for Use

Cancer drug treatments are of four broad types. Conventional chemotherapy agents were historically derived by the empirical observation that these "small molecules" (generally with molecular mass <1500 Da) could cause major regression of experimental tumors growing in animals. These agents mainly target DNA structure or segregation of DNA as chromosomes in mitosis. Targeted agents refer to small molecules or "biologicals" (generally macromolecules such as antibodies or cytokines) designed and developed to interact with a defined molecular target important in either maintaining the malignant state or selectively expressed by the tumor cells. As described in Chap. 84, successful tumors have activated biochemical pathways that lead to uncontrolled proliferation through the action of, e.g., oncogene products, loss of cell cycle inhibitors, or loss of cell death regulation, and have acquired the capacity to replicate chromosomes indefinitely, invade, metastasize, and evade the immune system. Targeted therapies seek to capitalize on the biology behind the aberrant cellular behavior as a basis for therapeutic effects. Hormonal therapies (the first form of targeted therapy) capitalize on the biochemical pathways underlying estrogen and androgen function and action as a therapeutic basis for approaching patients with tumors of breast, prostate, uterus, and ovarian origin. Biologic therapies are often macromolecules that have a particular target (e.g., antigrowth factor or cytokine antibodies) or may have the capacity to regulate growth of tumor cells or induce a host immune response to kill tumor cells. Thus, biologic therapies include not only antibodies but cytokines and gene therapies.

The usefulness of any drug is governed by the extent to which a given dose causes a useful result (therapeutic effect; in the case of anticancer agents, toxicity to tumor cells) as opposed to a toxic effect to the host. The therapeutic index is the degree of separation between toxic and therapeutic doses. Really useful drugs have large therapeutic indices, and this usually occurs when the drug target is expressed in the disease-causing compartment as opposed to the normal compartment. Classically, selective toxicity of an agent for an organ is governed by the expression of an agent's target or by differential accumulation into or elimination from compartments where toxicity is experienced or ameliorated, respectively. Currently used chemotherapeutic agents have the unfortunate property that their targets are present in both normal and tumor tissues. Therefore, they have relatively narrow therapeutic indices.

Figure 85-2 illustrates steps in cancer drug discovery and development. Following demonstration of antitumor activity in animal models, potentially useful anticancer agents are further evaluated to define an optimal schedule of administration and arrive at a drug formulation designed for a given route and schedule. Safety testing in two species on an analogous schedule of administration defines the starting dose for a phase I trial in humans. This is established as a fraction, usually one-sixth to one-tenth, of the dose just causing easily reversible toxicity in the more sensitive animal species. Escalating doses of the drug are then given during the human phase I trial until reversible toxicity is observed. Dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) defines a dose that conveys greater toxicity than would be acceptable in routine practice, allowing definition of a lower maximal tolerated dose (MTD). The occurrence of toxicity is, if possible, correlated with plasma drug concentrations. The MTD or a dose just lower than the MTD is usually the dose suitable for phase II trials, where a fixed dose is administered to a relatively homogeneous set of patients with a particular tumor type in an effort to define whether the drug causes regression of tumors. An "active" agent conventionally has PR rates of at least 20每25% with reversible non-life-threatening side effects, and it may then be suitable for study in phase III trials to assess efficacy in comparison to standard or no therapy.

Response, defined as tumor shrinkage, is but the most immediate indicator of drug effect. To be clinically valuable, responses must translate into clinical benefit. This is conventionally established by a beneficial effect on overall survival, or at least an increased time to further progression of disease. Active efforts are being made to quantitate effects of anticancer agents on quality of life. Cancer drug clinical trials conventionally use a toxicity grading scale where grade I toxicities do not require treatment, grade II often require symptomatic treatment but are not life-threatening, grade III toxicities are potentially life-threatening if untreated, grade IV toxicities are actually life-threatening, and grade V toxicities are those that result in the patient's death.

Development of "targeted agents" may proceed quite differently. While phase I每III trials are still conducted, molecular analysis of human tumors may allow the precise definition of target expression in a patient's tumor that is necessary for or relevant to the drug's action. This information might then allow selection of patients expressing the drug target for participation in all trial phases. These patients may then have a greater chance of developing a useful response to the drug by virtue of expressing the target in the tumor. Clinical trials may be designed to incorporate an assessment of the behavior of the target in relation to the drug (pharmacodynamic studies). Ideally, the plasma concentration that affects the drug target is known, so escalation to MTD may not be necessary. Rather, the correlation of host toxicity while achieving an "optimal biologic dose" becomes a more relevant endpoint for phase I and early phase II trials with targeted agents.

Useful cancer drug treatment strategies using conventional chemotherapy agents, targeted agents, hormonal treatments, or biologicals have one of two valuable outcomes. They can induce cancer cell death, resulting in tumor shrinkage with corresponding improvement in patient survival, or increase the time until the disease progresses. Another potential outcome is to induce cancer cell differentiation or dormancy with loss of tumor cell replicative potential and reacquisition of phenotypic properties resembling normal cells. Blocking tumor cell differentiation may be a key feature in the pathogenesis of certain leukemias.

Cell death is a closely regulated process. Necrosis refers to cell death induced, for example, by physical damage with the hallmarks of cell swelling and membrane disruption. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, refers to a highly ordered process whereby cells respond to defined stimuli by dying, and it recapitulates the necessary cell death observed during the ontogeny of the organism. Anoikis refers to the death of epithelial cells after removal from the normal milieu of substrate, particularly from cell-to-cell contact. Cancer chemotherapeutic agents can cause both necrosis and apoptosis. Apoptosis is characterized by chromatin condensation (giving rise to "apoptotic bodies"); cell shrinkage; and, in living animals, phagocytosis by surrounding stromal cells without evidence of inflammation. This process is regulated either by signal transduction systems that promote a cell's demise after a certain level of insult is achieved, or in response to specific cell-surface receptors that mediate cell death signals. Modulation of apoptosis by manipulation of signal transduction pathways has emerged as a basis for understanding the actions of drugs and designing new strategies to improve their use. Autophagy is a cellular response to injury where the cell does not initially die but catabolizes itself in a way that can lead to loss of replicative potential.

A general view of how cancer treatments work is that the interaction of a chemotherapeutic drug with its target induces a "cascade" of further signaling steps. These signals ultimately lead to cell death by triggering an "execution phase" where proteases, nucleases, and endogenous regulators of the cell death pathway are activated (Fig. 85-3).

Figure 85-3

 
 
 
Integration of cell death responses. Cell death through an apoptotic mechanism requires active participation of the cell. In response to interruption of growth factor (GF) or propagation of certain cytokine death signals (e.g., tumor necrosis factor receptor, TNF-R), there is activation of "upstream" cysteine aspartyl proteases (caspases), which then directly digest cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, resulting in activation of "downstream" caspases; these cause activation of nucleases, resulting in the characteristic DNA fragmentation that is a hallmark of apoptosis. Chemotherapy agents that create lesions in DNA or alter mitotic spindle function seem to activate aspects of this process by damage ultimately conveyed to the mitochondria, perhaps by activating the transcription of genes whose products can produce or modulate the toxicity of free radicals. In addition, membrane damage with activation of sphingomyelinases results in the production of ceramides that can have a direct action at mitochondria. The antiapoptotic protein bcl2 attenuates mitochondrial toxicity, while proapoptotic gene products such as bax antagonize the action of bcl2. Damaged mitochondria release cytochrome C and apoptosis-activating factor (APAF), which can directly activate caspase 9, resulting in propagation of a direct signal to other downstream caspases through protease activation. Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) is also released from the mitochondrion and then can translocate to the nucleus, bind to DNA, and generate free radicals to further damage DNA. An additional proapoptotic stimulus is the bad protein, which can heterodimerize with bcl2 gene family members to antagonize apoptosis. Importantly, though, bad protein function can be retarded by its sequestration as phospho-bad through the 14-3-3 adapter proteins. The phosphorylation of bad is mediated by the action of the AKT kinase in a way that defines how growth factors that activate this kinase can retard apoptosis and promote cell survival.
 
 

Figure 85-4

 
 
 
Site of action of targeted agents. Signals proceeding from growth factor每related receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) such as EGF-R, erbB2, or c-kit can be interrupted by lapatinib, erlotinib, gefitinib, and imatinib, acting at the ATP binding site; or by cetuximab, trastuzumab, or panitumumab acting at the receptor. Tyrosine kinases (TKs) that are not directly stimulated by growth factors such as p210 bcr-abl or src can be inhibited by imatinib, dasatinib, or nilotinib. Signals projected downstream from growth factor receptors can be affected by the multitargeted kinase inhibitor sorafenib, acting on c-raf, and, upon arrival at the nucleus, affect gene expression, which can be affected by the targeted transcriptional modulators vorinostat (targeting histone deacetylase), azacytidine derivatives (targeting DNA methyltransferase), or retinoid receptor modulators all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) or bexarotene. Cytokine receptors (CkRs) are one stimulus for degradation of the inhibitory subunit of the NFB transcription factor by the proteosome. Bortezomib inhibits this process and can prevent activation of NFB-dependent genes, among other growth-related effects. Sorafenib and sunitinib, acting as inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptors, can modulate tumor blood vessel function through their action on endothelial cells, while bevacizumab targets the same process by combining with VEGF itself.
 
 

Targeted agents differ from chemotherapy agents in that they do not indiscriminately cause macromolecular lesions but regulate the action of particular pathways. For example, the p210bcr-abl fusion protein tyrosine kinase drives chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), and HER-2/neu stimulates the proliferation of certain breast cancers. The tumor has been described as "addicted" to the function of these molecules in the sense that without the pathway's continued action, the tumor cell cannot survive. In this way, targeted agents may alter the "threshold" tumors have for undergoing apoptosis without actually creating any molecular lesions such as direct DNA strand breakage or altered membrane function.

While apoptotic mechanisms are important in regulating cellular proliferation and the behavior of tumor cells in vitro, in vivo it is unclear whether all of the actions of chemotherapeutic agents to cause cell death can be attributed to apoptotic mechanisms. However, changes in molecules that regulate apoptosis are correlated with clinical outcomes (e.g., bcl2 overexpression in certain lymphomas conveys poor prognosis; proapoptotic bax expression is associated with a better outcome after chemotherapy for ovarian carcinoma). A better understanding of the relationship of cell death and cell survival mechanisms is needed.

Resistance to chemotherapy drugs has been postulated to arise either from cells not being in the appropriate phase of the cell cycle to allow drug lethality, or from decreased uptake, increased efflux, metabolism of the drug, or alteration of the target, e.g., by mutation or overexpression. Indeed, p170PGP (p170 P-glycoprotein; mdr gene product) was recognized from experiments with cells growing in tissue culture as mediating the efflux of chemotherapeutic agents in resistant cells. Certain neoplasms, particularly hematopoietic tumors, have an adverse prognosis if they express high levels of p170PGP, and modulation of this protein's function has been attempted by a variety of strategies.

"Combination chemotherapy" refers to the use of regimens where different drugs are combined with the goal of achieving at least an additive and hopefully supra-additive effect. The component drugs in such regimens ideally have distinct, nonoverlapping toxicities to the host, are each individually active to some degree, and have been shown in a clinical trial to be tolerable and convey clinical value in contrast to the use of single agents.

Chemotherapeutic Agents Used for Cancer Treatment

Table 85每2 lists commonly used cancer chemotherapy agents and pertinent clinical aspects of their use. The drugs and schedules listed are examples that have proved tolerable and useful; the specific doses that may be used in a particular patient may vary somewhat with the particular protocol, or plan, of treatment. Significant variation from these dose ranges should be carefully verified to avoid or anticipate toxicity. Not included in Table 85每2 are hormone receptor每directed agents, as the side effects are generally those expected from the interruption or augmentation of hormonal effect, and doses used in most cases are those that adequately saturate the intended hormone receptor. The drugs listed may be usefully grouped into three general categories: those affecting DNA, those affecting microtubules, and molecularly targeted agents.

Table 85每2 Commonly Used Cancer Chemotherapy Agents

 
 
Drug Examples of Usual Doses Toxicity Interactions, Issues 
Direct DNA-Interacting Agents  
Alkylators        
Cyclophosphamide 400每2000 mg/m2 IV

100 mg/m2 PO qd
 Marrow (relative platelet sparing) Cystitis

Common alkylatora

Cardiac (high dose)
 Liver metabolism required to activate to phosphoramide mustard + acrolein

Mesna protects against "high-dose" bladder damage
 
Mechlorethamine 6 mg/m2 IV day 1 and day 8
  Marrow

Vesicant

Nausea
 Topical use in cutaneous lymphoma 
Chlorambucil 1每3 mg/m2 qd PO
  Marrow

Common alkylatora
   
Melphalan 8 mg/m2 qd x 5, PO
  Marrow (delayed nadir)

GI (high dose)
 Decreased renal function delays clearance 
Carmustine (BCNU) 200 mg/m2 IV

150 mg/m2 PO
 Marrow (delayed nadir)

GI, liver (high dose)

Renal
   
Lomustine (CCNU) 100每300 mg/m2 PO
  Marrow (delayed nadir)   
Ifosfamide 1.2 g/m2 per day qd x 5 + mesna
  Myelosuppressive

Bladder

Neurologic

Metabolic acidosis

Neuropathy
 Isomeric analogue of cyclophosphamide

More lipid soluble

Greater activity vs testicular neoplasms and sarcomas

Must use mesna
 
Procarbazine 100 mg/m2 per day qd x 14
  Marrow

Nausea

Neurologic

Common alkylatora
 Liver and tissue metabolism required Disulfiram-like effect with ethanol

Acts as MAOI

HBP after tyrosinase-rich foods
 
Dacarbazine (DTIC) 375 mg/m2 IV day 1 and day 15
  Marrow

Nausea

Flulike
 Metabolic activation 
Temozolomide 150每200 mg/m2 qd x 5 q28d or

75 mg/m2 qd x 6每7 weeks
 Nausea/vomiting

Headache/fatigue

Constipation
 Infrequent myelosuppression 
Altretamine (formerly hexamethylmelamine) 260 mg/m2 per day qd x 14每21 as 4 divided oral doses
  Nausea

Neurologic (mood swing)

Neuropathy

Marrow (less)
 Liver activation

Barbiturates enhance/cimetidine diminishes
 
Cisplatin 20 mg/m2 qd x 5 IV 1 q3每4 weeks or 100每200 mg/m2 per dose IV q3每4 weeks
  Nausea

Neuropathy

Auditory

Marrow platelets > WBCs

Renal Mg2+, Ca2+
 Maintain high urine flow; osmotic diuresis, monitor intake/output K+, Mg2+ Emetogenic〞prophylaxis needed

Full dose if CrCl > 60 mL/min and tolerate fluid push
 
Carboplatin 365 mg/m2 IV q3每4 weeks as adjusted for CrCl
  Marrow platelets > WBCs

Nausea

Renal (high dose)
 Reduce dose according to CrCl: to AUC of 5每7 mg/mL per min [AUC = dose/(CrCl + 25)] 
Oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 q3 weeks over 2 h or 85 mg/m2 q2 weeks
  Nausea

Anemia
 Acute reversible neurotoxicity; chronic sensory neurotoxicity cumulative with dose; reversible laryngopharyngeal spasm 
Antitumor Antibiotics and Topoisomerase Poisons  
Bleomycin 15每25 mg/d qd x 5 IV bolus or continuous IV  Pulmonary

Skin effects

Raynaud's

Hypersensitivity
 Inactivate by bleomycin hydrolase (decreased in lung/skin)

O2 enhances pulmonary toxicity

Cisplatin-induced decrease in CrCl may increase skin/lung toxicity

Reduce dose if CrCl < 60 mL/min
 
Actinomycin D 10每15 g/kg per day qd x 5 IV bolus Marrow

Nausea

Mucositis

Vesicant

Alopecia
 Radiation recall 
Etoposide (VP16-213) 100每150 mg/m2 IV qd x 3每5d

or 50 mg/m2 PO qd x 21d

or up to 1500 mg/m2 per dose (high dose with stem cell support)
 Marrow (WBCs > platelet)

Alopecia

Hypotension

Hypersensitivity (rapid IV)

Nausea

Mucositis (high dose)
 Hepatic metabolism〞renal 30%

Reduce doses with renal failure

Schedule-dependent (5 day better than 1 day)

Late leukemogenic

Accentuate antimetabolite action
 
Topotecan 20 mg/m2 IV q3每4 weeks over 30 min or 1.5每3 mg/m2 q3每4 weeks over 24 h or 0.5 mg/m2 per day over 21 days
  Marrow

Mucositis

Nausea

Mild alopecia
 Reduce dose with renal failure

No liver toxicity
 
Irinotecan (CPT II) 100每150 mg/m2 IV over 90 min q3每4 weeks

or 30 mg/m2 per day over 120 h
 Diarrhea: "early onset" with cramping, flushing, vomiting; "late onset" after several doses

Marrow

Alopecia

Nausea

Vomiting

Pulmonary
 Prodrug requires enzymatic clearance to active drug "SN 38"

Early diarrhea likely due to biliary excretion Late diarrhea, use "high-dose" loperamide (2 mg q2每4 h)
 
Doxorubicin and daunorubicin 45每60 mg/m2 dose q3每4 weeks

or 10每30 mg/m2 dose q week

or continuous-infusion regimen
 Marrow

Mucositis

Alopecia

Cardiovascular acute/chronic Vesicant
 Heparin aggregate; coadministration increases clearance

Acetaminophen, BCNU increase liver toxicity

Radiation recall
 
Idarubicin 10每15 mg/m2 IV q 3 weeks

or 10 mg/m2 IV qd x 3
 Marrow

Cardiac (less than doxorubicin)
 None established 
Epirubicin 150 mg/m2 IV q3 weeks
  Marrow

Cardiac
 None established 
Mitoxantrone 12 mg/m2 qd x 3

or 12每14 mg/m2 q3 weeks
 Marrow

Cardiac (less than doxorubicin) Vesicant (mild)

Blue urine, sclerae, nails
 Interacts with heparin

Less alopecia, nausea than doxorubicin Radiation recall
 
Indirect DNA-Interacting Agents  
Antimetabolites        
Deoxycoformycin 4 mg/m2 IV every other week
  Nausea

Immunosuppression

Neurologic

Renal
 Excretes in urine

Reduce dose for renal failure

Inhibits adenosine deaminase
 
6-Mercaptopurine 75 mg/m2 PO

or up to 500 mg/m2 PO (high dose)
 Marrow

Liver

Nausea
 Variable bioavailability

Metabolize by xanthine oxidase

Decrease dose with allopurinol

Increased toxicity with thiopurine

methyltransferase deficiency
 
6-Thioguanine 2每3 mg/kg per day for up to 3每4 weeks Marrow

Liver

Nausea
 Variable bioavailability

Increased toxicity with thiopurine

methyltransferase deficiency
 
Azathioprine 1每5 mg/kg per day Marrow

Nausea

Liver
 Metabolizes to 6MP, therefore reduce dose with allopurinol

Increased toxicity with thiopurine

methyltransferase deficiency
 
2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine 0.09 mg/kg per day qd x 7 as continuous infusion Marrow

Renal

Fever
 Notable use in hairy cell leukemia 
Hydroxyurea 20每50 mg/kg (lean body weight)

PO qd

or 1每3 g/d
 Marrow

Nausea

Mucositis

Skin changes

Rare renal, liver, lung,

CNS
 Decrease dose with renal failure

Augments antimetabolite effect
 
Methotrexate 15每30 mg PO or IM qd x 3每5

or 30 mg IV days 1 and 8

or 1.5每12g/m2 per day (with leucovorin)
 Marrow

Liver/lung

Renal tubular

Mucositis
 Rescue with leucovorin

Excreted in urine

Decrease dose in renal failure

NSAIDs increase renal toxicity
 
5-Fluorouracil (5FU) 375 mg/m2 IV qd x 5

or 600 mg/m2 IV days 1 and 8
 Marrow

Mucositis

Neurologic

Skin changes
 Toxicity enhanced by leucovorin Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency increases toxicity Metabolizes in tissues 
Capecitabine 665 mg/m2 bid continuous; 1250 mg/m2 bid 2 weeks on / 1 off; 829 mg/m2 bid 2 weeks on / 1 off + 60 mg/d leucovorin
 Diarrhea

Hand-foot syndrome
 Prodrug of 5FU due to intratumoral metabolism 
Cytosine arabinoside 100 mg/m2 per day qd x 7 by continuous infusion

or 1每3 g/m2 dose IV bolus
 Marrow

Mucositis

Neurologic (high dose)

Conjunctivitis (high dose) Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
 Enhances activity of alkylating agents Metabolizes in tissues by deamination 
Azacytidine 750 mg/m2 per week or 75每200 mg/m2 per day x 5每10 (bolus)

or (continuous IV or subcutaneous)
 Marrow

Nausea

Liver

Neurologic

Myalgia
 Use limited to leukemia

Altered methylation of DNA alters gene expression
 
Gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 IV weekly x 7
  Marrow

Nausea

Hepatic

Fever/"flu syndrome"
   
Fludarabine phosphate 25 mg/m2 IV qd x 5
  Marrow

Neurologic

Lung
 Dose reduction with renal failure

Metabolized to F-ara converted to F-ara ATP in cells by deoxycytidine kinase
 
Asparaginase 25,000 IU/m2 q3每4 weeks

or 6000 IU/m2 per day qod for 3每4 weeks

or 1000每2000 IU/m2 for 10每20 days
 Protein synthesis

Clotting factors

Glucose

Albumin

Hypersensitivity

CNS

Pancreatitis

Hepatic
 Blocks methotrexate action 
Pemetrexed 200 mg/m2 q3 weeks
  Anemia

Neutropenia

Thrombocytopenia
 Supplement folate/B12

Caution in renal failure
 
Antimitotic Agents  
Vincristine 1每1.4 mg/m2 per week (frequently cap at 2 mg total dose)
  Vesicant

Marrow

Neurologic

GI: ileus/constipation; bladder

hypotoxicity; SIADH

Cardiovascular
 Hepatic clearance

Dose reduction for bilirubin >1.5 mg/dL Prophylactic bowel regimen
 
Vinblastine 6每8 mg/m2 per week
  Vesicant

Marrow

Neurologic (less common but similar spectrum to other vincas) Hypertension

Raynaud's
 Hepatic clearance

Dose reduction as with vincristine
 
Vinorelbine 15每30 mg/m2 per week
  Vesicant

Marrow

Allergic/bronchospasm (immediate)

Dyspnea/cough (subacute) Neurologic (less prominent but similar spectrum to other vincas)
 Hepatic clearance 
Paclitaxel 135每175 mg/m2 per 24-h infusion

or 175 mg/m2 per 3-h infusion

or 140 mg/m2 per 96-h infusion

or 250 mg/m2 per 24-h infusion plus G-CSF
 Hypersensitivity

Marrow

Mucositis

Alopecia

Sensory neuropathy

CV conduction disturbance

Nausea〞infrequent
 Premedicate with steroids, H1 and H2 blockers

Hepatic clearance

Dose reduction as with vincas
 
Docetaxel 100 mg/m2 per 1-h infusion q3 weeks
  Hypersensitivity

Fluid retention syndrome

Marrow

Dermatologic

Sensory neuropathy

Nausea infrequent

Some stomatitis
 Premedicate with steroids, H1 and H2 blockers
  
Estramustine phosphate 14 mg/kg per day in 3每4 divided doses with water >2 h after meals

Avoid Ca2+-rich foods
 Nausea

Vomiting

Diarrhea

CHF

Thrombosis

Gynecomastia
   
Nab-paclitaxel (protein bound) 260 mg/m2 q3 weeks
  Neuropathy

Anemia

Neutropenia

Thrombocytopenia
 Caution in hepatic insufficiency 
Ixabepilone 40 mg/m2 q3 weeks
  Myelosuppression

Neuropathy
   
Molecularly Targeted Agents  
Retinoids        
Tretinoin 45 mg/m2 per day until complete response + anthracycline-based regimen in APL
  Teratogenic

Cutaneous
 APL differentiation syndrome: pulmonary dysfunction/infiltrate, pleural/pericardial effusion, fever 
Bexarotene 300每400 mg/m2 per day, continuous
  Hypercholesterolemia Hypertriglyceridemia

Cutaneous

Teratogenic
 Central hypothyroidism 
Targeted Toxins  
Denileukin diftitox 9每18 g/kg per day x 5 d q3 weeks Nausea/vomiting

Chills/fever

Asthenia

Hepatic
 Acute hypersensitivity: hypotension, vasodilation, rash, chest tightness

Vascular leak: hypotension, edema,

hypoalbuminemia, thrombotic events

(MI, DVT, CVA)
 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors  
Imatinib 400 mg/d, continuous Nausea

Periorbital edema
 Myelosuppression not frequent in solid tumor indications 
Gefitinib 250 mg PO per day Rash

Diarrhea
 In U.S., only with prior documented benefit 
Erlotinib 150 mg PO per day Rash

Diarrhea
 1 h before, 2 h after meals 
Dasatinib 70 mg PO bid; 100 mg PO per day Liver changes

Rash

Neutropenia

Thrombocytopenia
   
Sorafenib 400 mg PO bid Diarrhea

Hand-foot syndrome

Other rash
   
Sunitinib 50 mg PO qd for 4 of 6 weeks Fatigue

Diarrhea

Neutropenia
   
Proteosome Inhibitors  
Bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 day 1,4
  Neuropathy

Thrombocytopenia
   
Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors  
Vorinostat 400 mg/day Fatigue

Diarrhea

Thrombocytopenia

Embolism
   
Romidepsin 14 mg/m2 day 1, 8, 15
  Nausea

Vomiting

Cytopenias

Cardiac conduction
   
mTOR Inhibitors  
Temsirolimus 25 mg weekly Stomatitis

Thrombocytopenia

Nausea

Anorexia, fatigue

Metabolic (glucose, lipid)
   
Everolimus 10 mg daily Stomatitis

Fatigue
   
Miscellaneous  
Arsenic trioxide 0.16 mg/kg per day up to

50 days in APL
  QTc

Peripheral neuropathy

Musculoskeletal pain Hyperglycemia
 APL differentiation syndrome (see under tretinoin) 
 


aCommon alkylator: alopecia, pulmonary, infertility, plus teratogenesis.

Abbreviations: APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia; AUC, area under the curve; CHF, congestive heart failure; CNS, central nervous system; CrCl, creatinine clearance; CV, cardiovascular; CVA, cerebrovascular accident; DVT, deep venous thrombosis; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GI, gastrointestinal; HBP, high blood pressure; MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; MI, myocardial infarction; 6MP, 6-mercaptopurine; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone; WBCs, white blood cells.
 

Direct DNA-Interactive Agents

DNA replication occurs during the synthesis or S-phase of the cell cycle, with chromosome segregation of the replicated DNA occurring in the M, or mitosis, phase. The G1 and G2 "gap phases" precede S and M, respectively. Historically, chemotherapeutic agents have been divided into "phase-nonspecific" agents, which can act in any phase of the cell cycle, and "phase-specific" agents, which require the cell to be at a particular cell cycle phase to cause greatest effect. Once the agent has acted, cells may progress to "checkpoints" in the cell cycle where the drug-related damage may be assessed and either repaired or allowed to initiate apoptosis. An important function of certain tumor-suppressor genes such as p53 may be to modulate checkpoint function.

Formation of Covalent DNA Adducts

Alkylating agents as a class are cell cycle phase每nonspecific agents. They break down, either spontaneously or after normal organ or tumor cell metabolism, to reactive intermediates that covalently modify bases in DNA. This leads to cross-linkage of DNA strands or the appearance of breaks in DNA as a result of repair efforts. "Broken" or cross-linked DNA is intrinsically unable to complete normal replication or cell division; in addition, it is a potent activator of cell cycle checkpoints and further activates cell-signaling pathways that can precipitate apoptosis. As a class, alkylating agents share similar toxicities: myelosuppression, alopecia, gonadal dysfunction, mucositis, and pulmonary fibrosis. They differ greatly in a spectrum of normal organ toxicities. As a class they share the capacity to cause "second" neoplasms, particularly leukemia, many years after use, particularly when used in low doses for protracted periods.

Cyclophosphamide is inactive unless metabolized by the liver to 4-hydroxy-cyclophosphamide, which decomposes into an alkylating species, as well as to chloroacetaldehyde and acrolein. The latter causes chemical cystitis; therefore, excellent hydration must be maintained while using cyclophosphamide. If severe, the cystitis may be effectively treated by mesna (2-mercaptoethanesulfonate). Liver disease impairs drug activation. Sporadic interstitial pneumonitis leading to pulmonary fibrosis can accompany the use of cyclophosphamide, and high doses used in conditioning regimens for bone marrow transplant can cause cardiac dysfunction. Ifosfamide is a cyclophosphamide analogue also activated in the liver, but more slowly, and it requires coadministration of mesna to prevent bladder injury. Central nervous system (CNS) effects, including somnolence, confusion, and psychosis, can follow ifosfamide use; the incidence appears related to low body surface area or decreased creatinine clearance.

Several alkylating agents are less commonly used. Nitrogen mustard (mechlorethamine) is the prototypic agent of this class, decomposing rapidly in aqueous solution to potentially yield a bifunctional carbonium ion. It must be administered shortly after preparation into a rapidly flowing intravenous line. It is a powerful vesicant, and infiltration may be symptomatically ameliorated by infiltration of the affected site with 1/6 M thiosulfate. Even without infiltration, aseptic thrombophlebitis is frequent. It can be used topically as a dilute solution in cutaneous lymphomas, with a notable incidence of hypersensitivity reactions. It causes moderate nausea after intravenous administration. Bendamustine is a nitrogen mustard derivative with evidence of activity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and certain lymphomas.

Chlorambucil causes predictable myelosuppression, azoospermia, nausea, and pulmonary side effects. Busulfan can cause profound myelosuppression, alopecia, and pulmonary toxicity but is relatively "lymphocyte sparing." Its routine use in treatment of CML has been curtailed in favor of imatinib (Gleevec) or dasatinib, but it is still employed in transplant preparation regimens. Melphalan shows variable oral bioavailability and undergoes extensive binding to albumin and 1-acidic glycoprotein. Mucositis appears more prominently; however, it has prominent activity in multiple myeloma.

Nitrosoureas break down to carbamylating species that not only cause a distinct pattern of DNA base pair每directed toxicity but also can covalently modify proteins. They share the feature of causing relatively delayed bone marrow toxicity, which can be cumulative and long-lasting. Methyl CCNU (lomustine) causes direct glomerular as well as tubular damage, cumulatively related to dose and time of exposure.

Procarbazine is metabolized in the liver and possibly in tumor cells to yield a variety of free radical and alkylating species. In addition to myelosuppression, it causes hypnotic and other CNS effects, including vivid nightmares. It can cause a disulfiram-like syndrome on ingestion of ethanol. Altretamine (formerly hexamethylmelamine) and thiotepa can chemically give rise to alkylating species, although the nature of the DNA damage has not been well characterized in either case. Dacarbazine (DTIC) is activated in the liver to yield the highly reactive methyl diazonium cation. It causes only modest myelosuppression 21每25 days after a dose but causes prominent nausea on day 1. Temozolomide is structurally related to dacarbazine but was designed to be activated by nonenzymatic hydrolysis in tumors and is bioavailable orally.

Cisplatin was discovered fortuitously by observing that bacteria present in electrolysis solutions could not divide. Only the cis diamine configuration is active as an antitumor agent. It is hypothesized that in the intracellular environment, a chloride is lost from each position, being replaced by a water molecule. The resulting positively charged species is an efficient bifunctional interactor with DNA, forming Pt-based cross-links. Cisplatin requires administration with adequate hydration, including forced diuresis with mannitol to prevent kidney damage; even with the use of hydration, gradual decrease in kidney function is common, along with noteworthy anemia. Hypomagnesemia frequently attends cisplatin use and can lead to hypocalcemia and tetany. Other common toxicities include neurotoxocity with stocking-and-glove sensorimotor neuropathy. Hearing loss occurs in 50% of patients treated with conventional doses. Cisplatin is intensely emetogenic, requiring prophylactic antiemetics. Myelosuppression is less evident than with other alkylating agents. Chronic vascular toxicity (Raynaud's phenomenon, coronary artery disease) is a more unusual toxicity. Carboplatin displays less nephro-, oto-, and neurotoxicity. However, myelosuppression is more frequent, and as the drug is exclusively cleared through the kidney, adjustment of dose for creatinine clearance must be accomplished through use of various dosing nomograms. Oxaliplatin is a platinum analogue with noteworthy activity in colon cancers refractory to other treatments. It is prominently neurotoxic.

Antitumor Antibiotics and Topoisomerase Poisons

Antitumor antibiotics are substances produced by bacteria that in nature appear to provide a chemical defense against other hostile microorganisms. As a class they bind to DNA directly and can frequently undergo electron transfer reactions to generate free radicals in close proximity to DNA, leading to DNA damage in the form of single-strand breaks or cross-links. Topoisomerase poisons include natural products or semisynthetic species derived ultimately from plants, and they modify enzymes that regulate the capacity of DNA to unwind to allow normal replication or transcription. These include topoisomerase I, which creates single-strand breaks that then rejoin following the passage of the other DNA strand through the break. Topoisomerase II creates double-strand breaks through which another segment of DNA duplex passes before rejoining. DNA damage from these agents can occur in any cell cycle phase, but cells tend to arrest in S-phase or G2 of the cell cycle in cells with p53 and Rb pathway lesions as the result of defective checkpoint mechanisms in cancer cells. Owing to the role of topoisomerase I in the procession of the replication fork, topoisomerase I poisons cause lethality if the topoisomerase I每induced lesions are made in S-phase.

Doxorubicin can intercalate into DNA, thereby altering DNA structure, replication, and topoisomerase II function. It can also undergo reduction reactions by accepting electrons into its quinone ring system, with the capacity to undergo reoxidation to form reactive oxygen radicals after reoxidation. It causes predictable myelosuppression, alopecia, nausea, and mucositis. In addition, it causes acute cardiotoxicity in the form of atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias, but these are rarely of clinical significance. In contrast, cumulative doses >550 mg/m2 are associated with a 10% incidence of chronic cardiomyopathy. The incidence of cardiomyopathy appears to be related to schedule (peak serum concentration), with low-dose, frequent treatment or continuous infusions better tolerated than intermittent higher-dose exposures. Cardiotoxicity has been related to iron-catalyzed oxidation and reduction of doxorubicin, and not to topoisomerase action. Cardiotoxicity is related to peak plasma dose; thus, lower doses and continuous infusions are less likely to cause heart damage. Doxorubicin's cardiotoxicity is increased when given together with trastuzumab (Herceptin), the anti-HER2/neu antibody. Radiation recall or interaction with concomitantly administered radiation to cause local site complications is frequent. The drug is a powerful vesicant, with necrosis of tissue apparent 4每7 days after an extravasation; therefore, it should be administered into a rapidly flowing intravenous line. Dexrazoxane is an antidote to doxorubicin-induced extravasation. Doxorubicin is metabolized by the liver, so doses must be reduced by 50每75% in the presence of liver dysfunction. Daunorubicin is closely related to doxorubicin and was actually introduced first into leukemia treatment, where it remains part of curative regimens and has been shown preferable to doxorubicin owing to less mucositis and colonic damage. Idarubicin is also used in acute myeloid leukemia treatment and may be preferable to daunorubicin in activity. Encapsulation of daunorubicin into a liposomal formulation has attenuated cardiac toxicity and antitumor activity in Kaposi's sarcoma and ovarian cancer.

Bleomycin refers to a mixture of glycopeptides that have the unique feature of forming complexes with Fe2+ while also bound to DNA. It remains an important component of curative regimens for Hodgkin's disease and germ cell neoplasms. Oxidation of Fe2+ gives rise to superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. The drug causes little, if any, myelosuppression. The drug is cleared rapidly, but augmented skin and pulmonary toxicity in the presence of renal failure has led to the recommendation that doses be reduced by 50每75% in the face of a creatinine clearance <25 mL/min. Bleomycin is not a vesicant and can be administered intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously. Common side effects include fever and chills, facial flush, and Raynaud's phenomenon. Hypertension can follow rapid intravenous administration, and the incidence of anaphylaxis with early preparations of the drug has led to the practice of administering a test dose of 0.5每1 unit before the rest of the dose. The most feared complication of bleomycin treatment is pulmonary fibrosis, which increases in incidence at >300 cumulative units administered and is minimally responsive to treatment (e.g., glucocorticoids). The earliest indicator of an adverse effect is a decline in the DLCO, although cessation of drug immediately upon documentation of a decrease in DLCO may not prevent further decline in pulmonary function. Bleomycin is inactivated by a bleomycin hydrolase, whose concentration is diminished in skin and lung. Because bleomycin-dependent electron transport is dependent on O2, bleomycin toxicity may become apparent after exposure to transient very high PiO2. Thus, during surgical procedures, patients with prior exposure to bleomycin should be maintained on the lowest PiO2 consistent with maintaining adequate tissue oxygenation.

Mitoxantrone is a synthetic compound that was designed to recapitulate features of doxorubicin but with less cardiotoxicity. It is quantitatively less cardiotoxic (comparing the ratio of cardiotoxic to therapeutically effective doses) but is still associated with a 10% incidence of cardiotoxicity at cumulative doses of >150 mg/m2. It also causes alopecia. Cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) have arisen shortly after exposure of patients to mitoxantrone, particularly in the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. While chemotherapy-associated leukemia is generally of the acute myeloid type, APL arising in the setting of prior mitoxantrone treatment had the typical t(15;17) chromosome translocation associated with APL, but the breakpoints of the translocation appeared to be at topoisomerase II sites that would be preferred sites of mitoxantrone action, clearly linking the action of the drug to the generation of the leukemia.

Etoposide was synthetically derived from the plant product podophyllotoxin; it binds directly to topoisomerase II and DNA in a reversible ternary complex. It stabilizes the covalent intermediate in the enzyme's action where the enzyme is covalently linked to DNA. This "alkali-labile" DNA bond was historically a first hint that an enzyme such as a topoisomerase might exist. The drug therefore causes a prominent G2 arrest, reflecting the action of a DNA damage checkpoint. Prominent clinical effects include myelosuppression, nausea, and transient hypotension related to the speed of administration of the agent. Etoposide is a mild vesicant but is relatively free from other large-organ toxicities. When given at high doses or very frequently, topoisomerase II inhibitors may cause acute leukemia associated with chromosome 11q23 abnormalities in up to 1% of exposed patients.

Camptothecin was isolated from extracts of a Chinese tree and had notable antileukemia activity in preclinical mouse models. Early human clinical studies with the sodium salt of the hydrolyzed camptothecin lactone showed evidence of toxicity with little antitumor activity. Identification of topoisomerase I as the target of camptothecins and the need to preserve lactone structure allowed additional efforts to identify active members of this series. Topoisomerase I is responsible for unwinding the DNA strand by introducing single-strand breaks and allowing rotation of one strand about the other. In S-phase, topoisomerase I每induced breaks that are not promptly resealed lead to progress of the replication fork off the end of a DNA strand. The DNA damage is a potent signal for induction of apoptosis. Camptothecins promote the stabilization of the DNA linked to the enzyme in a so-called cleavable complex, analogous to the action of etoposide with topoisomerase II. Topotecan is a camptothecin derivative approved for use in gynecologic tumors and small cell lung cancer. Toxicity is limited to myelosuppression and mucositis. CPT-11, or irinotecan, is a camptothecin with evidence of activity in colon carcinoma. In addition to myelosuppression, it causes a secretory diarrhea related to the toxicity of a metabolite called SN-38. The diarrhea can be treated effectively with loperamide or octreotide.

Indirect Effectors of DNA Function: Antimetabolites

A broad definition of antimetabolites would include compounds with structural similarity to precursors of purines or pyrimidines, or compounds that interfere with purine or pyrimidine synthesis. Antimetabolites can cause DNA damage indirectly, through misincorporation into DNA, abnormal timing or progression through DNA synthesis, or altered function of pyrimidine and purine biosynthetic enzymes. They tend to convey greatest toxicity to cells in S-phase, and the degree of toxicity increases with duration of exposure. Common toxic manifestations include stomatitis, diarrhea, and myelosuppression. Second malignancies are not associated with their use.

Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, which regenerates reduced folates from the oxidized folates produced when thymidine monophosphate is formed from deoxyuridine monophosphate. Without reduced folates, cells die a "thymine-less" death. N5-tetrahydrofolate or N5-formyltetrahydrofolate (leucovorin) can bypass this block and rescue cells from methotrexate, which is maintained in cells by polyglutamylation. The drug and other reduced folates are transported into cells by the folate carrier, and high concentrations of drug can bypass this carrier and allow diffusion of drug directly into cells. These properties have suggested the design of "high-dose" methotrexate regimens with leucovorin rescue of normal marrow and mucosa as part of curative approaches to osteosarcoma in the adjuvant setting and hematopoietic neoplasms of children and adults. Methotrexate is cleared by the kidney via both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion, and toxicity is augmented by renal dysfunction and drugs such as salicylates, probenecid, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents that undergo tubular secretion. With normal renal function, 15 mg/m2 leucovorin will rescue 10每8 to 10每6M methotrexate in three to four doses. However, with decreased creatinine clearance, doses of 50每100 mg/m2 are continued until methotrexate levels are <5 x 10每8M. In addition to bone marrow suppression and mucosal irritation, methotrexate can cause renal failure itself at high doses owing to crystallization in renal tubules; therefore, high-dose regimens require alkalinization of urine with increased flow by hydration. Methotrexate can be sequestered in third-space collections and leach back into the general circulation, causing prolonged myelosuppression. Less-frequent adverse effects include reversible increases in transaminases and hypersensitivity-like pulmonary syndrome. Chronic low-dose methotrexate can cause hepatic fibrosis. When administered to the intrathecal space, methotrexate can cause chemical arachnoiditis and CNS dysfunction.

Pemetrexed is a novel folate-directed antimetabolite. It is "multitargeted" in that it inhibits the activity of several enzymes, including thymidylate synthetase, dihydrofolate reductase, and glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase, thereby affecting the synthesis of both purine and pyrimidine nucleic acid precursors. To avoid significant toxicity to the normal tissues, patients receiving pemetrexed should also receive low-dose folate and vitamin B12 supplementation. Pemetrexed has notable activity against certain lung cancers and, in combination with cisplatin, also against mesotheliomas. Palatrexate is an antifolate approved for use in T cell lymphoma that is very efficiently transported into cancer cells.

5-Fluorouracil (5FU) represents an early example of "rational" drug design in that it originated from the observation that tumor cells incorporate radiolabeled uracil more efficiently into DNA than normal cells, especially gut. 5FU is metabolized in cells to 5'FdUMP, which inhibits thymidylate synthetase (TS). In addition, misincorporation can lead to single-strand breaks, and RNA can aberrantly incorporate FUMP. 5FU is metabolized by dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, and deficiency of this enzyme can lead to excessive toxicity from 5FU. Oral bioavailability varies unreliably, but orally administered analogues of 5FU such as capecitabine have been developed that allow at least equivalent activity to many parenteral 5FU-based approaches. Intravenous administration of 5FU leads to bone marrow suppression after short infusions but to stomatitis after prolonged infusions. Leucovorin augments the activity of 5FU by promoting formation of the ternary covalent complex of 5FU, the reduced folate, and TS. Less-frequent toxicities include CNS dysfunction, with prominent cerebellar signs, and endothelial toxicity manifested by thrombosis, including pulmonary embolus and myocardial infarction.

Cytosine arabinoside (ara-C) is incorporated into DNA after formation of ara-CTP, resulting in S-phase每related toxicity. Continuous infusion schedules allow maximal efficiency, with uptake maximal at 5每7 M. Ara-C can be administered intrathecally. Adverse effects include nausea, diarrhea, stomatitis, chemical conjunctivitis, and cerebellar ataxia. Gemcitabine is a cytosine derivative that is similar to ara-C in that it is incorporated into DNA after anabolism to the triphosphate, rendering DNA susceptible to breakage and repair synthesis, which differs from that in ara-C in that gemcitabine-induced lesions are very inefficiently removed. In contrast to ara-C, gemcitabine appears to have useful activity in a variety of solid tumors, with limited nonmyelosuppressive toxicities. 6-Thioguanine and 6-mercaptopurine (6MP) are used in the treatment of acute lymphoid leukemia. Although administered orally, they display variable bioavailability. 6MP is metabolized by xanthine oxidase and therefore requires dose reduction when used with allopurinol.

Fludarabine phosphate is a prodrug of F-adenine arabinoside (F-ara-A), which in turn was designed to diminish the susceptibility of ara-A to adenosine deaminase. F-ara-A is incorporated into DNA and can cause delayed cytotoxicity even in cells with low growth fraction, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia and follicular B cell lymphoma. CNS and peripheral nerve dysfunction and T cell depletion leading to opportunistic infections can occur in addition to myelosuppression. 2-Chlorodeoxyadenosine is a similar compound with activity in hairy cell leukemia. 2-Deoxycoformycin inhibits adenosine deaminase, with resulting increase in dATP levels. This causes inhibition of ribonucleotide reductase as well as augmented susceptibility to apoptosis, particularly in T cells. Renal failure and CNS dysfunction are notable toxicities in addition to immunosuppression. Hydroxyurea inhibits ribonucleotide reductase, resulting in S-phase block. It is orally bioavailable and useful for the acute management of myeloproliferative states.

Asparaginase is a bacterial enzyme that causes breakdown of extracellular asparagine required for protein synthesis in certain leukemic cells. This effectively stops tumor cell DNA synthesis, as DNA synthesis requires concurrent protein synthesis. The outcome of asparaginase action is therefore very similar to the result of the small-molecule antimetabolites. As asparaginase is a foreign protein, hypersensitivity reactions are common, as are effects on organs such as pancreas and liver that normally require continuing protein synthesis. This may result in decreased insulin secretion with hyperglycemia, with or without hyperamylasemia and clotting function abnormalities. Close monitoring of clotting functions should accompany use of asparaginase. Paradoxically, owing to depletion of rapidly turning over anticoagulant factors, thromboses particularly affecting the CNS may also be seen with asparaginase.

Mitotic Spindle Inhibitors

Microtubules are cellular structures that form the mitotic spindle, and in interphase cells they are responsible for the cellular "scaffolding" along which various motile and secretory processes occur. Microtubules are composed of repeating noncovalent multimers of a heterodimer of  and  isoform of the protein tubulin. Vincristine binds to the tubulin dimer with the result that microtubules are disaggregated. This results in the block of growing cells in M-phase; however, toxic effects in G1 and S-phase are also evident, reflecting effects on normal cellular activities of microtubules. Vincristine is metabolized by the liver, and dose adjustment in the presence of hepatic dysfunction is required. It is a powerful vesicant, and infiltration can be treated by local heat and infiltration of hyaluronidase. At clinically used intravenous doses, neurotoxicity in the form of glove-and-stocking neuropathy is frequent. Acute neuropathic effects include jaw pain, paralytic ileus, urinary retention, and the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion. Myelosuppression is not seen. Vinblastine is similar to vincristine, except that it tends to be more myelotoxic, with more frequent thrombocytopenia and also mucositis and stomatitis. Vinorelbine is a vinca alkaloid that appears to have differences in resistance patterns in comparison to vincristine and vinblastine; it may be administered orally.

The taxanes include paclitaxel and docetaxel. These agents differ from the vinca alkaloids in that the taxanes stabilize microtubules against depolymerization. The "stabilized" microtubules function abnormally and are not able to undergo the normal dynamic changes of microtubule structure and function necessary for cell cycle completion. Taxanes are among the most broadly active antineoplastic agents for use in solid tumors, with evidence of activity in ovarian cancer, breast cancer, Kaposi's sarcoma, and lung tumors. They are administered intravenously, and paclitaxel requires use of a Cremophor-containing vehicle that can cause hypersensitivity reactions. Premedication with dexamethasone (8每16 mg orally or intravenously 12 and 6 h before treatment) and diphenhydramine (50 mg) and cimetidine (300 mg), both 30 min before treatment, decreases but does not eliminate the risk of hypersensitivity reactions to the paclitaxel vehicle. Docetaxel uses a polysorbate 80 formulation, which can cause fluid retention in addition to hypersensitivity reactions, and dexamethasone premedication with or without antihistamines is frequently used. A protein-bound formulation of paclitaxel (called nab-paclitaxel) has at least equivalent antineoplastic activity and decreased risk of hypersensitivity reactions. Paclitaxel may also cause hypersensitivity reactions, myelosuppression, neurotoxicity in the form of glove-and-stocking numbness, and paresthesia. Cardiac rhythm disturbances were observed in phase I and II trials, most commonly asymptomatic bradycardia but also, much more rarely, varying degrees of heart block. These have not emerged as clinically significant in the majority of patients. Docetaxel causes comparable degrees of myelosuppression and neuropathy. Hypersensitivity reactions, including bronchospasm, dyspnea, and hypotension, are less frequent but occur to some degree in up to 25% of patients. Fluid retention appears to result from a vascular leak syndrome that can aggravate preexisting effusions. Rash can complicate docetaxel administration, appearing prominently as a pruritic maculopapular rash affecting the forearms, but it has also been associated with fingernail ridging, breakdown, and skin discoloration. Stomatitis appears to be somewhat more frequent than with paclitaxel.

Resistance to taxanes has been related to the emergence of efficient efflux of taxanes from tumor cells through the p170 P-glycoprotein (mdr gene product) or the presence of variant or mutant forms of tubulin. Epothilones represent a class of novel microtubule-stabilizing agents that have been conscientiously optimized for activity in taxane-resistant tumors. Ixabepilone has clear evidence of activity in breast cancers resistant to taxanes and anthracyclines such as doxorubicin. It retains acceptable expected side effects, including myelosuppression, and can also cause peripheral sensory neuropathy.

Estramustine was originally synthesized as a mustard derivative that might be useful in neoplasms that possessed estrogen receptors. However, no evidence of interaction with DNA was observed. Surprisingly, the drug caused metaphase arrest, and subsequent study revealed that it binds to microtubule-associated proteins, resulting in abnormal microtubule function. Estramustine binds to estramustine-binding proteins (EMBPs), which are notably present in prostate tumor tissue. The drug is used in patients with prostate cancer. Gastrointestinal and cardiovascular adverse effects related to the estrogen moiety occur in up to 10% of patients, including worsened heart failure and thromboembolic phenomena. Gynecomastia and nipple tenderness can also occur.

Hormonal Agents

Steroid hormone receptor每related molecules have emerged as prominent targets for small molecules useful in cancer treatment. When bound to their cognate ligands, these receptors can alter gene transcription and, in certain tissues, induce apoptosis. The pharmacologic effect is a mirror or parody of the normal effects of the agents acting on nontransformed normal tissues, although the effects on tumors are mediated by indirect effects in some cases.

Glucocorticoids are generally given in "pulsed" high doses in leukemias and lymphomas, where they induce apoptosis in tumor cells. Cushing's syndrome or inadvertent adrenal suppression on withdrawal from high-dose glucocorticoids can be significant complications, along with infections common in immunosuppressed patients, in particular Pneumocystis pneumonia, which classically appears a few days after completing a course of high-dose glucocorticoids.

Tamoxifen is a partial estrogen receptor antagonist; it has a tenfold greater antitumor activity in breast cancer patients whose tumors express estrogen receptors than in those who have low or no levels of expression. It might be considered the prototypic "molecularly targeted" agent. Owing to its agonistic activities in vascular and uterine tissue, side effects include a somewhat increased risk of cardiovascular complications, such as thromboembolic phenomena, and a small increased incidence of endometrial carcinoma, which appears after chronic use (usually >5 years). Progestational agents〞including medroxyprogesterone acetate, androgens including fluoxymesterone (Halotestin), and, paradoxically, estrogens〞have approximately the same degree of activity in primary hormonal treatment of breast cancers that have elevated expression of estrogen receptor protein. Estrogen itself is not used often owing to prominent cardiovascular and uterotropic activity.

Aromatase refers to a family of enzymes that catalyze the formation of estrogen in various tissues, including the ovary and peripheral adipose tissue and some tumor cells. Aromatase inhibitors are of two types, the irreversible steroid analogues such as exemestane and the reversible inhibitors such as anastrozole or letrozole. Anastrozole is superior to tamoxifen in the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer in postmenopausal patients with estrogen receptor每positive tumors. Letrozole treatment affords benefit following tamoxifen treatment. Adverse effects of aromatase inhibitors may include an increased risk of osteoporosis.

Prostate cancer is classically treated by androgen deprivation. Diethylstilbestrol (DES) acting as an estrogen at the level of the hypothalamus to downregulate hypothalamic luteinizing hormone (LH) production results in decreased elaboration of testosterone by the testicle. For this reason, orchiectomy is equally as effective as moderate-dose DES, inducing responses in 80% of previously untreated patients with prostate cancer but without the prominent cardiovascular side effects of DES, including thrombosis and exacerbation of coronary artery disease. In the event that orchiectomy is not accepted by the patient, testicular androgen suppression can also be effected by luteinizing hormone每releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists such as leuprolide and goserelin. These agents cause tonic stimulation of the LHRH receptor, with the loss of its normal pulsatile activation resulting in decreased output of LH by the anterior pituitary. Therefore, as primary hormonal manipulation in prostate cancer, one can choose orchiectomy or leuprolide, but not both. The addition of androgen receptor blockers, including flutamide or bicalutamide, is of uncertain additional benefit in extending overall response duration; the combined use of orchiectomy or leuprolide plus flutamide is referred to as total androgen blockade.

Tumors that respond to a primary hormonal manipulation may frequently respond to second and third hormonal manipulations. Thus, breast tumors that had previously responded to tamoxifen have, on relapse, notable response rates to withdrawal of tamoxifen itself or to subsequent addition of an aromatase inhibitor or progestin. Likewise, initial treatment of prostate cancers with leuprolide plus flutamide may be followed after disease progression by response to withdrawal of flutamide. These responses may result from the removal of antagonists from mutant steroid hormone receptors that have come to depend on the presence of the antagonist as a growth-promoting influence.

Additional strategies to treat refractory breast and prostate cancers that possess steroid hormone receptors may also address adrenal capacity to produce androgens and estrogens, even after orchiectomy or oophorectomy, respectively. Thus, aminoglutethimide or ketoconazole can be used to block adrenal synthesis by interfering with the enzymes of steroid hormone metabolism. Administration of these agents requires concomitant hydrocortisone replacement and additional glucocorticoid doses administered in the event of physiologic stress.

Humoral mechanisms can also result in complications from an underlying malignancy producing the hormone. Adrenocortical carcinomas can cause Cushing's syndrome as well as syndromes of androgen or estrogen excess. Mitotane can counteract these by decreasing synthesis of steroid hormones. Islet cell neoplasms can cause debilitating diarrhea, treated with the somatostatin analogue octreotide. Prolactin-secreting tumors can be effectively managed by the dopaminergic agonist bromocriptine.

Targeted Therapies

A better understanding of cancer cell biology has suggested many new targets for cancer drug discovery and development. These include the products of oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes, regulators of cell death pathways, mediators of cellular immortality such as telomerase, and molecules responsible for microenvironmental molding such as proteases or angiogenic factors. The essential difference in the development of agents that would target these processes is that the basis for discovery of the candidate drug is the a priori importance of the target in the biology of the tumor, rather than the initial detection of drug candidates based on the phenomenon of tumor cell regression in tissue culture or in animals. The following examples reflect the rapidly evolving clinical research activity in this area. Figure 85-4 summarizes how FDA-approved targeted agents act.

Hematopoietic Neoplasms

Imatinib targets the ATP binding site of the p210bcr-abl protein tyrosine kinase that is formed as the result of the chromosome 9,22 translocation producing the Philadelphia chromosome in CML. Imatinib is superior to interferon plus chemotherapy in the initial treatment of the chronic phase of this disorder. It has lesser activity in the blast phase of CML, where the cells may have acquired additional mutations in p210bcr-abl itself or other genetic lesions. Its side effects are relatively tolerable in most patients and include hepatic dysfunction, diarrhea, and fluid retention. Rarely, patients receiving imatinib have decreased cardiac function, which may persist after discontinuation of the drug. The quality of response to imatinib enters into the decision about when to refer patients with CML for consideration of transplant approaches. Nilotinib is a tyrosine protein kinase inhibitor with a similar spectrum of activity to imatinib, but with increased potency and perhaps better tolerance by certain patients. Dasatinib, another inhibitor of the p210bcr-abl oncoproteins, is active in certain mutant variants of p210bcr-abl that are refractory to imatinib and arise during therapy with imatinib or are present de novo. Dasatinib also has inhibitory action against kinases belonging to the src tyrosine protein kinase family; this activity may contribute to its effects in hematopoietic tumors and suggest a role in solid tumors where src kinases are active. Only the T315I mutant is resistant to dasatinib; a new class of inhibitors called aurora kinase inhibitors is in development to address this problem.

All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) targets the PML-retinoic acid receptor (RAR)  fusion protein, which is the result of the chromosome 15,17 translocation pathogenic for most forms of APL. Administered orally, it causes differentiation of the neoplastic promyelocytes to mature granulocytes and attenuates the rate of hemorrhagic complications. Adverse effects include headache with or without pseudotumor cerebri and gastrointestinal and cutaneous toxicities. Another active retinoid is the synthetic retinoid X receptor ligand bexarotene, which has activity in cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

Bortezomib is an inhibitor of the proteasome, the multisubunit assembly of protease activities responsible for the selective degradation of proteins important in regulating activation of transcription factors, including NF-B and proteins regulating cell cycle progression. It has activity in multiple myeloma and certain lymphomas. Adverse effects include neuropathy, orthostatic hypotension with or without hyponatremia, and reversible thrombocytopenia.

Vorinostat is an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, responsible for maintaining the proper orientation of histones on DNA, with resulting capacity for transcriptional readiness. Acetylated histones allow entry of transcription factors and therefore increased expression of genes that are selectively repressed in tumors. The result can be differentiation with the emergence of a more normal cellular phenotype, or cell cycle arrest with expression of endogenous regulators of cell cycle progression. Vorinostat is approved for clinical use in cutaneous T cell lymphoma, with dramatic skin clearing and very few side effects. Romidepsin is a distinct molecular class of histone deacetylase inhibitor also active in cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

DNA methyltransferase inhibitors including 5-aza-cytidine and 2'-deoxy-5-azacytidine (decitabine) can also increase transcription of genes "silenced" during the pathogenesis of a tumor by causing demethylation of the methylated cytosines that are acquired as an "epigenetic" (i.e., after the DNA is replicated) modification of DNA. These drugs were originally considered antimetabolites but have clinical value in myelodysplastic syndromes and certain leukemias when administered at low doses. Combinations of DNA methyltransferase inhibitors and histone deacetylase inhibitors may offer new approaches to regulate chromatin function.

Targeted toxins utilize macromolecules such as antibodies or cytokines with high affinity for defined tumor cell-surface molecules, such as a leukemia differentiation antigen, to which a therapeutic antibody can deliver a covalently linked potent cytotoxin, or a growth factor such as IL-2 to deliver a toxin (in the form of diphtheria toxin in denileukin diftitox) to cells bearing the IL-2 receptor. The value of such targeted approaches is that in addition to maximizing the therapeutic index by differential expression of the target in tumor (as opposed to nonrenewable normal cells), selection of patients for clinical use can capitalize on assessing the target in the tumor.

Solid Tumors

Small-molecule epidermal growth factor (EGF) antagonists act at the ATP binding site of the EGF receptor tyrosine kinase. In early clinical trials, gefitinib showed evidence of responses in a small fraction of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Side effects were generally acceptable, consisting mostly of rash and diarrhea. Subsequent analysis of responding patients revealed a high frequency of activating mutations in the EGF receptor. Often patients who developed resistance to gefitinib have acquired additional mutations in the enzyme, similar to what was seen in imatinib-resistant CML. Erlotinib is another EGF receptor tyrosine kinase antagonist with somewhat superior outcome in clinical trials in NSCLC. Even patients with wild-type EGF receptors may benefit from erlotinib treatment. Lapatinib is a combined EGF receptor and erbB2 tyrosine kinase antagonist with activity in breast cancers refractory to anti-erbB2 antibodies.

In addition to the p210bcr-abl kinase, imatinib also has activity against the c-kit tyrosine kinase, activated in gastrointestinal stromal sarcoma, and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGF-R), activated by translocation in certain sarcomas. Imatinib has found clinical utility in these neoplasms previously refractory to chemotherapeutic approaches.

"Multitargeted" kinase antagonists are small-molecule ATP site-directed antagonists that inhibit more than one protein kinase. Drugs of this type with prominent activity against the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGF-R) tyrosine kinase have activity in renal cell carcinoma. Sorafenib is a VEGF-R antagonist with activity against the raf serine-threonine protein kinase as well. Sunitinib has anti-VEGF-R as well as anti-PDGF-R and anti-c-kit activity. It causes prominent responses as well as stabilization of disease in renal cell cancers and gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Side effects for both agents are mostly acceptable, with fatigue and diarrhea encountered with both agents. The "hand-foot syndrome" with erythema and desquamation of the distal extremities, in some cases requiring dose modification, may be seen with sorafenib. Temsirolimus and everolimus are mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors with activity in renal cancers. They produce stomatitis, fatigue, and some hyperlipidemia (10%), myelosuppression (10%), and rare lung toxicity.

Personalized Cancer Treatment

The recognition that targeted therapies may benefit subsets of patients with an identical histologic diagnosis, but whose tumor is dependent for viability on the target's function, has spurred research to define molecular diagnostic approaches to define potentially responding patients. In addition, a patient's germ-line DNA may contain indicators of differential capacity to metabolize cancer chemotherapy agents and thus be susceptible to drug-induced toxicity. While efforts in this area are still a focus of both clinical and basic research, the following conclusions can be drawn, and are applicable to patients being initially managed in the primary care setting.

All patients undergoing initial diagnostic evaluation for breast cancer should have their tumor tested for the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and the c-erbB2 (HER2; HER2/neu) oncoprotein by immunohistochemistry or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Patients expressing the ER and/or PR are candidates for adjuvant hormone receptor每directed therapies. Patients with evidence of abundant HER2 expression or HER2 gene amplification will likely derive benefit from trastuzumab. In addition, Oncotype Dx is a 21-gene expression test that has been approved by the FDA for defining patients without lymph node involvement but with ER+ tumors who may have the greatest chance of benefiting from adjuvant chemotherapy added to adjuvant estrogen therapy. The MammaPrint test is similar in intent for node-negative patients but without reference to ER expression status.

The value of characterizing the mutational status of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor pathway in patients with lung cancer is also a matter of current clinical investigations. While the tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib is approved for use in all patients with NSCLC who have had progression of disease despite treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy, subsets of patients, such as female Asian nonsmokers, have a high evidence of EGF-R mutations resulting in marked sensitivity to erlotinib. And it is possible that in the larger population of patients with NSCLC, such testing may allow selection of patients in whom initial use of erlotinib may also be considered. Conversely, a mutated K-ras oncogene in patients with lung adenocarcinoma is associated with no benefit from erlotinib treatment.

In patients with colon cancer, a mutated K-ras oncogene is clearly associated with no benefit to the use of the EGF-R每directed antibody cetuximab, and characterization of K-ras mutational status should be undertaken as part of the routine diagnostic evaluation of patients with newly diagnosed metastatic or newly recurrent colon cancer. Patients undergoing diagnostic evaluation for initial treatment of metastatic colon cancer might usefully undergo evaluation of their germ-line uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase (UGT) 1A1 allele status, as the expression of variant alleles at that locus influences susceptibility to irinotecan-induced hematologic toxicity. Patients with known Gilbert's disease should receive irinotecan very cautiously or perhaps not at all.

Acute Complications of Cancer Chemotherapy

Myelosuppression

The common cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents almost invariably affect bone marrow function. Titration of this effect determines the MTD of the agent on a given schedule. The normal kinetics of blood cell turnover influences the sequence and sensitivity of each of the formed elements. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs; t1/2 = 6每8 h), platelets (t1/2 = 5每7 days), and red blood cells (RBCs; t1/2 = 120 days) respectively have most, less, and least susceptibility to usually administered cytotoxic agents. The nadir count of each cell type in response to classes of agents is characteristic. Maximal neutropenia occurs 6每14 days after conventional doses of anthracyclines, antifolates, and antimetabolites. Alkylating agents differ from each other in the timing of cytopenias. Nitrosoureas, DTIC, and procarbazine can display delayed marrow toxicity, first appearing 6 weeks after dosing.

Complications of myelosuppression result from the predictable sequelae of the missing cells' function. Febrile neutropenia refers to the clinical presentation of fever (one temperature 38.5∼C or three readings 38∼C but 38.5∼C per 24 h) in a neutropenic patient with an uncontrolled neoplasm involving the bone marrow or, more usually, in a patient undergoing treatment with cytotoxic agents. Mortality from uncontrolled infection varies inversely with the neutrophil count. If the nadir neutrophil count is >1000/L, there is little risk; if <500/L, risk of death is markedly increased. Management of febrile neutropenia has conventionally included empirical coverage with antibiotics for the duration of neutropenia (Chap. 86). Selection of antibiotics is governed by the expected association of infections with certain underlying neoplasms; careful physical examination (with scrutiny of catheter sites, dentition, mucosal surfaces, and perirectal and genital orifices by gentle palpation); chest x-ray; and Gram stain and culture of blood, urine, and sputum (if any) to define a putative site of infection. In the absence of any originating site, a broadly acting -lactam with anti-Pseudomonas activity, such as ceftazidime, is begun empirically. The addition of vancomycin to cover potential cutaneous sites of origin (until these are ruled out or shown to originate from methicillin-sensitive organisms) or metronidazole or imipenem for abdominal or other sites favoring anaerobes reflects modifications tailored to individual patient presentations. The coexistence of pulmonary compromise raises a distinct set of potential pathogens, including Legionella, Pneumocystis, and fungal agents that may require further diagnostic evaluations, such as bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage. Febrile neutropenic patients can be stratified broadly into two prognostic groups. The first, with expected short duration of neutropenia and no evidence of hypotension or abdominal or other localizing symptoms, may be expected to do well even with oral regimens, e.g., ciprofloxacin or moxifloxacin, or amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid. A less favorable prognostic group is patients with expected prolonged neutropenia, evidence of sepsis, and end organ compromise, particularly pneumonia. These patients require tailoring of their antibiotic regimen to their underlying presentation, with frequent empirical addition of antifungal agents if fever persists for 7 days without identification of an adequately treated organism or site.

Transfusion of granulocytes has no role in the management of febrile neutropenia, owing to their exceedingly short half-life, mechanical fragility, and clinical syndromes of pulmonary compromise with leukostasis after their use. Instead, colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) are used to augment bone marrow production of PMNs. Early-acting factors such as IL-1, IL-3, and stem cell factor have not been as useful clinically as late-acting, lineage-specific factors such as G-CSF (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) or GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor), erythropoietin (EPO), thrombopoietin, IL-6, and IL-11. CSFs may easily become overused in oncology practice. The settings in which their use has been proved effective are limited. G-CSF, GM-CSF, EPO, and IL-11 are currently approved for use. The American Society of Clinical Oncology has developed practice guidelines for the use of G-CSF and GM-CSF (Table 85每3).

Table 85每3 Indications for the Clinical Use of G-CSF or GM-CSF

 
 
Preventive Uses  
With the first cycle of chemotherapy (so-called primary CSF administration) 
  Not needed on a routine basis 
  Use if the probability of febrile neutropenia is 20% 
  Use if patient has preexisting neutropenia or active infection 
  Age >65 years treated for lymphoma with curative intent or other tumor treated by similar regimens 
  Poor performance status 
  Extensive prior chemotherapy 
  Dose-dense regimens in a clinical trial or with strong evidence of benefit 
With subsequent cycles if febrile neutropenia has previously occurred (so-called secondary CSF administration) 
  Not needed after short-duration neutropenia without fever 
  Use if patient had febrile neutropenia in previous cycle 
  Use if prolonged neutropenia (even without fever) delays therapy 
Therapeutic Uses  
Afebrile neutropenic patients 
  No evidence of benefit 
Febrile neutropenic patients 
  No evidence of benefit 
  May feel compelled to use in the face of clinical deterioration from sepsis, pneumonia, or fungal infection, but benefit unclear 
In bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cell transplantation 
  Use to mobilize stem cells from marrow 
  Use to hasten myeloid recovery 
In acute myeloid leukemia 
  G-CSF of minor or no benefit 
  GM-CSF of no benefit and may be harmful 
In myelodysplastic syndromes 
  Not routinely beneficial 
  Use intermittently in subset with neutropenia and recurrent infection 
What Dose and Schedule Should Be Used?  
G-CSF: 5 mg/kg per day subcutaneously 
GM-CSF: 250 mg/m2 per day subcutaneously
  
Peg-filgrastim: one dose of 6 mg 24 h after chemotherapy 
When Should Therapy Begin and End?  
When indicated, start 24每72 h after chemotherapy 
Continue until absolute neutrophil count is 10,000/L 
Do not use concurrently with chemotherapy or radiation therapy 
 


Abbreviations: G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

Source: From the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
 

Primary prophylaxis (i.e., shortly after completing chemotherapy to reduce the nadir) administers G-CSF to patients receiving cytotoxic regimens associated with a 20% incidence of febrile neutropenia. "Dose-dense" regimens, where cycling of chemotherapy is intended to be completed without delay of administered doses, may also benefit, but such patients should be on a clinical trial. Administration of G-CSF in these circumstances has reduced the incidence of febrile neutropenia in several studies by about 50%. Most patients, however, receive regimens that do not have such a high risk of expected febrile neutropenia, and therefore most patients initially should not receive G-CSF or GM-CSF. Special circumstances〞such as a documented history of febrile neutropenia with the regimen in a particular patient or categories of patients at increased risk, such as patients older than age 65 years with aggressive lymphoma treated with curative chemotherapy regimens; extensive compromise of marrow by prior radiation or chemotherapy; or active, open wounds or deep-seated infection〞may support primary treatment with G-CSF or GM-CSF. Administration of G-CSF or GM-CSF to afebrile neutropenic patients or to patients with low-risk febrile neutropenia is not recommended, and patients receiving concomitant chemoradiation treatment, particularly those with thoracic neoplasms, likewise are not generally recommended for treatment. In contrast, administration of G-CSF to high-risk patients with febrile neutropenia and evidence of organ compromise including sepsis syndrome, invasive fungal infection, concurrent hospitalization at the time fever develops, pneumonia, profound neutropenia (<0.1 x 109/L), or age >65 years is reasonable.

Secondary prophylaxis refers to the administration of CSFs in patients who have experienced a neutropenic complication from a prior cycle of chemotherapy; dose reduction or delay may be a reasonably considered alternative. G-CSF or GM-CSF is conventionally started 24每72 h after completion of chemotherapy and continued until a PMN count of 10,000/L is achieved, unless a "depot" preparation of G-CSF such as pegfilgrastim is used, where one dose is administered at least 14 days before the next scheduled administration of chemotherapy. Also, patients with myeloid leukemias undergoing induction therapy may have a slight reduction in the duration of neutropenia if G-CSF is commenced after completion of therapy and may be of particular value in elderly patients, but the influence on long-term outcome has not been defined. GM-CSF probably has a more restricted utility than G-CSF, with its use currently limited to patients after autologous bone marrow transplants, although proper head-to-head comparisons with G-CSF have not been conducted in most instances. GM-CSF may be associated with more systemic side effects.

Dangerous degrees of thrombocytopenia do not frequently complicate the management of patients with solid tumors receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy (with the possible exception of certain carboplatin-containing regimens), but they are frequent in patients with certain hematologicneoplasms where marrow is infiltrated with tumor. Severe bleeding related to thrombocytopenia occurs with increased frequency at platelet counts <20,000/L and is very prevalent at counts <5000/L.

The precise "trigger" point at which to transfuse patients is being evaluated in a randomized study. This issue is important not only because of the costs of frequent transfusion, but unnecessary platelet transfusions expose the patient to the risks of allosensitization and loss of value from subsequent transfusion owing to rapid platelet clearance, as well as the infectious and hypersensitivity risks inherent in any transfusion. Prophylactic transfusions to keep platelets >20,000/L are reasonable in patients with leukemia who are stressed by fever or concomitant medical conditions (the threshold for transfusion is 10,000/L in patients with solid tumors and no other bleeding diathesis or physiologic stressors such as fever or hypotension, a level that might also be reasonably considered for leukemia patients who are thrombocytopenic but not stressed or bleeding). In contrast, patients with myeloproliferative states may have functionally altered platelets despite normal platelet counts, and transfusion with normal donor platelets should be considered for evidence of bleeding in these patients. Careful review of medication lists to prevent exposure to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and maintenance of clotting factor levels adequate to support near-normal prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time tests are important in minimizing the risk of bleeding in the thrombocytopenic patient.

Certain cytokines in clinical investigation have shown an ability to increase platelets (e.g., IL-6, IL-1, thrombopoietin), but clinical benefit and safety are not yet proven. IL-11 (oprelvekin) is approved for use in the setting of expected thrombocytopenia, but its effects on platelet counts are small, and it is associated with side effects such as headache, fever, malaise, syncope, cardiac arrhythmias, and fluid retention.

Anemia associated with chemotherapy can be managed by transfusion of packed RBCs. Transfusion is not undertaken until the hemoglobin falls to <80 g/L (8 g/dL) or if compromise of end organ function occurs, or an underlying condition (e.g., coronary artery disease) calls for maintenance of hemoglobin >90 g/L (9 g/dL). Patients who are to receive therapy for >2 months on a "stable" regimen and who are likely to require continuing transfusions are also candidates for erythropoietin (EPO). Randomized trials in certain tumors have raised the possibility that EPO use may promote tumor-related adverse events. This information should be considered in the care of individual patients. In the event EPO treatment is undertaken, maintenance of hemoglobin of 90每100 g/L (9每10 g/dL) should be the target. In the setting of adequate iron stores and serum EPO levels <100 ng/mL, EPO, 150 U three times a week, can produce a slow increase in hemoglobin over about 2 months of administration. Depot formulations can be administered less frequently. It is unclear whether higher hemoglobin levels, up to 110每120 g/L (11每12 g/dL), are associated with improved quality of life to a degree that justifies the more intensive EPO use. Efforts to achieve levels at or above 120 g/L (12 g/dL) have been associated with increased thromboses and mortality rates. EPO may rescue hypoxemic cells from death and contribute to tumor radioresistance.

Nausea and Vomiting

The most common side effect of chemotherapy administration is nausea, with or without vomiting. Nausea may be acute (within 24 h of chemotherapy), delayed (>24 h), or anticipatory of the receipt of chemotherapy. Patients may be likewise stratified for their risk of susceptibility to nausea and vomiting, with increased risk in young, female, heavily pretreated patients without a history of alcohol or drug use but with a history of motion or morning sickness. Antineoplastic agents vary in their capacity to cause nausea and vomiting. Highly emetogenic drugs (>90%) include mechlorethamine, streptozotocin, DTIC, cyclophosphamide at >1500 mg/m2, and cisplatin; moderately emetogenic drugs (30每90% risk) include carboplatin, cytosine arabinoside (>1 mg/m2), ifosfamide, conventional-dose cyclophosphamide, and anthracyclines; low-risk (10每30%) agents include fluorouracil, taxanes, etoposide, and bortezomib, with minimal risk (<10%) afforded by treatment with antibodies, bleomycin, busulfan, fludarabine, and vinca alkaloids. Emesis is a reflex caused by stimulation of the vomiting center in the medulla. Input to the vomiting center comes from the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) and afferents from the peripheral gastrointestinal tract, cerebral cortex, and heart. The different emesis "syndromes" require distinct management approaches. In addition, a conditioned reflex may contribute to anticipatory nausea arising after repeated cycles of chemotherapy. Accordingly, antiemetic agents differ in their locus and timing of action. Combining agents from different classes or the sequential use of different classes of agent is the cornerstone of successful management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Of great importance are the prophylactic administration of agents, and such psychological techniques as the maintenance of a supportive milieu, counseling, and relaxation to augment the action of antiemetic agents.

Serotonin antagonists (5-HT3) and neurokine (NK1) receptor antagonists are useful in "high-risk" chemotherapy regimens. The combination acts at both peripheral gastrointestinal as well as CNS sites that control nausea and vomiting. For example, the 5-HT3 blocker dolasetron (Anzamet), 100 mg intravenously or orally; dexamethasone, 12 mg; and the NK1 antagonist aprepitant, 125 mg orally, are combined on the day of administration of severely emetogenic regimens, with repetition of dexamethasone (8 mg) and aprepitant (80 mg) on days 2 and 3 for delayed nausea. Alternate 5-HT3 antagonists include ondansetron (Zofran), given as 0.15 mg/kg intravenously for three doses just before and at 4 and 8 h after chemotherapy; palonosetron (Aloxi) at 0.25 mg over 30 s, 30 min prechemotherapy; and granisetron (Kytril), given as a single dose of 0.01 mg/kg just before chemotherapy. Emesis from moderately emetic chemotherapy regimens may be prevented with a 5-HT3 antagonist and dexamethasone alone for patients not receiving doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide combinations; the latter combination requires the 5-HT3/dexamethasone/aprepitant on day 1 but aprepitant alone on days 2 and 3. Emesis from low-emetic-risk regimens may be prevented with 8 mg of dexamethasone alone, or with non-5-HT3, non-NK1 antagonist approaches including the following.

Antidopaminergic phenothiazines act directly at the CTZ and include prochlorperazine (Compazine), 10 mg intramuscularly or intravenously, 10每25 mg orally or 25 mg per rectum every 4每6 h for up to four doses; and thiethylperazine (Torecan), 10 mg by potentially all the above routes every 6 h. Haloperidol (Haldol) is a butyrophenone dopamine antagonist given at 1.0 to 1 mg intramuscularly or orally every 8 h. Antihistamines such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) have little intrinsic antiemetic capacity but are frequently given to prevent or treat dystonic reactions that can complicate use of the antidopaminergic agents. Lorazepam (Ativan) is a short-acting benzodiazepine that provides an anxiolytic effect to augment the effectiveness of a variety of agents when used at 1每2 mg intramuscularly, intravenously, or orally every 4每6 h. Metoclopramide (Reglan) acts on peripheral dopamine receptors to augment gastric emptying and is used in high doses for highly emetogenic regimens (1每2 mg/kg intravenously 30 min before chemotherapy and every 2 h for up to three additional doses as needed); intravenous doses of 10每20 mg every 4每6 h as needed or 50 mg orally 4 h before and 8 and 12 h after chemotherapy are used for moderately emetogenic regimens. 5-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (Marinol) is a rather weak antiemetic compared to other available agents, but it may be useful for persisting nausea and is used orally at 10 mg every 3每4 h as needed.

Diarrhea

Regimens that include fluorouracil infusions and/or irinotecan may produce severe diarrhea. Similar to the vomiting syndromes, chemotherapy-induced diarrhea may be immediate or can occur in a delayed fashion up to 48每72 h after the drugs. Careful attention to maintained hydration and electrolyte repletion, intravenously if necessary, along with antimotility treatments such as "high-dose" loperamide, commenced with 4 mg at the first occurrence of diarrhea, with 2 mg repeated every 2 h until 12 h without loose stools, not to exceed a total daily dose of 16 mg. Octreotide (100每150 g), a somatostatin analogue, or opiate-based preparations may be considered for patients not responding to loperamide.

Mucositis

Irritation and inflammation of the mucous membranes particularly afflicting the oral and anal mucosa, but potentially involving the gastrointestinal tract, may accompany cytotoxic chemotherapy. Mucositis is due to damage to the proliferating cells at the base of the mucosal squamous epithelia or in the intestinal crypts. Topical therapies, including anesthetics and barrier-creating preparations, may provide symptomatic relief in mild cases. Palifermin or keratinocyte growth factor, a member of the fibroblast growth factor family, is effective in preventing severe mucositis in the setting of high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation for hematologicmalignancies. It may also prevent or ameliorate mucositis from radiation.

Alopecia

Chemotherapeutic agents vary widely in causing alopecia, with anthracyclines, alkylating agents, and topoisomerase inhibitors reliably causing near-total alopecia when given at therapeutic doses. Antimetabolites are more variably associated with alopecia. Psychological support and the use of cosmetic resources are to be encouraged, and "chemo caps" that reduce scalp temperature to decrease the degree of alopecia should be discouraged, particularly during treatment with curative intent of neoplasms, such as leukemia or lymphoma, or in adjuvant breast cancer therapy. The richly vascularized scalp can certainly harbor micrometastatic or disseminated disease.

Gonadal Dysfunction and Pregnancy

Cessation of ovulation and azoospermia reliably result from alkylating agent每 and topoisomerase poison每containing regimens. The duration of these effects varies with age and sex. Males treated for Hodgkin's disease with mechlorethamine- and procarbazine-containing regimens are effectively sterile, whereas fertility usually returns after regimens that include cisplatin, vinblastine, or etoposide and after bleomycin for testicular cancer. Sperm banking before treatment may be considered to support patients likely to be sterilized by treatment. Females experience amenorrhea with anovulation after alkylating agent therapy; they are likely to recover normal menses if treatment is completed before age 30 but unlikely to recover menses after age 35. Even those who regain menses usually experience premature menopause. As the magnitude and extent of decreased fertility can be difficult to predict, patients should be counseled to maintain effective contraception, preferably by barrier means, during and after therapy. Resumption of efforts to conceive should be considered in the context of the patient's likely prognosis. Hormone replacement therapy should be undertaken in women who do not have a hormonally responsive tumor. For those patients who have had a hormone-sensitive tumor primarily treated by a local modality, conventional practice would counsel against hormone replacement, but this issue is under investigation.

Chemotherapy agents have variable effects on the success of pregnancy. All agents tend to have increased risk of adverse outcomes when administered during the first trimester, and strategies to delay chemotherapy, if possible, until after this milestone should be considered if the pregnancy is to continue to term. Patients in their second or third trimester can be treated with most regimens for the common neoplasms afflicting women in their childbearing years, with the exception of antimetabolites, particularly antifolates, which have notable teratogenic or fetotoxic effects throughout pregnancy. The need for anticancer chemotherapy per se is infrequently a clear basis to recommend termination of a concurrent pregnancy, although each treatment strategy in this circumstance must be tailored to the individual needs of the patient. Chronic effects of cancer treatment are reviewed in Chap. 102.
 
Biologic Therapy

The goal of biologic therapy is to manipulate the host每tumor interaction in favor of the host, potentially at an optimum biologic dose that might be different than an MTD. As a class, biologic therapies may be distinguished from molecularly targeted agents in that many biologic therapies require an active response (e.g., reexpression of silenced genes, or antigen expression) on the part of the tumor cell or on the part of the host (e.g., immunologic effects) to allow therapeutic effect. This may be contrasted with the more narrowly defined antiproliferative or apoptotic response that is the ultimate goal of molecularly targeted agents discussed above. However, there is much commonality in the strategies to evaluate and use molecularly targeted and biologic therapies.

Immune Mediators of Antitumor Effects

Tumors have a variety of means of avoiding the immune system: (1) they are often only subtly different from their normal counterparts; (2) they are capable of downregulating their major histocompatibility complex antigens, effectively masking them from recognition by T cells; (3) they are inefficient at presenting antigens to the immune system; (4) they can cloak themselves in a protective shell of fibrin to minimize contact with surveillance mechanisms; and (5) they can produce a range of soluble molecules, including potential immune targets, that can distract the immune system from recognizing the tumor cell or can kill the immune effector cells. Some of the cell products initially polarize the immune response away from cellular immunity (shifting from TH1 to TH2 responses; Chap. 314) and ultimately lead to defects in T cells that prevent their activation and cytotoxic activity. Cancer treatment further suppresses host immunity. A variety of strategies are being tested to overcome these barriers.

Cell-Mediated Immunity

The strongest evidence that the immune system can exert clinically meaningful antitumor effects comes from allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Adoptively transferred T cells from the donor expand in the tumor-bearing host, recognize the tumor as being foreign, and can mediate impressive antitumor effects (graft-versus-tumor effects). Three types of experimental interventions are being developed to take advantage of the ability of T cells to kill tumor cells.

Allogeneic T cells are transferred to cancer-bearing hosts in three major settings: in the form of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, as pure lymphocyte transfusions following bone marrow recovery after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, and as pure lymphocyte transfusions following immunosuppressive (but not myeloablative) therapy (so-called minitransplants). In each of these settings, the effector cells are donor T cells that recognize the tumor as being foreign, probably through minor histocompatibility differences. The main risk of such therapy is the development of graft-versus-host disease because of the minimal difference between the cancer and the normal host cells. This approach has been highly effective in certain hematologic cancers.

Autologous T cells are removed from the tumor-bearing host, manipulated in several ways in vitro, and given back to the patient. The two major classes of autologous T cell manipulation are (a) to develop tumor antigen每specific T cells and expand them to large numbers over many weeks ex vivo before administration, and (b) to activate the cells with polyclonal stimulators such as anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 after a short period ex vivo and try to expand them in the host after adoptive transfer with stimulation by IL-2, for example. Short periods removed from the patient permit the cells to overcome the tumor-induced T cell defects, and such cells traffic and home to sites of disease better than cells that have been in culture for many weeks.

Tumor vaccines are aimed at boosting T cell immunity. The finding that mutant oncogenes that are expressed only intracellularly can be recognized as targets of T cell killing greatly expanded the possibilities for tumor vaccine development. No longer is it difficult to find something different about tumor cells. However, major difficulties remain in getting the tumor-specific peptides presented in a fashion to prime the T cells. Tumors themselves are very poor at presenting their own antigens to T cells at the first antigen exposure (priming). Priming is best accomplished by professional antigen-presenting cells (dendritic cells). Thus, a number of experimental strategies are aimed at priming host T cells against tumor-associated peptides. Vaccine adjuvants such as GM-CSF appear capable of attracting antigen-presenting cells to a skin site containing a tumor antigen. Such an approach has been documented to eradicate microscopic residual disease in follicular lymphoma and give rise to tumor-specific T cells. Purified antigen-presenting cells can be pulsed with tumor, its membranes, or particular tumor antigens and delivered as a vaccine. One such vaccine, Sipuleucel-T, is approved for use in patients with hormone-independent prostate cancer. In this approach, the patient undergoes leukapheresis, wherein mononuclear cells (that include antigen-presenting cells) are removed from the patient's blood. The cells are pulsed in a laboratory with an antigenic fusion protein comprising a protein frequently expressed by prostate cancer cells, prostate acid phosphatase, fused to GM-CSF, and matured to increase their capacity to present the antigen to immune effector cells. The cells are then returned to the patient, in a well-tolerated treatment. While no objective tumor response was documented, median survival was increased about 4 months. Tumor cells can also be transfected with genes that attract antigen-presenting cells. Vaccines against viruses that cause cancers are safe and effective. Hepatitis B vaccine prevents hepatocellular carcinoma, and a tetravalent human papilloma virus vaccine prevents infection by virus types currently accounting for 70% of cervical cancer. These vaccines are ineffective at treating patients who have developed a virus-induced cancer.

Antibodies

In general, antibodies are not very effective at killing cancer cells. Because the tumor seems to influence the host toward making antibodies rather than generating cellular immunity, it is inferred that antibodies are easier for the tumor to fend off. Many patients can be shown to have serum antibodies directed at their tumors, but these do not appear to influence disease progression. However, the ability to grow very large quantities of high-affinity antibody directed at a tumor by the hybridoma technique has led to the application of antibodies to the treatment of cancer.

Clinical antitumor efficacy has been obtained using antibodies where the antigen-combining regions are grafted onto human immunoglobulin gene products (chimerized or humanized) or derive de novo from mice bearing human immunoglobulin gene loci. Such humanized antibodies against the CD20 molecule expressed on B cell lymphomas (rituximab) and against the HER-2/neu receptor overexpressed on epithelial cancers, especially breast cancer (trastuzumab), have become reliable tools in the oncologist's armamentarium. Each used alone can cause tumor regression (rituximab more than trastuzumab), and both appear to potentiate the effects of combination chemotherapy given just after antibody administration. Antibodies to CD52 are active in chronic lymphoid leukemia and T cell malignancies. EGF-R每directed antibodies (such as cetuximab and panitumumab) have activity in colorectal cancer refractory to chemotherapy, particularly when utilized to augment the activity of an additional chemotherapy program, and in the primary treatment of head and neck cancers treated with radiation therapy. The mechanism of action is unclear. Direct effects on the tumor may mediate an antiproliferative effect as well as stimulate the participation of host mechanisms involving immune cell or complement-mediated response to tumor cell每bound antibody. Alternatively, the antibody may alter the release of paracrine factors promoting tumor cell survival.

The anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab shows little evidence of antitumor effect when used alone, but when combined with chemotherapeutic agents it improves the magnitude of tumor shrinkage and time to disease progression in colorectal, lung, and breast cancer. The mechanism for the effect is unclear and may relate to the capacity of the antibody to alter delivery and tumor uptake of the active chemotherapeutic agent.

Side effects include infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions, usually limited to the first infusion, which can be managed with glucocorticoid and/or antihistamine prophylaxis. In addition, distinct syndromes have emerged with different antibodies. Anti-EGF-R antibodies produce an acneiform rash that poorly responds to steroid cream treatment. Trastuzumab (anti-HER2) can inhibit cardiac function, particularly in those patients with prior exposure to anthracyclines. Bevacizumab has a number of side effects of medical significance, including hypertension, thrombosis, proteinuria, hemorrhage, and gastrointestinal perforations with or without prior surgeries.

Conjugation of antibodies to drugs and toxins is discussed above; conjugates of antibodies with isotopes, photodynamic agents, and other killing moieties may also be effective. Radioconjugates targeting CD20 on lymphomas have been approved for use [ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin), using yttrium-90 or 131I-tositumomab]. Other conjugates are associated with problems that have not yet been solved (e.g., antigenicity, instability, poor tumor penetration).

Cytokines

There are >70 separate proteins and glycoproteins with biologic effects in humans: interferon (IFN) , , ; IL-1 through -29 (so far); the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family [including lymphotoxin, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), CD40 ligand, and others]; and the chemokine family. Only a fraction of these has been tested against cancer; only IFN- and IL-2 are in routine clinical use.

About 20 different genes encode IFN-, and their biologic effects are indistinguishable. Interferon induces the expression of many genes, inhibits protein synthesis, and exerts a number of different effects on diverse cellular processes. The two recombinant forms that are commercially available are IFN-2a and -2b. Interferon is not curative for any tumor but can induce partial responses in follicular lymphoma, hairy cell leukemia, CML, melanoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma. It has been used in the adjuvant setting in stage II melanoma, multiple myeloma, and follicular lymphoma, with uncertain effects on survival. It produces fever, fatigue, a flulike syndrome, malaise, myelosuppression, and depression and can induce clinically significant autoimmune disease.

IL-2 must exert its antitumor effects indirectly through augmentation of immune function. Its biologic activity is to promote the growth and activity of T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. High doses of IL-2 can produce tumor regression in certain patients with metastatic melanoma and renal cell cancer. About 2每5% of patients may experience complete remissions that are durable, unlike any other treatment for these tumors. IL-2 is associated with myriad clinical side effects: intravascular volume depletion, capillary leak syndrome, adult respiratory distress syndrome, hypotension, fever, chills, skin rash, and impaired renal and liver function. Patients may require blood pressure support and intensive care to manage the toxicity. However, once the agent is stopped, most of the toxicities reverse completely within 3每6 days.
 
Gene Therapies

No gene therapy has been approved for routine clinical use. Several strategies are under evaluation, including the use of viruses that cannot replicate to express genes that can allow the action of drugs or directly inhibit cancer cell growth, viruses that can actually replicate but only in the context of the tumor cell, or viruses that can express antigens in the context of the tumor and therefore provoke a host-mediated immune response. Key issues in the success of these approaches will be in defining safe viral vector systems that escape host immune function and effectively target the tumor or tumor cell milieu. Other gene therapy strategies would utilize therapeutic oligonucleotides to target the expression of genes important in the maintenance of tumor cell viability.
 
Acknowledgments

Stephen M. Hahn, MD, and Eli Glatstein, MD, contributed a chapter on radiation therapy in a prior edition, and some of their material has been incorporated into this chapter.
 
Further Readings

American Society of Clinical Oncology: 2006 Update of recommendations for the use of white blood cell growth factors: An evidence-based clinical practice guideline. J Clin Oncol 24:3187, 2006 

 
Chabner ba, Longo DL (eds): Cancer Chemotherapy and Biotherapy: Principles and Practice, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011 

 
Ettinger DS et al: Antiemesis: Clinical practice guidelines in oncology. J Natl Compr Cancer Network 7:572, 2009[PMID: 19460282] 

 
Mcdermott U, Settleman J: Personalized cancer therapy with selective kinase inhibitors: An emerging paradigm in medical oncology. J Clin Oncol 27: 5650, 2009[PMID: 19858389] 

 
Olopade OI et al. Advances in breast cancer: Pathways to personalized medicine. Clin Cancer Res 14: 7988, 2008[PMID: 19088015] 

 
Rizzo JD et al: ASCO special article: Use of epoetin and darbepoetin in patients with cancer: 2007 American Society of Clinical Oncology / American Society of Hematology Clinical Practice Guideline update. J Clin Oncol 26, 132, 2008 

 
 

^^
Infections in Patients with Cancer: Introduction

Infections are a common cause of death and an even more common cause of morbidity in patients with a wide variety of neoplasms. Autopsy studies show that most deaths from acute leukemia and half of deaths from lymphoma are caused directly by infection. With more intensive chemotherapy, patients with solid tumors have also become more likely to die of infection. Fortunately, an evolving approach to prevention and treatment of infectious complications of cancer has decreased infection-associated mortality rates and will probably continue to do so. This accomplishment has resulted from three major steps:

The concept of "early empirical" antibiotics reduced mortality rates among patients with leukemia and bacteremia from 84% in 1965 to 44% in 1972. This dramatic improvement is attributed to early intervention with appropriate antimicrobial therapy.

"Empirical" antifungal therapy has lowered the incidence of disseminated fungal infection; in trial settings, mortality rates now range from 7% to 21%. An antifungal agent is administered〞on the basis of likely fungal infection〞to neutropenic patients who, after 4每7 days of antibiotic therapy, remain febrile but have no positive cultures. In one study, the 7-day survival rate was 85% among patients who had fever and neutropenia as a result of cancer chemotherapy and who required antifungal therapy.

Use of antibiotics for afebrile neutropenic patients as broad-spectrum prophylaxis against infections has decreased both mortality and morbidity even further. The current approach to treatment of severely neutropenic patients (e.g., those receiving high-dose chemotherapy for leukemia or high-grade lymphomas) is based on initial prophylactic therapy at the onset of neutropenia, with subsequent "empirical" antibacterial therapy targeting the organisms whose involvement is likely in light of physical findings (most often fever alone), and finally "empirical" antifungal therapy based on the known likelihood that fungal infection will become a serious issue after 4每7 days of broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy.

A physical predisposition to infection in patients with cancer (Table 86每1) can be a result of the neoplasm's production of a break in the skin. For example, a squamous cell carcinoma may cause local invasion of the epidermis, which allows bacteria to gain access to the subcutaneous tissue and permits the development of cellulitis. The artificial closing of a normally patent orifice can also predispose to infection; for example, obstruction of a ureter by a tumor can cause urinary tract infection, and obstruction of the bile duct can cause cholangitis. Part of the host's normal defense against infection depends on the continuous emptying of a viscus; without emptying, a few bacteria that are present as a result of bacteremia or local transit can multiply and cause disease.

Table 86每1 Disruption of Normal Barriers that May Predispose to Infections in Patients with Cancer

 
 
Type of Defense Specific Lesion Cells Involved Organism Cancer Association Disease 
Physical barrier Breaks in skin Skin epithelial cells Staphylococci, streptococci Head and neck, squamous cell carcinoma Cellulitis, extensive skin infection 
Emptying of fluid collections Occlusion of orifices: ureters, bile duct, colon Luminal epithelial cells Gram-negative bacilli Renal, ovarian, biliary tree, metastatic diseases of many cancers Rapid, overwhelming bacteremia; urinary tract infection 
Lymphatic function Node dissection Lymph nodes Staphylococci, streptococci Breast cancer surgery Cellulitis 
Splenic clearance of microorganisms Splenectomy Splenic reticuloendothelial cells Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Babesia, Capnocytophaga canimorsus  Hodgkin's disease, leukemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Rapid, overwhelming sepsis 
Phagocytosis Lack of granulocytes Granulocytes (neutrophils) Staphylococci, streptococci, enteric organisms, fungi Hairy cell, acute myelocytic, and acute lymphocytic leukemias Bacteremia 
Humoral immunity Lack of antibody B cells S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, N. meningitidis  Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, multiple myeloma Infections with encapsulated organisms, sinusitis, pneumonia 
Cellular immunity Lack of T cells T cells and macrophages Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Listeria, herpesviruses, fungi, intracellular parasites  Hodgkin's disease, leukemia, T cell lymphoma Infections with intracellular bacteria, fungi, parasites 
 

 

A similar problem can affect patients whose lymph node integrity has been disrupted by radical surgery, particularly patients who have had radical node dissections. A common clinical problem following radical mastectomy is the development of cellulitis (usually caused by streptococci or staphylococci) because of lymphedema and/or inadequate lymph drainage. In most cases, this problem can be addressed by local measures designed to prevent fluid accumulation and breaks in the skin, but antibiotic prophylaxis has been necessary in refractory cases.

A life-threatening problem common to many cancer patients is the loss of the reticuloendothelial capacity to clear microorganisms after splenectomy, which may be performed as part of the management of hairy cell leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) and in Hodgkin's disease. Even after curative therapy for the underlying disease, the lack of a spleen predisposes such patients to rapidly fatal infections. The loss of the spleen through trauma similarly predisposes the normal host to overwhelming infection throughout life. The splenectomized patient should be counseled about the risks of infection with certain organisms, such as the protozoan Babesia (Chap. 211) and Capnocytophaga canimorsus, a bacterium carried in the mouths of animals (Chaps. 146 and e24). Since encapsulated bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis) are the organisms most commonly associated with postsplenectomy sepsis, splenectomized persons should be vaccinated (and revaccinated; Table 86每2 and Chap. 122) against the capsular polysaccharides of these organisms. Many clinicians recommend giving splenectomized patients a small supply of antibiotics effective against S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, and H. influenzae to avert rapid, overwhelming sepsis in the event that they cannot present for medical attention immediately after the onset of fever or other signs or symptoms of bacterial infection. A few amoxicillin/clavulanic acid tablets are a reasonable choice for this purpose.

Table 86每2 Vaccination of Cancer Patients Receiving Chemotherapya

 
 
  Use in Indicated Patients 
Vaccine Intensive Chemotherapy Hodgkin's Disease Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation 
Diphtheria-tetanusb  Primary series and boosters as necessary No special recommendation 3 doses given 6每12 months after transplantation 
Poliomyelitisc  Complete primary series and boosters No special recommendation 3 doses given 6每12 months after transplantation 
Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate  Primary series and booster for children Immunization before treatment and booster 3 months afterward 3 doses given 6每12 months after transplantation 
Human papillomavirus 3 doses for girls and women through 26 years of age 3 doses for girls and women through 26 years of age 3 doses for girls and women through 26 years of age 
Hepatitis A As indicated for normal hosts based on occupation and lifestyle As indicated for normal hosts based on occupation and lifestyle As indicated for normal hosts based on occupation and lifestyle 
Hepatitis B Same as for normal hosts As indicated for normal hosts based on occupation and lifestyle 3 doses given 6每12 months after transplantation 
23-Valent pneumococcal polysaccharided  Every 5 years Immunization before treatment and booster 3 months afterward 1 or 2 doses given 6每12 months after transplantation 
4-Valent meningococcal vaccinee  Should be administered to splenectomized patients and patients living in endemic areas, including college

students in dormitories
 Should be administered to splenectomized patients and patients living in endemic areas, including college students in dormitories Should be administered to splenectomized patients and patients living in endemic areas, including college students in dormitories 
Influenza Seasonal immunization Seasonal immunization Seasonal immunization 
Measles/mumps/rubella Contraindicated Contraindicated during chemotherapy After 24 months in patients without graft-versus-host disease 
Varicella-zoster virusf  Contraindicatedg  Contraindicated Contraindicated 
 


aThe latest recommendations by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices and the CDC guidelines can be found at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines.

b The Td (tetanus-diphtheria) combination was recommended for adults. Pertussis vaccine was not recommended for people >6 years of age in the past. However, recent data indicate that the Tdap (tetanus每diphtheria每acellular pertussis) product is both safe and efficacious in adults. A single Tdap booster is now recommended for adults.

cLive-virus vaccine is contraindicated; inactivated vaccine should be used.

dThe 7- and 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccines are currently recommended for children.

eMeningococcal conjugate vaccine (MCV4) is recommended for adults 55 years old and meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine (MPSV4) for those 56 years old.

fIncludes both varicella vaccine for children and zoster vaccine for adults.

gContact the manufacturer for more information on use in children with acute lymphocytic leukemia.
 

The level of suspicion of infections with certain organisms should depend on the type of cancer diagnosed (Table 86每3). Diagnosis of multiple myeloma or CLL should alert the clinician to the possibility of hypogammaglobulinemia. While immunoglobulin replacement therapy can be effective, in most cases prophylactic antibiotics are a cheaper, more convenient method of eliminating bacterial infections in CLL patients with hypogammaglobulinemia. Patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and all cancer patients treated with high-dose glucocorticoids (or glucocorticoid-containing chemotherapy regimens) should receive antibiotic prophylaxis for Pneumocystis infection (Table 86每3) for the duration of their chemotherapy. In addition to exhibiting susceptibility to certain infectious organisms, patients with cancer are likely to manifest their infections in characteristic ways. For example, fever〞generally a sign of infection in normal hosts〞continues to be a reliable indicator in neutropenic patients. In contrast, patients receiving glucocorticoids and agents that impair T cell function and cytokine secretion may have serious infections in the absence of fever. Similarly, neutropenic patients commonly present with cellulitis without purulence and with pneumonia without sputum or even x-ray findings (see below).

Table 86每3 Infections Associated with Specific Types of Cancer

 
 
Cancer Underlying Immune Abnormality Organisms Causing Infection 
Multiple myeloma Hypogammaglobulinemia Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis  
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia Hypogammaglobulinemia S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, N. meningitidis  
Acute myelocytic or lymphocytic leukemia Granulocytopenia, skin and mucous-membrane lesions Extracellular gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, fungi 
Hodgkin's disease Abnormal T cell function Intracellular pathogens (Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Listeria, Salmonella, Cryptococcus, Mycobacterium avium)  
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and acute lymphocytic leukemia Glucocorticoid chemotherapy, T and B cell dysfunction Pneumocystis  
Colon and rectal tumors Local abnormalitiesa  Streptococcus bovis (bacteremia) 
Hairy cell leukemia Abnormal T cell function Intracellular pathogens (M. tuberculosis, Listeria, Cryptococcus, M. avium)  
 


aThe reason for this association is not well defined.
 

The use of monoclonal antibodies that target B and T cells as well as drugs that interfere with lymphocyte signal transduction events is associated with reactivation of latent infections. The use of rituximab, the antibody to CD20 (a B每cell surface protein), is associated with the development of reactivation tuberculosis as well as hepatitis B, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, and other latent infections. Like organ transplant recipients (Chap. 132), patients with positive purified protein derivative tests and underlying viral infection should be carefully monitored for reactivation disease.
 
System-Specific Syndromes

Skin-Specific Syndromes

Skin lesions are common in cancer patients, and the appearance of these lesions may permit the diagnosis of systemic bacterial or fungal infection. While cellulitis caused by skin organisms such as Streptococcus or Staphylococcus is common, neutropenic patients〞i.e., those with <500 functional polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs)/L〞and patients with impaired blood or lymphatic drainage may develop infections with unusual organisms. Innocent-looking macules or papules may be the first sign of bacterial or fungal sepsis in immunocompromised patients (Fig. 86-1). In the neutropenic host, a macule progresses rapidly to ecthyma gangrenosum (Fig. e7-35), a usually painless, round, necrotic lesion consisting of a central black or gray-black eschar with surrounding erythema. Ecthyma gangrenosum, which is located in nonpressure areas (as distinguished from necrotic lesions associated with lack of circulation), is often associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia (Chap. 152) but may be caused by other bacteria.

Figure 86-1

 
 
 
 
A.Papules related toEscherichia coli bacteremia in a neutropenic patient with acute lymphocytic leukemia. B. The same lesion the following day.
 
 

Candidemia (Chap. 203) is also associated with a variety of skin conditions (Fig. e7-38) and commonly presents as a maculopapular rash. Punch biopsy of the skin may be the best method for diagnosis.

Cellulitis, an acute spreading inflammation of the skin, is most often caused by infection with group A Streptococcus or Staphylococcus aureus, virulent organisms normally found on the skin (Chap. 125). Although cellulitis tends to be circumscribed in normal hosts, it may spread rapidly in neutropenic patients. A tiny break in the skin may lead to spreading cellulitis, which is characterized by pain and erythema; in the affected patients, signs of infection (e.g., purulence) are often lacking. What might be a furuncle in a normal host may require amputation because of uncontrolled infection in a patient presenting with leukemia. A dramatic response to an infection that might be trivial in a normal host can mark the first sign of leukemia. Fortunately, granulocytopenic patients are likely to be infected with certain types of organisms (Table 86每4); thus the selection of an antibiotic regimen is somewhat easier than it might otherwise be (see "Antibacterial Therapy," below). It is essential to recognize cellulitis early and to treat it aggressively. Patients who are neutropenic or have previously received antibiotics for other reasons may develop cellulitis with unusual organisms (e.g., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas, or fungi). Early treatment, even of innocent-looking lesions, is essential to prevent necrosis and loss of tissue. Debridement to prevent spread may sometimes be necessary early in the course of disease, but it can often be performed after chemotherapy, when the PMN count increases.

Table 86每4 Organisms Likely to Cause Infections in Granulocytopenic Patients

 
 
Gram-positive cocci

   Staphylococcus epidermidis Staphylococcus aureus

   Viridans Streptococcus

   Enterococcus faecalis

   Streptococcus pneumoniae

Gram-negative bacilli

   Escherichia coli

   Klebsiella spp.

   Pseudomonas aeruginosa

   Non-aeruginosa Pseudomonas spp.a
    Enterobacter spp.

   Serratia spp.

   Acinetobacter spp.a

   Citrobacter spp.

Gram-positive bacilli

   Diphtheroids

   JK bacillusa

Fungi

   Candida spp.

   Aspergillus spp.
 
 


aOften associated with intravenous catheters.
 

Sweet's syndrome, or febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, was originally described in women with elevated white blood cell (WBC) counts. The disease is characterized by the presence of leukocytes in the lower dermis, with edema of the papillary body. Ironically, this disease now is usually seen in neutropenic patients with cancer, most often in association with acute leukemia but also in association with a variety of other malignancies. Sweet's syndrome usually presents as red or bluish-red papules or nodules that may coalesce and form sharply bordered plaques (Fig. e7-41). The edema may suggest vesicles, but on palpation the lesions are solid, and vesicles probably never arise in this disease. The lesions are most common on the face, neck, and arms. On the legs, they may be confused with erythema nodosum (Fig. e7-40). The development of lesions is often accompanied by high fevers and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Both the lesions and the temperature elevation respond dramatically to glucocorticoid administration. Treatment begins with high doses of glucocorticoids (60 mg/d of prednisone) followed by tapered doses over the next 2每3 weeks.

Data indicate that erythema multiforme (Fig. e7-25) with mucous membrane involvement is often associated with herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection and is distinct from Stevens-Johnson syndrome, which is associated with drugs and tends to have a more widespread distribution. Since cancer patients are both immunosuppressed [and therefore susceptible to herpes infections) and heavily treated with drugs and therefore subject to Stevens-Johnson syndrome (Fig. e12-4)], both of these conditions are common in this population.

Cytokines, which are used as adjuvants or primary treatments for cancer, can themselves cause characteristic rashes, further complicating the differential diagnosis. This phenomenon is a particular problem in bone marrow transplant recipients (Chap. 132), who, in addition to having the usual chemotherapy-, antibiotic-, and cytokine-induced rashes, are plagued by graft-versus-host disease.

Catheter-Related Infections

Because IV catheters are commonly used in cancer chemotherapy and are prone to infection (Chap. 131), they pose a major problem in the care of patients with cancer. Some catheter-associated infections can be treated with antibiotics, while in others the catheter must be removed (Table 86每5). If the patient has a "tunneled" catheter (which consists of an entrance site, a subcutaneous tunnel, and an exit site), a red streak over the subcutaneous part of the line (the tunnel) is grounds for immediate device removal. Failure to remove catheters under these circumstances may result in extensive cellulitis and tissue necrosis.

Table 86每5 Approach to Catheter Infections in Immunocompromised Patients

 
 
Clinical Presentation Catheter Removal Antibiotics Comments 
Evidence of Infection, Negative Blood Cultures  
Exit-site erythema Not necessary if infection responds to treatment Usually begin treatment for gram-positive cocci. Coagulase-negative staphylococci are most common. 
Tunnel-site erythema Required Treat for gram-positive cocci pending culture results. Failure to remove the catheter may lead to complications. 
Blood Culture每Positive Infections  
Coagulase-negative staphylococci Line removal optimal but may be unnecessary if patient is clinically stable and responds to antibiotics Usually start with vancomycin. (Linezolid, quinupristin/dalfopristin, and daptomycin are all appropriate.) If there are no contraindications to line removal, this course of action is optimal. If the line is removed, antibiotics may not be necessary. 
Other gram-positive cocci (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus); gram-positive rods (Bacillus, Corynebacterium spp.)  Recommended Treat with antibiotics to which the organism is sensitive, with duration based on the clinical setting. The incidence of metastatic infections following S.aureus infection and the difficulty of treating enterococcal infection make line removal the recommended course of action. In addition, gram-positive rods do not respond readily to antibiotics alone.  
Gram-negative bacteria Recommended Use an agent to which the organism is shown to be sensitive. Organisms like Stenotrophomonas, Pseudomonas, and Burkholderia are notoriously hard to treat.  
Fungi Recommended 〞 Fungal infections of catheters are extremely difficult to treat. 
 

 

More common than tunnel infections are exit-site infections, often with erythema around the area where the line penetrates the skin. Most authorities (Chap. 135) recommend treatment (usually with vancomycin) for an exit-site infection caused by coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. Treatment of coagulase-positive staphylococcal infection is associated with a poorer outcome, and it is advisable to remove the catheter if possible. Similarly, many clinicians remove catheters associated with infections due to P. aeruginosa and Candida species, since such infections are difficult to treat and bloodstream infections with these organisms are likely to be deadly. Catheter infections caused by Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas spp., Agrobacterium spp., and Acinetobacter baumannii as well as Pseudomonas spp. other than aeruginosa are likely to be very difficult to eradicate with antibiotics alone. Similarly, isolation of Bacillus, Corynebacterium, and Mycobacterium spp. should prompt removal of the catheter.

Gastrointestinal Tract每Specific Syndromes

Upper Gastrointestinal Tract Disease

Infections of the Mouth

The oral cavity is rich in aerobic and anaerobic bacteria (Chap. 164) that normally live in a commensal relationship with the host. The antimetabolic effects of chemotherapy cause a breakdown of host defenses, leading to ulceration of the mouth and the potential for invasion by resident bacteria. Mouth ulcerations afflict most patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy and have been associated with viridans streptococcal bacteremia. Candida infections of the mouth are very common. Fluconazole is clearly effective in the treatment of both local infections (thrush) and systemic infections (esophagitis) due to Candida albicans. Other azoles (e.g., voriconazole) as well as echinocandins offer similar efficacy as well as activity against the fluconazole-resistant organisms that are associated with extensive fluconazole treatment (Chap. 203).

Noma (cancrum oris), commonly seen in malnourished children, is a penetrating disease of the soft and hard tissues of the mouth and adjacent sites, with resulting necrosis and gangrene. It has a counterpart in immunocompromised patients and is thought to be due to invasion of the tissues by Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, and other normal inhabitants of the mouth. Noma is associated with debility, poor oral hygiene, and immunosuppression.

Viruses, particularly HSV, are a prominent cause of morbidity in immunocompromised patients, in whom they are associated with severe mucositis. The use of acyclovir, either prophylactically or therapeutically, is of value.

Esophageal Infections

The differential diagnosis of esophagitis (usually presenting as substernal chest pain upon swallowing) includes herpes simplex and candidiasis, both of which are readily treatable.

Lower Gastrointestinal Tract Disease

Hepatic candidiasis (Chap. 203) results from seeding of the liver (usually from a gastrointestinal source) in neutropenic patients. It is most common among patients being treated for acute leukemia and usually presents symptomatically around the time the neutropenia resolves. The characteristic picture is that of persistent fever unresponsive to antibiotics, abdominal pain and tenderness or nausea, and elevated serum levels of alkaline phosphatase in a patient with hematologicmalignancy who has recently recovered from neutropenia. The diagnosis of this disease (which may present in an indolent manner and persist for several months) is based on the finding of yeasts or pseudohyphae in granulomatous lesions. Hepatic ultrasound or CT may reveal bull's-eye lesions. In some cases, MRI reveals small lesions not visible by other imaging modalities. The pathology (a granulomatous response) and the timing (with resolution of neutropenia and an elevation in granulocyte count) suggest that the host response to Candida is an important component of the manifestations of disease. In many cases, although organisms are visible, cultures of biopsied material may be negative. The designation hepatosplenic candidiasis or hepatic candidiasis is a misnomer because the disease often involves the kidneys and other tissues; the term chronic disseminated candidiasis may be more appropriate. Because of the risk of bleeding with liver biopsy, diagnosis is often based on imaging studies (MRI, CT). Treatment should be directed to the causative agent (usually C.albicans but sometimes C. tropicalis or other less common Candida spp).

Typhlitis

Typhlitis (also referred to as necrotizing colitis, neutropenic colitis, necrotizing enteropathy, ileocecal syndrome, and cecitis) is a clinical syndrome of fever and right-lower-quadrant tenderness in an immunosuppressed host. This syndrome is classically seen in neutropenic patients after chemotherapy with cytotoxic drugs. It may be more common among children than among adults and appears to be much more common among patients with acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) or ALL than among those with other types of cancer; a similar syndrome has been reported in patients infected with HIV type 1. Physical examination reveals right-lower-quadrant tenderness, with or without rebound tenderness. Associated diarrhea (often bloody) is common, and the diagnosis can be confirmed by the finding of a thickened cecal wall on CT, MRI, or ultrasonography. Plain films may reveal a right-lower-quadrant mass, but CT with contrast or MRI is a much more sensitive means of diagnosis. Although surgery is sometimes attempted to avoid perforation from ischemia, most cases resolve with medical therapy alone. The disease is sometimes associated with positive blood cultures (which usually yield aerobic gram-negative bacilli), and therapy is recommended for a broad spectrum of bacteria (particularly gram-negative bacilli, which are likely to be found in the bowel flora). Surgery is indicated in the case of perforation.

Clostridium Difficile每Induced Diarrhea

Patients with cancer are predisposed to the development of C. difficile diarrhea (Chap. 129) as a consequence of chemotherapy alone. Thus, they may have positive toxin tests before receiving antibiotics. Obviously, such patients are also subject to C. difficile每induced diarrhea as a result of antibiotic pressure. C. difficile should always be considered as a possible cause of diarrhea in cancer patients who have received antibiotics.

Central Nervous System每Specific Syndromes

Meningitis

The presentation of meningitis in patients with lymphoma or CLL, patients receiving chemotherapy (particularly with glucocorticoids) for solid tumors, and patients who have received bone marrow transplants suggests a diagnosis of cryptococcal or listerial infection. As noted previously, splenectomized patients are susceptible to rapid, overwhelming infection with encapsulated bacteria (including S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and N. meningitidis). Similarly, patients who are antibody-deficient (e.g., those with CLL, those who have received intensive chemotherapy, or those who have undergone bone marrow transplantation) are likely to have infections caused by these bacteria. Other cancer patients, however, because of their defective cellular immunity, are likely to be infected with other pathogens (Table 86每3).

Encephalitis

The spectrum of disease resulting from viral encephalitis is expanded in immunocompromised patients. A predisposition to infections with intracellular organisms similar to those encountered in patients with AIDS (Chap. 189) is seen in cancer patients receiving (1) high-dose cytotoxic chemotherapy, (2) chemotherapy affecting T cell function (e.g., fludarabine), or (3) antibodies that eliminate T cells (e.g., anti-CD3, alemtuzumab, anti-CD52) or cytokine activity (anti-tumor necrosis factor agents or interleukin 1 receptor antagonists). Infection with varicella-zoster virus (VZV) has been associated with encephalitis that may be caused by VZV-related vasculitis. Chronic viral infections may also be associated with dementia and encephalitic presentations, and a diagnosis of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (Chap. 381) should be considered when a patient who has received chemotherapy presents with dementia (Table 86每6). Other abnormalities of the central nervous system (CNS) that may be confused with infection include normal-pressure hydrocephalus and vasculitis resulting from CNS irradiation. It may be possible to differentiate these conditions by MRI.

Table 86每6 Differential Diagnosis of Central Nervous System Infections in Patients with Cancer

 
 
  Underlying Predisposition 
Findings on CT or MRI Prolonged Neutropenia Defects in Cellular Immunitya  
Mass lesions Aspergillus, Nocardia, or

Cryptococcus brain abscess
 Toxoplasmosis

EBV-LPD
 
Diffuse encephalitis PML (JC virus) Infection with VZV, CMV, HSV, HHV-6,

JC virus (PML),

Listeria
 
 


aHigh-dose glucocorticoid therapy, cytotoxic chemotherapy. Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV-LPD, Epstein-Barr virus lymphoproliferative disease; HHV-6, human herpesvirus type 6; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
 

Brain Masses

Mass lesions of the brain most often present as headache with or without fever or neurologic abnormalities. Infections associated with mass lesions may be caused by bacteria (particularly Nocardia), fungi (particularly Cryptococcus or Aspergillus), or parasites (Toxoplasma). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)每associated lymphoproliferative disease may also present as single or multiple mass lesions of the brain. A biopsy may be required for a definitive diagnosis.

Pulmonary Infections

Pneumonia (Chap. 257) in immunocompromised patients may be difficult to diagnose because conventional methods of diagnosis depend on the presence of neutrophils. Bacterial pneumonia in neutropenic patients may present without purulent sputum〞or, in fact, without any sputum at all〞and may not produce physical findings suggestive of chest consolidation (rales or egophony).

In granulocytopenic patients with persistent or recurrent fever, the chest x-ray pattern may help to localize an infection and thus to determine which investigative tests and procedures should be undertaken and which therapeutic options should be considered (Table 86每7). In this setting, a simple chest x-ray is a screening tool; because the impaired host response results in less evidence of consolidation or infiltration, high-resolution CT is recommended for the diagnosis of pulmonary infections. The difficulties encountered in the management of pulmonary infiltrates relate in part to the difficulties of performing diagnostic procedures on the patients involved. When platelet counts can be increased to adequate levels by transfusion, microscopic and microbiologic evaluation of the fluid obtained by endoscopic bronchial lavage is often diagnostic. Lavage fluid should be cultured for Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, Legionella, Nocardia, more common bacterial pathogens, and fungi. In addition, the possibility of Pneumocystis pneumonia should be considered, especially in patients with ALL or lymphoma who have not received prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). The characteristics of the infiltrate may be helpful in decisions about further diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers. Nodular infiltrates suggest fungal pneumonia (e.g., that caused by Aspergillus or Mucor). Such lesions may best be approached by visualized biopsy procedures.

Table 86每7 Differential Diagnosis of Chest Infiltrates in Immunocompromised Patients

 
 
  Cause of Pneumonia 
Infiltrate Infectious Noninfectious 
Localized Bacteria (including Legionella, mycobacteria)  Local hemorrhage or embolism, tumor 
Nodular Fungi (e.g., Aspergillus or Mucor), Nocardia  Recurrent tumor 
Diffuse Viruses (especially CMV), Chlamydia, Pneumocystis, Toxoplasma gondii, mycobacteria  Congestive heart failure, radiation pneumonitis, drug-induced lung injury, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (described after BMT) 
 


Abbreviations: BMT, bone marrow transplantation; CMV, cytomegalovirus.
 

Aspergillus species (Chap. 204) can colonize the skin and respiratory tract or cause fatal systemic illness. Although this fungus may cause aspergillomas in a previously existing cavity or may produce allergic bronchopulmonary disease, the major problem posed by this genus in neutropenic patients is invasive disease due to A. fumigatus or A. flavus. The organisms enter the host following colonization of the respiratory tract, with subsequent invasion of blood vessels. The disease is likely to present as a thrombotic or embolic event because of this ability of the fungi to invade blood vessels. The risk of infection with Aspergillus correlates directly with the duration of neutropenia. In prolonged neutropenia, positive surveillance cultures for nasopharyngeal colonization with Aspergillus may predict the development of disease.

Patients with Aspergillus infection often present with pleuritic chest pain and fever, which are sometimes accompanied by cough. Hemoptysis may be an ominous sign. Chest x-rays may reveal new focal infiltrates or nodules. Chest CT may reveal a characteristic halo consisting of a mass-like infiltrate surrounded by an area of low attenuation. The presence of a "crescent sign" on chest x-ray or chest CT, in which the mass progresses to central cavitation, is characteristic of invasive Aspergillus infection but may develop as the lesions are resolving.

In addition to causing pulmonary disease, Aspergillus may invade through the nose or palate, with deep sinus penetration. The appearance of a discolored area in the nasal passages or on the hard palate should prompt a search for invasive Aspergillus. This situation is likely to require surgical debridement. Catheter infections with Aspergillus usually require both removal of the catheter and antifungal therapy.

Diffuse interstitial infiltrates suggest viral, parasitic, or Pneumocystis pneumonia. If the patient has a diffuse interstitial pattern on chest x-ray, it may be reasonable, while considering invasive diagnostic procedures, to institute empirical treatment for Pneumocystis with TMP-SMX and for Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, and Legionella with a quinolone or an erythromycin derivative (e.g., azithromycin). Noninvasive procedures, such as staining of sputum smears for Pneumocystis, serum cryptococcal antigen tests, and urine testing for Legionella antigen, may be helpful. Serum galactomannan and -d-glucan tests may be helpful in diagnosing Aspergillus infection, but their utility is limited by their lack of sensitivity. In transplant recipients who are seropositive for CMV, a determination of CMV load in the serum should be considered. Viral load studies (which allow physicians to quantitate viruses) have superseded simple measurement of serum IgG, which merely documents prior exposure to virus. Infections with viruses that cause only upper respiratory symptoms in immunocompetent hosts, such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza viruses, and parainfluenza viruses, may be associated with fatal pneumonitis in immunocompromised hosts. Polymerase chain reaction testing now allows rapid diagnosis of viral pneumonia, which can lead to treatment in some cases (e.g., influenza).

Bleomycin is the most common cause of chemotherapy-induced lung disease. Other causes include alkylating agents (such as cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and melphalan), nitrosoureas [carmustine (BCNU), lomustine (CCNU), and methyl-CCNU], busulfan, procarbazine, methotrexate, and hydroxyurea. Both infectious and noninfectious (drug- and/or radiation-induced) pneumonitis can cause fever and abnormalities on chest x-ray; thus, the differential diagnosis of an infiltrate in a patient receiving chemotherapy encompasses a broad range of conditions (Table 86每7). The treatment of radiation pneumonitis (which may respond dramatically to glucocorticoids) or drug-induced pneumonitis is different from that of infectious pneumonia, and a biopsy may be important in the diagnosis. Unfortunately, no definitive diagnosis can be made in 30% of cases, even after bronchoscopy.

Open-lung biopsy is the gold standard of diagnostic techniques. Biopsy via a visualized thoracostomy can replace an open procedure in many cases. When a biopsy cannot be performed, empirical treatment can be undertaken; a quinolone or an erythromycin derivative (azithromycin) and TMP-SMX are used in the case of diffuse infiltrates, and an antifungal agent is administered in the case of nodular infiltrates. The risks should be weighed carefully in these cases. If inappropriate drugs are administered, empirical treatment may prove toxic or ineffective; either of these outcomes may be riskier than biopsy.

Cardiovascular Infections

Patients with Hodgkin's disease are prone to persistent infections by Salmonella, sometimes (and particularly often in elderly patients) affecting a vascular site. The use of IV catheters deliberately lodged in the right atrium is associated with a high incidence of bacterial endocarditis, presumably related to valve damage followed by bacteremia. Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis has been described in association with a variety of malignancies (most often solid tumors) and may follow bone marrow transplantation as well. The presentation of an embolic event with a new cardiac murmur suggests this diagnosis. Blood cultures are negative in this disease of unknown pathogenesis.

Endocrine Syndromes

Infections of the endocrine system have been described in immunocompromised patients. Candida infection of the thyroid may be difficult to diagnose during the neutropenic period. It can be defined by indium-labeled WBC scans or gallium scans after neutrophil counts increase. CMV infection can cause adrenalitis with or without resulting adrenal insufficiency. The presentation of a sudden endocrine anomaly in an immunocompromised patient may be a sign of infection in the involved end organ.

Musculoskeletal Infections

Infection that is a consequence of vascular compromise, resulting in gangrene, can occur when a tumor restricts the blood supply to muscles, bones, or joints. The process of diagnosis and treatment of such infection is similar to that in normal hosts, with the following caveats:

In terms of diagnosis, a lack of physical findings resulting from a lack of granulocytes in the granulocytopenic patient should make the clinician more aggressive in obtaining tissue rather than relying on physical signs.

In terms of therapy, aggressive debridement of infected tissues may be required, but it is usually difficult to operate on patients who have recently received chemotherapy, both because of a lack of platelets (which results in bleeding complications) and because of a lack of WBCs (which may lead to secondary infection). A blood culture positive for Clostridium perfringens〞an organism commonly associated with gas gangrene〞can have a number of meanings (Chap. 142). Bloodstream infections with intestinal organisms such as Streptococcus bovis and C. perfringens may arise spontaneously from lower gastrointestinal lesions (tumor or polyps); alternatively, these lesions may be harbingers of invasive disease. The clinical setting must be considered in order to define the appropriate treatment for each case.

Renal and Ureteral Infections

Infections of the urinary tract are common among patients whose ureteral excretion is compromised (Table 86每1). Candida, which has a predilection for the kidney, can invade either from the bloodstream or in a retrograde manner (via the ureters or bladder) in immunocompromised patients. The presence of "fungus balls" or persistent candiduria suggests invasive disease. Persistent funguria (with Aspergillus as well as Candida) should prompt a search for a nidus of infection in the kidney.

Certain viruses are typically seen only in immunosuppressed patients. BK virus (polyomavirus hominis 1) has been documented in the urine of bone marrow transplant recipients and, like adenovirus, may be associated with hemorrhagic cystitis. BK-induced cystitis usually remits with decreasing immunosuppression. Anecdotal reports have described the treatment of infections due to adenovirus and BK virus with cidofovir.
 
Abnormalities that Predispose to Infection

(Table 86每1)

The Lymphoid System

It is beyond the scope of this chapter to detail how all the immunologic abnormalities that result from cancer or from chemotherapy for cancer lead to infections. Disorders of the immune system are discussed in other sections of this book. As has been noted, patients with antibody deficiency are predisposed to overwhelming infection with encapsulated bacteria (including S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and N. meningitidis). Infections that result from the lack of a functional cellular immune system are described in Chap. 189. It is worth mentioning, however, that patients undergoing intensive chemotherapy for any form of cancer will have not only defects due to granulocytopenia but also lymphocyte dysfunction, which may be profound. Thus, these patients〞especially those receiving glucocorticoid-containing regimens or drugs that inhibit either T cell activation (calcineurin inhibitors or drugs like fludarabine, which affect lymphocyte function) or cytokine induction〞should be given prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia.

The Hematopoietic System

Initial studies in the 1960s revealed a dramatic increase in the incidence of infections (fatal and nonfatal) among cancer patients with a granulocyte count of <500/L. The use of prophylactic antibacterial agents has reduced the number of bacterial infections, but 35每78% of febrile neutropenic patients being treated for hematologicmalignancies develop infections at some time during chemotherapy. Aerobic pathogens (both gram-positive and gram-negative) predominate in all series, but the exact organisms isolated vary from center to center. Infections with anaerobic organisms are uncommon. Geographic patterns affect the types of fungi isolated. Tuberculosis and malaria are common causes of fever in the developing world and may present in this setting as well.

Neutropenic patients are unusually susceptible to infection with a wide variety of bacteria; thus, antibiotic therapy should be initiated promptly to cover likely pathogens if infection is suspected. Indeed, early initiation of antibacterial agents is mandatory to prevent deaths. Like most immunocompromised patients, neutropenic patients are threatened by their own microbial flora, including gram-positive and gram-negative organisms found commonly on the skin and in the bowel (Table 86每4). Because treatment with narrow-spectrum agents leads to infection with organisms not covered by the antibiotics used, the initial regimen should target all pathogens likely to be initial causes of bacterial infection in neutropenic hosts. As noted in the algorithm shown in Fig. 86-2, administration of antimicrobial agents is routinely continued until neutropenia resolves〞i.e., the granulocyte count is sustained above 500/L for at least 2 days. In some cases, patients remain febrile after resolution of neutropenia. In these instances, the risk of sudden death from overwhelming bacteremia is greatly reduced, and the following diagnoses should be seriously considered: (1) fungal infection, (2) bacterial abscesses or undrained foci of infection, and (3) drug fever (including reactions to antimicrobial agents as well as to chemotherapy or cytokines). In the proper setting, viral infection or graft-versus-host disease should be considered. In clinical practice, antibacterial therapy is usually discontinued when the patient is no longer neutropenic and all evidence of bacterial disease has been eliminated. Antifungal agents are then discontinued if there is no evidence of fungal disease. If the patient remains febrile, a search for viral diseases or unusual pathogens is conducted while unnecessary cytokines and other drugs are systematically eliminated from the regimen.

Figure 86-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for the diagnosis and treatment of febrile -neutropenic patients.
 
 

Treatment: Infections in Cancer Patients

Antibacterial Therapy

Hundreds of antibacterial regimens have been tested for use in patients with cancer. The major risk of infection is related to the degree of neutropenia seen as a consequence of either the disease or the therapy. Many of the relevant studies have involved small populations in which the outcomes have generally been good, and most have lacked the statistical power to detect differences among the regimens studied. Each febrile neutropenic patient should be approached as a unique problem, with particular attention given to previous infections and recent antibiotic exposures. Several general guidelines are useful in the initial treatment of neutropenic patients with fever (Fig. 86-2):

In the initial regimen, it is necessary to use antibiotics active against both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria (Table 86每4).

Monotherapy with an aminoglycoside or an antibiotic without good activity against gram-positive organisms (e.g., ciprofloxacin or aztreonam) is not adequate in this setting.

The agents used should reflect both the epidemiology and the antibiotic resistance pattern of the hospital.

If the pattern of resistance justifies its use, a single third-generation cephalosporin constitutes an appropriate initial regimen in many hospitals.

Most standard regimens are designed for patients who have not previously received prophylactic antibiotics. The development of fever in a patient who has received antibiotics affects the choice of subsequent therapy, which should target resistant organisms and organisms known to cause infections in patients being treated with the antibiotics already administered.

Randomized trials have indicated the safety of oral antibiotic regimens in the treatment of "low-risk" patients with fever and neutropenia. Outpatients who are expected to remain neutropenic for <10 days and who have no concurrent medical problems (such as hypotension, pulmonary compromise, or abdominal pain) can be classified as low risk and treated with a broad-spectrum oral regimen.

Several large-scale studies indicate that prophylaxis with a fluoroquinolone (ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin) decreases morbidity and mortality rates among afebrile patients who are anticipated to have neutropenia of long duration.

The initial antibacterial regimen should be refined on the basis of culture results (Fig. 86-2). Blood cultures are the most relevant on which to base therapy; surface cultures of skin and mucous membranes may be misleading. In the case of gram-positive bacteremia or another gram-positive infection, it is important that the antibiotic be optimal for the organism isolated. Although it is not desirable to leave the patient unprotected, the addition of more and more antibacterial agents to the regimen is not appropriate unless there is a clinical or microbiologic reason to do so. Planned progressive therapy (the serial, empirical addition of one drug after another without culture data) is not efficacious in most settings and may have unfortunate consequences. Simply adding another antibiotic for fear that a gram-negative infection is present is a dubious practice. The synergy exhibited by -lactams and aminoglycosides against certain gram-negative organisms (especially P. aeruginosa) provides the rationale for using two antibiotics in this setting, but recent analyses suggest that efficacy is not enhanced by the addition of aminoglycosides, while toxicity may be increased. Mere "double coverage," with the addition of a quinolone or another antibiotic that is not likely to exhibit synergy, has not been shown to be of benefit and may cause additional toxicities and side effects. Cephalosporins can cause bone marrow suppression, and vancomycin is associated with neutropenia in some healthy individuals. Furthermore, the addition of multiple cephalosporins may induce -lactamase production by some organisms; cephalosporins and double -lactam combinations should probably be avoided altogether in Enterobacter infections.

Antifungal Therapy

Fungal infections in cancer patients are most often associated with neutropenia. Neutropenic patients are predisposed to the development of invasive fungal infections, most commonly those due to Candida and Aspergillus species and occasionally those caused by Fusarium, Trichosporon, and Bipolaris. Cryptococcal infection, which is common among patients taking immunosuppressive agents, is uncommon among neutropenic patients receiving chemotherapy for AML. Invasive candidal disease is usually caused by C. albicans or C. tropicalis but can be caused by C. krusei, C. parapsilosis, and C. glabrata.

For decades it has been common clinical practice to add amphotericin B to antibacterial regimens if a neutropenic patient remains febrile despite 4每7 days of treatment with antibacterial agents. The rationale for this empirical addition is that it is difficult to culture fungi before they cause disseminated disease and that mortality rates from disseminated fungal infections in granulocytopenic patients are high. Before the introduction of newer azoles into clinical practice, amphotericin B was the mainstay of antifungal therapy. The insolubility of amphotericin B has resulted in the marketing of several lipid formulations that are less toxic than the amphotericin B deoxycholate complex. Echinocandins (e.g., caspofungin) are useful in the treatment of infections caused by azole-resistant Candida as well as in therapy for aspergillosis and have been shown to be equivalent to liposomal amphotericin B for the empirical treatment of patients with prolonged fever and neutropenia. Newer azoles have also been demonstrated to be effective in this setting. Although fluconazole is efficacious in the treatment of infections due to many Candida spp., its use against serious fungal infections in immunocompromised patients is limited by its narrow spectrum: it has no activity against Aspergillus or against several non-albicansCandida spp. The broad-spectrum azoles (e.g., voriconazole and posaconazole) provide another option for the treatment of Aspergillus infection (Chap. 204), including CNS infection, in which amphotericin B has usually failed. Clinicians should be aware that the spectrum of each azole is somewhat different and that no drug can be assumed to be efficacious against all fungi. For example, while voriconazole is active against Pseudallescheria boydii, amphotericin B is not; however, voriconazole has no activity against Mucor. Posaconazole, which is administered orally, is useful as a prophylactic agent in patients with prolonged neutropenia. Studies in progress are assessing the use of these agents in combinations. For a full discussion of antifungal therapy, see Chap. 198.

Antiviral Therapy

The availability of a variety of agents active against herpes-group viruses, including some new agents with a broader spectrum of activity, has heightened focus on the treatment of viral infections, which pose a major problem in cancer patients. Viral diseases caused by the herpes group are prominent. Serious (and sometimes fatal) infections due to HSV and CMV are well documented, and VZV infections may be fatal to patients receiving chemotherapy. The roles of human herpesvirus (HHV)-6, HHV-7, and HHV-8 (Kaposi's sarcoma每associated herpesvirus) in cancer patients are still being defined (Chap. 182). While clinical experience is most extensive with acyclovir, which can be used therapeutically or prophylactically, a number of derivative drugs offer advantages over this agent (Table 86每8).

Table 86每8 Antiviral Agents Active Against Herpesviruses

 
 
Agent Description Spectrum Toxicity Other Issues 
Acyclovir Inhibits HSV

polymerase
 HSV, VZV (㊣ CMV, EBV) Rarely has side effects; crystalluria can occur at high doses Long history of safety; original antiviral agent 
Famciclovir Prodrug of penciclovir (a guanosine analogue) HSV, VZV (㊣ CMV) Associated with cancerin rats Longer effective half-life than acyclovir 
Valacyclovir Prodrug of acyclovir; better absorption HSV, VZV (㊣ CMV) Associated with thrombotic microangiopathy in one study of immunocompromised patients Better oral absorption and longer effective half-life than acyclovir; can be given as a single daily dose for prophylaxis 
Ganciclovir More potent polymerase inhibitor; more toxic than acyclovir HSV, VZV, CMV, HHV-6 Bone marrow suppression Neutropenia may respond to G-CSF or GM-CSF 
Valganciclovir Prodrug of ganciclovir; better absorption HSV, VZV, CMV, HHV-6 Bone marrow suppression 〞 
Cidofovir Nucleotide analogue of cytosine HSV, VZV, CMV; good in vitro activity against adenovirus and others Nephrotoxic marrow suppression Given IV once a week 
Foscarnet Phosphonoformic acid; inhibits viral

DNA polymerase
 HSV, VZV, CMV, HHV-6 Nephrotoxic; electrolyte abnormalities common IV only 
 


Abbreviations: ㊣, agent has some activity but not enough for the treatment of infections; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
 

In addition to the herpes group, several respiratory viruses (especially RSV) may cause serious disease in cancer patients. While influenza vaccination is recommended (see below), it may be ineffective in this patient population. The availability of antiviral drugs with activity against influenza viruses gives the clinician additional options for the treatment of these patients (Table 86每9).

Table 86每9 Other Antiviral Agents Useful in the Treatment of Infections in Cancer Patients

 
 
Agent Description Spectrum Toxicity Other Issues 
Amantadine, rimantadine Interfere with uncoating Influenza A only 5每10% fewer CNS effects with rimantadine May be given prophylactically 
Zanamivir Neuraminidase inhibitor Influenza A and B Usually well tolerated Inhalation only 
Oseltamivir Neuraminidase inhibitor Influenza A and B Usually well tolerated PO dosing 
Pleconaril Blocks enterovirus binding and uncoating 90% of enteroviruses, 80% of rhinoviruses Generally well tolerated Decreases duration of meningitis; available for compassionate use only 
Interferons Cytokines with broad spectrum of activity Used locally for warts, systemically for hepatitis Fever, myalgias, bone marrow suppression Not shown to be helpful in CMV infection; use limited by toxicity 
Ribavirin Purine analogue (precise mechanism of action unknown) Broad theoretical spectrum; documented use against RSV, Lassa fever virus, and hepatitis viruses (with interferon) IV form causes anemia Given by aerosol for RSV infection (efficacy in doubt); approved for use in children with heart/lung disease; given with interferon for hepatitis C 
 


Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.
 

Other Therapeutic Modalities

Another way to address the problems of the febrile neutropenic patient is to replenish the neutrophil population. Although granulocyte transfusions are effective in the treatment of refractory gram-negative bacteremia, they do not have a documented role in prophylaxis. Because of the expense, the risk of leukoagglutinin reactions (which has probably been decreased by improved cell-separation procedures), and the risk of transmission of CMV from unscreened donors (which has been reduced by the use of filters), granulocyte transfusion is reserved for patients unresponsive to antibiotics. This modality is efficacious for documented gram-negative bacteremia refractory to antibiotics, particularly in situations where granulocyte numbers will be depressed for only a short period. The demonstrated usefulness of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in mobilizing neutrophils and advances in preservation techniques may make this option more useful than in the past.

A variety of cytokines, including G-CSF and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), enhance granulocyte recovery after chemotherapy and consequently shorten the period of maximal vulnerability to fatal infections. Interferon  has been demonstrated to be effective in some infections caused by intracellular organisms, presumably because of its ability to activate macrophages. The role of these cytokines in routine practice is still a matter of some debate. Most authorities recommend their use only when neutropenia is both severe and prolonged. The cytokines themselves may have adverse effects, including fever, hypoxemia, and pleural effusions or serositis in other areas (Chap. 314).

Once neutropenia has resolved, the risk of infection decreases dramatically. However, depending on what drugs they receive, patients who continue on chemotherapeutic protocols remain at high risk for certain diseases. Any patient receiving more than a maintenance dose of glucocorticoids (including many treatment regimens for diffuse lymphoma) should also receive prophylactic TMP-SMX because of the risk of Pneumocystis infection; those with ALL should receive such prophylaxis for the duration of chemotherapy.
 
Prevention of Infection in Cancer Patients

Effect of the Environment

Outbreaks of fatal Aspergillus infection have been associated with construction projects and materials in several hospitals. The association between spore counts and risk of infection suggests the need for a high-efficiency air-handling system in hospitals that care for large numbers of neutropenic patients. The use of laminar-flow rooms and prophylactic antibiotics has decreased the number of infectious episodes in severely neutropenic patients. However, because of the expense of such a program and the failure to show that it dramatically affects mortality rates, most centers do not routinely use laminar flow to care for neutropenic patients. Some centers use "reverse isolation," in which health care providers and visitors to a patient who is neutropenic wear gowns and gloves. Since most of the infections these patients develop are due to organisms that colonize the patients' own skin and bowel, the validity of such schemes is dubious, and limited clinical data do not support their use. Hand washing by all staff caring for neutropenic patients should be required to prevent the spread of resistant organisms.

The presence of large numbers of bacteria (particularly P. aeruginosa) in certain foods, especially fresh vegetables, has led some authorities to recommend a special "low-bacteria" diet. A diet consisting of cooked and canned food is satisfactory to most neutropenic patients and does not involve elaborate disinfection or sterilization protocols. However, there are no studies to support even this type of dietary restriction. Counseling of patients to avoid leftovers, deli foods, and unpasteurized dairy products is recommended.

Physical Measures

Although few studies address this issue, patients with cancer are predisposed to infections resulting from anatomic compromise (e.g., lymphedema resulting from node dissections after radical mastectomy). Surgeons who specialize in cancer surgery can provide specific guidelines for the care of such patients, and patients benefit from commonsense advice about how to prevent infections in vulnerable areas.

Immunoglobulin Replacement

Many patients with multiple myeloma or CLL have immunoglobulin deficiencies as a result of their disease, and all allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients are hypogammaglobulinemic for a period after transplantation. However, current recommendations reserve intravenous immunoglobulin replacement therapy for those patients with severe (<400 mg/dL), prolonged hypogammaglobulinemia. Antibiotic prophylaxis has been shown to be cheaper and is efficacious in preventing infections in most CLL patients with hypogammaglobulinemia. Routine use of immunoglobulin replacement is not recommended.

Sexual Practices

The use of condoms is recommended for severely immunocompromised patients. Any sexual practice that results in oral exposure to feces is not recommended. Neutropenic patients should be advised to avoid any practice that results in trauma, as even microscopic cuts may result in bacterial invasion and fatal sepsis.

Antibiotic Prophylaxis

Several studies indicate that the use of oral fluoroquinolones prevents infection and decreases mortality rates among severely neutropenic patients. Fluconazole prevents Candida infections when given prophylactically to patients receiving bone marrow transplants. The use of broader-spectrum antifungal agents (e.g., posaconazole) appears to be more efficacious. Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis is mandatory for patients with ALL and for all cancer patients receiving glucocorticoid-containing chemotherapy regimens.

Vaccination of Cancer Patients

In general, patients undergoing chemotherapy respond less well to vaccines than do normal hosts. Their greater need for vaccines thus leads to a dilemma in their management. Purified proteins and inactivated vaccines are almost never contraindicated and should be given to patients even during chemotherapy. For example, all adults should receive diphtheria每tetanus toxoid boosters at the indicated times as well as seasonal influenza vaccine. However, if possible, vaccination should not be undertaken concurrent with cytotoxic chemotherapy. If patients are expected to be receiving chemotherapy for several months and vaccination is indicated (e.g., influenza vaccination in the fall), the vaccine should be given midcycle〞as far apart in time as possible from the antimetabolic agents that will prevent an immune response. The meningococcal and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines should be given to patients before splenectomy, if possible. The H. influenzae type b conjugate vaccine should be administered to all splenectomized patients.

In general, live virus (or live bacterial) vaccines should not be given to patients during intensive chemotherapy because of the risk of disseminated infection. Recommendations on vaccination are summarized in Table 86每2.
 
Further Readings

Gafter-Gvili A et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial infections in afebrile neutropenic patients following chemotherapy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD004386, 2009 

 
Gupta A et al: Infections in acute myeloid leukemia: An analysis of 382 febrile episodes. Med Oncol, published online October 15, 2009 

 
Mermel LA et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of intravenous catheter每related infection: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 49:1, 2009[PMID: 19489710] 

 
Paul M et al: Beta-lactam versus beta-lactam每aminoglycoside combination therapy in cancer patients with neutropenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD003038, 2010 

 
Pickering LK et al: Immunization programs for infants, children, adolescents, and adults: Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 49:817, 2009[PMID: 19659433] 

 
Tomblyn M et al: Guidelines for preventing infectious complications among hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients: A global perspective. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 15:1143, 2009[PMID: 19747629] 

 
Ullmann AJ et al: Posaconazole or fluconazole for prophylaxis in severe graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med 356:335, 2007[PMID: 17251530] 

 
Vento S et al: Lung infections after cancer chemotherapy. Lancet Oncol 9:982, 2008[PMID: 19071255] 
 
 

^^
Melanoma

Pigmented lesions are among the most common findings on skin examination. The challenge is to distinguish cutaneous melanomas, which account for the overwhelming majority of deaths resulting from skin cancer, from the remainder, which with rare exceptions are benign. Cutaneous melanoma can occur in adults of all ages, even young individuals, and people of all colors; it is located on the skin, where it is visible; and it has distinct clinical features that make it detectable at a time when complete surgical excision is possible. Examples of malignant and benign pigmented lesions are shown in Fig. 87-1.

Figure 87-1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Atypical and malignant pigmented lesions. The most common melanoma is superficial spreading melanoma (not pictured). A. Acral lentiginous melanoma is the most common melanoma in blacks, Asians, and Hispanics and occurs as an enlarging hyperpigmented macule or plaque on the palms and soles. Lateral pigment diffusion is present. B. Nodular melanoma most commonly manifests as a rapidly growing, often ulcerated or crusted black nodule. C. Lentigo maligna melanoma occurs on sun-exposed skin as a large, hyperpigmented macule or plaque with -irregular borders and variable pigmentation. D. Dysplastic nevi are irregularly pigmented and shaped nevomelanocytic lesions that may be associated with familial melanoma.
 
 

Epidemiology

Melanoma is an aggressive malignancy of melanocytes: pigment-producing cells that originate from the neural crest and migrate to the skin, meninges, mucous membranes, upper esophagus, and eyes. Melanocytes in each of these locations have the potential for malignant transformation. In the United States, nearly 69,000 individuals were expected to develop melanoma and approximately 9,000 were expected to die in 2010. Although the overall incidence and mortality have increased over the last decades, the mortality rates for younger patients have flattened whereas those rates for individuals over age 65 have continued to increase. It is predominantly a malignancy of white-skinned people (98% of cases), and the incidence correlates with latitude of residence, providing strong evidence for the role of sun exposure. Men are affected slightly more than women (1.3:1), and the median age at diagnosis is the late fifties. Dark-skinned populations (such as those of India and Puerto Rico), blacks, and East Asians also develop melanoma, albeit at rates 10每20 times lower than those in whites. Cutaneous melanomas in these populations are diagnosed more often at a higher stage, and patients tend to have worse outcomes. Furthermore, in nonwhite populations, there is a much higher frequency of acral (subungual, plantar, palmar) and mucosal melanomas.

Risk Factors

The strongest risk factors for melanoma are the presence of multiple benign or atypical nevi and a family or personal history of melanoma (Table 87每1). The presence of melanocytic nevi, common or dysplastic, is a marker for increased risk of melanoma. Nevi have been referred to as precursor lesions because they can transform into melanomas; however, the actual risk for any specific nevus is exceedingly low. About one-quarter of melanomas are histologically associated with nevi, but the majority arise de novo. Table 87每2 lists the characteristic features of clinically atypical moles and the features that differentiate them from benign acquired nevi. The number of clinically atypical moles may vary from one to several hundred, and they usually differ from one another in appearance. The borders are often hazy and indistinct, and the pigment pattern is more highly varied than that in benign acquired nevi. Individuals with clinically atypical moles and a strong family history of melanoma have been reported to have a >50% lifetime risk for developing melanoma and warrant close follow-up with a dermatologist. Of the 90% of melanoma patients whose disease is regarded as sporadic (i.e., who lack a family history of melanoma), 40% have clinically atypical moles, compared with an estimated 5每10% of the population at large.

Table 87每1 Factors Associated with Increased Risk of Melanoma

 
 
Total body nevi (higher number = higher risk) 
Family or personal history 
Dysplastic nevi 
Light skin/hair/eye color 
Poor tanning ability 
Freckling 
UV exposure/sunburns/tanning booths 
CDKN2A mutation  
MC1R variants  
 

 
Table 87每2 Pigmented Lesions that Must Be Distinguished from Cutaneous Melanoma and Its Precursors

 
 
Blue nevus Gunmetal or cerulean blue, blue-gray. Stable over time. One-half occur on dorsa of hands and feet.

Lesions are usually single, small, 3 mm每 < 1 cm.

Must be distinguished from nodular melanoma.
 
Compound nevus Round or oval shape, well demarcated, smooth-bordered.

May be dome-shaped or papillomatous; colors range from flesh-colored to very dark brown, with individual nevi being relatively homogeneous in color.
 
Hemangioma Dome-shaped reddish, purple, blue nodule. Compression with a glass microscope slide may result in blanching. Must be distinguished from nodular melanoma. 
Junctional nevus Flat to barely raised brown lesion. Sharp border. Fine pigmentary stippling visible, especially upon magnification. 
Lentigo   
Juvenile Flat, uniformly medium or dark brown lesion with sharp border. 
Solar Solar lentigines are acquired lesions on sites of chronic solar exposure (face and backs of hands). Lesions are 2 mm每1 cm. Solar lentigines have reticulate pigmentation upon magnification. 
Pigmented basal cell carcinoma Papular border. May have central ulceration. Usually on a sun-exposed surface in an older patient. Patient usually has dark brown eyes and dark brown or black hair. 
Pigmented dermatofibroma Lesion is not well demarcated visually, is firm, and dimples downward when compressed laterally. Usually on extremities. Usually <6 mm. 
Seborrheic keratosis Rough, sharp-bordered lesions that feel waxy and "stuck on"; range in color from flesh to tan to dark brown. Presence of keratin plugs in surface is helpful for discriminating especially dark lesions from melanoma. 
Subungual hematoma Maroon (red-brown) coloration. As lesion grows out from nail fold, a curving clear area is seen. 
Tattoo (medical or traumatic) In medical tattoos, lesions are small pigmentary dots, often blue or green, which make a regular pattern (rectangle). Traumatic tattoos are irregular, and pigmentation may appear black. 
 

 

Congenital melanocytic nevi, which are classified as small (1.5 cm), medium (1.5每20 cm), and giant (>20 cm), can be precursors for melanoma. The risk is highest for the giant melanocytic nevus, also called the bathing trunk nevus, which is a rare malformation that affects 1 in 30,000每100,000 individuals, with a lifetime risk of melanoma development estimated to be as high as 6%. At present there are no uniform management guidelines for giant congenital nevi, but because of the potential for malignancy, prophylactic excision early in life is prudent. This usually requires staged removal with coverage by split-thickness skin grafts. Surgery cannot remove all at-risk nevus cells, as some may penetrate into the muscles or central nervous system (CNS) below the nevus. Small- to medium-size congenital melanocytic nevi affect approximately 1% of persons; the risk of melanoma developing in these lesions is not known but appears to be relatively low. The management of small- to medium-size congenital melanocytic nevi remains controversial.

Personal and Family History

Perhaps the single greatest risk factor for melanoma is a personal history of melanoma. Once diagnosed, patients with melanoma require a lifetime of surveillance because their risk is 10 times that of the general population. First-degree relatives have a higher risk of developing melanoma than do individuals without a family history, but only 5每10% of all melanomas are truly familial. In familial melanoma, patients tend to be younger at first diagnosis, lesions are thinner, survival is improved, and multiple primary melanomas are common.

Genetic Susceptibility

Approximately 20每40% of cases of hereditary melanoma (0.2每2% of all melanomas) are due to germ-line mutations in the cell cycle regulatory gene cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A). In fact, 70% of all cutaneous melanomas have somatic mutations or deletions affecting the CDKN2A locus on chromosome 9p21. This locus encodes two distinct tumor suppressor proteins from alternate reading frames: p16 and ARF (p14ARF). The p16 protein inhibits CDK4/6-mediated phosphorylation and inactivation of the retinoblastoma (RB) protein, whereas ARF inhibits MDM2 ubiquitin-mediated degradation of p53. The end result of the loss of CDKN2A is inactivation of two critical tumor suppressor pathways, RB and p53, which control entry of cells into the cell cycle. Several studies have shown an increased risk of pancreatic cancer among melanoma-prone families with CDKN2A mutations.

The melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene is also an inherited melanoma susceptibility factor. Solar radiation stimulates the production of melanocortin [-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (-MSH)], the ligand for MC1R, which is a G-protein-coupled receptor that signals via cyclic AMP and regulates the amount and type of pigment produced. MC1R is highly polymorphic, and among its 80 variants are those that result in partial loss of signaling and lead to the production of pheomelanin, which is not sun-protective and produces red hair. This red hair color (RHC) phenotype is associated with fair skin, red hair, freckles, increased sun sensitivity, and increased risk of melanoma.

Clinical Classification

Traditionally, four major types of cutaneous melanoma have been recognized (Table 87每3). In three of these types〞superficial spreading melanoma, lentigo maligna melanoma, and acral lentiginous melanoma〞the lesion has a period of superficial (so-called radial) growth during which it increases in size but does not penetrate deeply. It is during this period that the melanoma is most capable of being cured by surgical excision. The fourth type〞nodular melanoma〞does not have a recognizable radial growth phase and usually presents as a deeply invasive lesion that is capable of early metastasis. When tumors begin to penetrate deeply into the skin, they are in the so-called vertical growth phase. Melanomas with a radial growth phase are characterized by irregular and sometimes notched borders, variation in pigment pattern, and variation in color. An increase in size or change in color is noted by the patient in 70% of early lesions. Bleeding, ulceration, and pain are late signs and are of little help in early recognition. Superficial spreading melanoma is the most common variant observed in the white population. The back is the most common site for melanoma in men. In women, the back and the lower leg (from knee to ankle) are common sites. Nodular melanomas are dark brown-black to blue-black nodules. Lentigo maligna melanoma usually is confined to chronically sun-damaged, sun-exposed sites (face, neck, back of hands) in older individuals. Acral lentiginous melanoma occurs on the palms, soles, nail beds, and mucous membranes. Although this type occurs in whites, it occurs most frequently (along with nodular melanoma) in blacks and East Asians. A fifth type of melanoma, desmoplastic melanoma, is associated with a fibrotic response, neural invasion, and a greater tendency for local recurrence. Occasionally, melanomas appear clinically to be amelanotic, in which case the diagnosis is established histologically after biopsy of a new or a changing skin nodule or because of suspicion of a basal cell carcinoma.

Table 87每3 Classification of Malignant Melanoma

 
 
Type Site Average Age at Diagnosis, Years Duration of Known Existence, Years Color 
Lentigo maligna melanoma Sun-exposed surfaces, particularly malar region of cheek and temple 70 5每20 or longer*
  In flat portions, shades of brown and tan predominate, but whitish gray occasionally present; in nodules, shades of reddish brown, bluish gray, bluish black 
Superficial spreading melanoma Any site (more common on upper back and, in women, lower legs) 40每50 1每7 Shades of brown mixed with bluish red (violaceous), bluish black, reddish brown, and often whitish pink, and the border of lesion is at least in part visibly and/or palpably elevated 
Nodular melanoma Any 40每50 Months每<5 years Reddish blue (purple) or bluish black; either uniform in color or mixed with brown or black 
Acral lentiginous melanoma Palm, sole, nail bed, mucous membrane 60 1每10 In flat portions, dark brown predominantly; in raised lesions (plaques), brown-black or blue-black predominantly 
 


*During much of this time, the precursor stage, lentigo maligna, is confined to the epidermis. Source: Adapted from AJ Sober, in NA Soter, HP Baden (eds): Pathophysiology of Dermatologic Diseases. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1984.
 

Although melanoma subtypes are clinically and histopathologically distinct, this classification does not have independent prognostic value and has fallen out of favor. Histologic subtype is not part of American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging and often is not identified in current pathology reports. Future classification schemes will be based on molecular features of each melanoma (see below). The molecular analysis of individual melanomas will provide a basis for distinguishing benign nevi from melanomas, identify distinct subclasses of melanoma on the basis of the anatomic site, indicate the extent of ultraviolet (UV) exposure, and determine the mutational status of the tumor, which will help elucidate the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis and identify targets that will serve as a basis for selection of therapy.

Pathogenesis and Molecular Classification

Considerable evidence from epidemiologic and molecular studies suggests that cutaneous melanomas arise via multiple pathways. There are both environmental and genetic components. Uv solar radiation causes genetic changes in the skin, impairs cutaneous immune function, increases the production of growth factors, and induces the formation of DNA-damaging reactive oxygen species that affect keratinocytes and melanocytes. A comprehensive catalog of somatic mutations from a human melanoma revealed more than 33,000 base mutations with damage to almost 300 protein-coding segments compared with normal cells from the same patient. The dominant mutational signature reflected DNA damage due to UV light exposure. The melanoma also contained previously described driver mutations (i.e., mutations that confer selective clonal growth advantage and are implicated in oncogenesis). These driver mutations affect pathways that promote cell proliferation and inhibit normal pathways of apoptosis in response to DNA repair (see below). The altered melanocytes accumulate DNA damage, and selection occurs for all the attributes that constitute the malignant phenotype: invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis.

An understanding of the molecular changes that occur during the transformation of normal melanocytes into malignant melanoma not only would help classify patients in similar prognostic groups but also would contribute to the understanding of etiology and help identify new therapeutic options. A genomewide assessment of melanomas classified into four groups based on their location and degree of exposure to the sun has confirmed that there are distinct genetic pathways in the development of melanoma. The four groups were melanomas on skin without chronic sun-induced damage, melanomas on skin with chronic sun-induced damage, mucosal melanomas, and acral melanomas. Remarkably, distinct patterns of DNA alterations were noted that varied with the site of origin and were independent of the histologic subtype of the tumor. What that work and research done by others have shown is that the overall pattern of mutation, amplification, and loss of cancer genes indicate that although the genetic changes are diverse, they have convergent effects on key biochemical pathways involved in proliferation, senescence, and apoptosis. The p16 mutation that leads to cell cycle arrest and the ARF mutation that results in defective apoptotic responses to genotoxic damage were described earlier. The proliferative pathways affected were the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase/AKT pathways (Fig. 87-2).

Figure 87-2

 
 
 
Major pathways involved in melanoma. The MAP kinase and AKT pathways, which promote proliferation and inhibit apoptosis, respectively, are subject to mutations in melanoma. ERK, extracellular signalregulated kinase; MEK, methylethylketone; PTEN, pentaerythritol tetranitrate.
 
 

The RAS family and BRAF, members of the MAP kinase pathway, which classically mediates the transcription of genes involved in cell proliferation and survival, undergo somatic mutation in melanoma. N-RAS is mutated in approximately 20% of melanomas, and somatic activating BRAF mutations are found in most benign nevi and 40每60% of melanomas. Neither mutation by itself appears to be sufficient to cause melanoma; they often are accompanied by other mutations, (e.g., CDKN2A) or phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase pathway (e.g., loss of PTEN). The BRAF mutation is almost always a point mutation (TA nucleotide change) that results in a valine-to-glutamate amino acid substitution (V600E). V600E BRAF mutations do not have the standard UV signature mutation (pyrimidine dimer) but are present in most melanomas that arise on sites with intermittent sun exposure and are absent in melanomas from chronically sun-damaged skin.

Melanomas also contain mutations in AKT (primarily in AKT3) and PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog). AKT can be amplified, and PTEN may be deleted or undergo epigenetic silencing that leads to constitutive activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway and enhanced cell survival by antagonizing the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis. Loss of PTEN, which dysregulates AKT activity, and mutation of AKT3 prolong survival through inactivation of BAD, Bc12-antagonist of cell death, and activation of the forkhead transcription factor FOXO1, which leads to synthesis of prosurvival genes. In melanoma, these two signaling pathways enhance tumorigenesis, chemoresistance, migration, and cell cycle dysregulation. Targeted agents are being employed that inhibit each pathway, but it is likely that effective antimelanoma therapy will require simultaneous inhibition of both MAPK and PI3K.

Diagnosis

The main goal is to diagnose melanoma early in its natural history, before tumor invasion and life-threatening metastases have occurred. Early detection of melanoma may be facilitated by applying the ABCDEs: asymmetry (benign lesions are usually symmetric); border irregularity (most nevi have clear-cut borders); color variegation (benign lesions usually have uniform light or dark pigment); diameter >6 mm (the size of a pencil eraser); evolving (any change in size, shape, color, or elevation or new symptoms such as bleeding, itching, and crusting). The aim of differential diagnosis is to distinguish benign pigmented lesions from melanoma and its precursor. If melanoma is a consideration, biopsy is appropriate. Some benign look-alikes may be removed in the process of trying to detect melanoma. Several factors may help distinguish benign nevi from atypical moles:

Size: Benign nevi usually are <6 mm in diameter; atypical moles usually are >6 mm in diameter.

Shape: Benign nevi usually are round with distinct borders and may be flat or elevated; atypical moles usually have irregular borders with pigment fading off at the edge.

Color: Benign nevi usually are uniformly brown or tan; atypical moles usually have variable mixtures of brown, tan, black, and reddish pigment and differ from one another.

Location: Benign nevi usually appear on sun-exposed skin above the waist, rarely involving scalp, breasts, or buttocks; atypical moles usually appear on sun-exposed skin, most often on the back, but can involve the scalp, breasts, or buttocks.

Number: Benign nevi are present in 85% of adults, with 10每40 moles scattered over the body; atypical nevi can be present in the hundreds.

The entire cutaneous surface, including the scalp and mucous membranes, as well as the nails should be examined in each patient. Bright room illumination is important, and a hand lens is helpful for evaluating variation in pigment pattern. Any suspicious lesions should be biopsied, evaluated by a specialist, or recorded by chart and/or photography for follow-up. A focused method for examining individual lesions, dermoscopy, employs low-level magnification of the epidermis and may allow a more precise visualization of patterns of pigmentation than is possible with the naked eye. Complete physical examination with attention to the regional lymph nodes is part of the initial evaluation in a patient with suspected melanoma. The patient should be advised to have other family members screened if either melanoma or clinically atypical moles (dysplastic nevi) are present. Patients who fit into high-risk groups should be instructed to perform monthly self-examinations.

Biopsy

Any pigmented cutaneous lesion that has changed in size or shape or has other features suggestive of malignant melanoma is a candidate for biopsy. The recommended technique is an excisional biopsy, which facilitates pathologic assessment of the lesion, permits accurate measurement of thickness if the lesion is melanoma, and constitutes treatment if the lesion is benign. For large lesions or lesions on anatomic sites where excisional biopsy may not be feasible (such as the face, hands, and feet), an incisional biopsy through the most nodular or darkest area of the lesion is acceptable; this should include the vertical growth phase of the primary tumor, if present. Incisional biopsy does not appear to facilitate the spread of melanoma. For suspicious lesions, every attempt should be made to preserve the ability to assess the deep and peripheral margins and to perform immunohistochemistry. Shave biopsies and cauterization should be avoided. The biopsy should be read by a pathologist experienced in pigmented lesions, and the minimal elements of the report should include Breslow thickness, mitoses per square millimeter for lesions 1mm, presence or absence of ulceration, and peripheral and deep margin status. Breslow thickness is the greatest thickness of a primary cutaneous melanoma measured on the slide from the top of the epidermal granular layer, or from the ulcer base, to the bottom of the tumor. To distinguish melanomas from benign nevi in cases with challenging histology, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with multiple probes can be helpful.

Prognostic Factors

The prognostic factors of greatest importance to a newly diagnosed patient are included in the staging classification (Table 87每4). The best predictor of metastatic risk is the lesion's Breslow thickness. The Clark level, which defines melanomas on the basis of the layer of skin to which a melanoma has invaded, does not add significant prognostic information and no longer is used. Other important factors recognized via the staging classification include presence of ulceration, evidence of nodal involvement, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and presence and site of distant metastases. The effects of these important prognostic factors on survival can be seen in Fig. 8

^^
Head and Neck Cancer: Introduction

Epithelial carcinomas of the head and neck arise from the mucosal surfaces in the head and neck area and typically are squamous cell in origin. This category includes tumors of the paranasal sinuses, the oral cavity, and the nasopharynx, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx. Tumors of the salivary glands differ from the more common carcinomas of the head and neck in etiology, histopathology, clinical presentation, and therapy. Thyroid malignancies are described in Chap. 341.
 
Incidence and Epidemiology

The number of new cases of head and neck cancers in the United States was 36,540 in 2010, accounting for about 3% of adult malignancies; 7880 people died from the disease. The worldwide incidence exceeds half a million cases annually. In North America and Europe, the tumors usually arise from the oral cavity, oropharynx, or larynx, whereas nasopharyngeal cancer is more commonly seen in the Mediterranean countries and in the Far East.
 
Etiology and Genetics

Alcohol and tobacco use are the most significant risk factors for head and neck cancer in the United States. Smokeless tobacco is an etiologic agent for oral cancers. Other potential carcinogens include marijuana and occupational exposures such as nickel refining, exposure to textile fibers, and woodworking.

Dietary factors may contribute. The incidence of head and neck cancer is higher in people with the lowest consumption of fruits and vegetables. Certain vitamins, including carotenoids, may be protective if included in a balanced diet. Supplements of retinoids such as cis-retinoic acid have not been shown to prevent head and neck cancers (or lung cancer) and may increase the risk in active smokers.

Some head and neck cancers have a viral etiology. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is frequently associated with nasopharyngeal cancer. Nasopharyngeal cancer occurs endemically in some countries of the Mediterranean and Far East, where EBV antibody titers can be measured to screen high-risk populations. Nasopharyngeal cancer has also been associated with consumption of salted fish.

In Western countries, the human papilloma virus (HPV) is associated with approximately 50% of tumors arising from the oropharynx, i.e., the tonsillar bed and base of tongue. Similar to cervical cancer, HPV 16 and 18 are the commonly associated viral subtypes. The incidence of oropharyngeal cancers is increasing in Western counties. Epidemiologically HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer occurs in a younger patient population and is associated with increased numbers of sexual partners and oral sexual practices.

No specific risk factors or environmental carcinogens have been identified for salivary gland tumors.
 
Histopathology, Carcinogenesis, and Molecular Biology

Squamous cell head and neck cancers can be divided into well-differentiated, moderately well-differentiated, and poorly differentiated categories. Poorly differentiated tumors have a worse prognosis than well-differentiated tumors. For nasopharyngeal cancers, the less common differentiated squamous cell carcinoma is distinguished from nonkeratinizing and undifferentiated carcinoma (lymphoepithelioma) that contains infiltrating lymphocytes and is commonly associated with EBV.

Salivary gland tumors can arise from the major (parotid, submandibular, sublingual) or minor salivary glands (located in the submucosa of the upper aerodigestive tract). Most parotid tumors are benign, but half of submandibular and sublingual gland tumors and most minor salivary gland tumors are malignant. Malignant tumors include mucoepidermoid and adenoid cystic carcinomas and adenocarcinomas.

The mucosal surface of the entire pharynx is exposed to alcohol- and tobacco-related carcinogens and is at risk for the development of a premalignant or malignant lesion. Erythroplakia (a red patch) or leukoplakia (a white patch) can be histopathologically hyperplasia, dysplasia, carcinoma in situ, or carcinoma. However, most head and neck cancers do not present with a history of premalignant lesions. Multiple synchronous or metachronous cancers can also be observed. In fact, over time patients with early-stage head and neck cancer are at greater risk of dying from a second malignancy than from a recurrence of the primary disease.

Second head and neck malignancies are usually not therapy-induced; they reflect the exposure of the upper aerodigestive mucosa to the same carcinogens that caused the first cancer. These second primaries develop in the head and neck area, the lung, or the esophagus. Rarely, patients can develop a radiation therapy每induced sarcoma after having undergone prior radiotherapy for a head and neck cancer.

The molecular carcinogenesis of head and neck cancer is a developing story. Activation of oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (frequently of p53) have been described. Overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is common and of prognostic importance.

Resected tumor specimens with histopathologically negative margins ("complete resection") can have residual tumor cells with persistent p53 mutations at the margins. Thus, a tumor-specific p53 mutation can be detected in some phenotypically "normal" surgical margins, indicating residual disease. Patients with such submicroscopic marginal involvement may have a worse prognosis than patients with truly negative margins.
 
Clinical Presentation and Differential Diagnosis

Most head and neck cancers occur in patients older than age 50 years. HPV-related malignancies are frequently diagnosed in patients in their 40s while EBV-related nasopharyngeal cancer can occur in all ages, including teenagers. The manifestations vary according to the stage and primary site of the tumor. Patients with nonspecific signs and symptoms in the head and neck area should be evaluated with a thorough otolaryngologic exam, particularly if symptoms persist longer than 2每4 weeks.

Cancer of the nasopharynx typically does not cause early symptoms. However, on occasion it may cause unilateral serous otitis media due to obstruction of the eustachian tube, unilateral or bilateral nasal obstruction, or epistaxis. Advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma causes neuropathies of the cranial nerves due to skull base involvement.

Carcinomas of the oral cavity present as nonhealing ulcers, changes in the fit of dentures, or painful lesions. Tumors of the tongue base or oropharynx can cause decreased tongue mobility and alterations in speech. Cancers of the oropharynx or hypopharynx rarely cause early symptoms, but they may cause sore throat and/or otalgia.

Hoarseness may be an early symptom of laryngeal cancer, and persistent hoarseness requires referral to a specialist for indirect laryngoscopy and/or radiographic studies. If a head and neck lesion treated initially with antibiotics does not resolve in a short period, further workup is indicated; to simply continue the antibiotic treatment may be to lose the chance of early diagnosis of a malignancy.

Advanced head and neck cancers in any location can cause severe pain, otalgia, airway obstruction, cranial neuropathies, trismus, odynophagia, dysphagia, decreased tongue mobility, fistulas, skin involvement, and massive cervical lymphadenopathy, which may be unilateral or bilateral. Some patients have enlarged lymph nodes even though no primary lesion can be detected by endoscopy or biopsy; these patients are considered to have carcinoma of unknown primary (Fig. 88-1). If the enlarged nodes are located in the upper neck and the tumor cells are of squamous cell histology, the malignancy probably arose from a mucosal surface in the head or neck. Tumor cells in supraclavicular lymph nodes may also arise from a primary site in the chest or abdomen.

Figure 88-1

 
 
 
Evaluation of a patient with cervical adenopathy without a primary mucosal lesion; a diagnostic workup. FNA, fine-needle aspiration.
 
 

The physical examination should include inspection of all visible mucosal surfaces and palpation of the floor of mouth and tongue and of the neck. In addition to tumors themselves, leukoplakia (a white mucosal patch) or erythroplakia (a red mucosal patch) may be observed; these "premalignant" lesions can represent hyperplasia, dysplasia, or carcinoma in situ and require biopsy. Further examination should be performed by a specialist. Additional staging procedures include CT of the head and neck to identify the extent of the disease. Patients with lymph node involvement should have chest radiography and a bone scan to screen for distant metastases. A positron emission tomographic scan may also be administered and can help to identify or exclude distant metastases. The definitive staging procedure is an endoscopic examination under anesthesia, which may include laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and bronchoscopy; during this procedure, multiple biopsy samples are obtained to establish a primary diagnosis, define the extent of primary disease, and identify any additional premalignant lesions or second primaries.

Head and neck tumors are classified according to the TNM system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer. This classification varies according to the specific anatomic subsite (Tables 88每1 and 88每2). Distant metastases are found in <10% of patients at initial diagnosis and are more common in patients with advanced lymph nodal stage; microscopic involvement of the lungs, bones, or liver is more common, particularly in patients with advanced neck lymph node disease. Modern imaging techniques may increase the number of patients with clinically detectable distant metastases in the future.

Table 88每1 TNM Classification for Head and Neck Cancer

 
 
Primary Tumor Site (Example) 
T Grade  Oropharynx  Hypopharynx  
T1 0每2 cm 0每2 cm 
T2 2.1每4 cm >1 site, 2.1每4 cm 
T3 >4 cm >4 cm or fixation of hemilarynx 
T4a Invasion of larynx, muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, mandible Invasion of thyroid/cricoid cartilage, hyoid bone, thyroid gland, esophagus, or central compartment soft tissue invasion 
T4b Invasion of lateral pterygoid muscle, pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases carotid artery Invasion of prevertebral fascia, encases carotid artery, or involvement of mediastinal structures 
 

 
Regional Lymph Nodes (N)  
NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed 
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis 
N1 Unilateral metastasis in lymph node(s), 3 cm in greatest dimension 
N2 Single ipsilateral lymph node >3.1, 6 cm, or multiple ipsilateral, or contralateral lymph nodes 6 cm. Bilateral metastasis in lymph node(s), 6 cm in greatest dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa 
N3 Lymph node >6 cm in greatest dimension 
 

 
Stage Grouping  
Stage 0 Tis N0 M0 
Stage I T1 N0 M0 
Stage II T2 N0 M0 
Stage III T3 N0 M0 
  T1-T3 N1 M0 
Stage IVA T4a N0 M0 
  T4a N1 M0 
  T1-T4a N2 M0 
Stage IVB T4b Any N M0 
  Any T N3 M0 
Stage IVC Any T Any N M1 
 

 
Table 88每2 Definition of TNM-Nasopharynx

 
 
Primary Tumor (T)  Stage Grouping  
Tis Carcinoma in situ 
T1 Tumor confined to the nasopharynx 
T2 Tumor extends to parapharyngeal soft tissues 
T3 Tumor involves bony structures of skull base and/or paranasal sinuses 
T4 Tumor with intracranial extension and/or involvement of cranial nerves, infratemporal fossa, hypopharynx, orbit, or masticator space 
 

 
Regional Lymph Nodes (N)  
  The distribution and the prognostic impact of regional lymph node spread from nasopharynx cancer, particularly of the undifferentiated type, are different from those of other head and neck mucosal cancers and justify the use of a different N classification scheme. 
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis 
N1 Unilateral metastasis in lymph node(s), 6 cm in greatest dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa 
N2 Bilateral metastasis in lymph node(s), 6 cm in greatest dimension, above the supraclavicular fossa 
N3 Metastasis in lymph node(s), >6 cm and/or to supraclavicular fossa 
N3a Greater than 6 cm in dimension 
N3b Extension to the supraclavicular fossa 
 

 
Anatomic Stage/Prognostic Groups 
Nasopharynx        
Stage 0 Tis NO MO 
Stage I T1 N0 M0 
Stage II T1 N1 M0 
  T2 N0-N1 M0 
Stage III T1 N2 M0 
  T2 N2 M0 
  T3 N0-N2 M0 
Stage IVA T4 N0-N2 M0 
Stage IVB Any T N3 M0 
Stage IVC Any T Any N M1 
 

 

In patients with lymph node involvement and no visible primary, the diagnosis should be made by lymph node excision. If the results indicate squamous cell carcinoma, a panendoscopy should be performed, with biopsy of all suspicious-appearing areas and directed biopsies of common primary sites, such as the nasopharynx, tonsil, tongue base, and pyriform sinus.

Treatment: Head and Neck Cancer

Patients with head and neck cancer can be grossly categorized into three clinical groups: those with localized disease, those with locally or regionally advanced disease, and those with recurrent and/or metastatic disease. Comorbidities associated with tobacco and alcohol abuse can affect treatment outcome and define long-term risks for patients who are cured of their disease.

Localized Disease

Nearly one-third of patients have localized disease, that is, T1 or T2 (stage I or stage II) lesions without detectable lymph node involvement or distant metastases. These lesions are treated with curative intent by either surgery or radiation therapy. The choice of modality differs according to anatomic location and institutional expertise. Radiation therapy is often preferred for laryngeal cancer to preserve voice function, and surgery is preferred for small lesions in the oral cavity to avoid the long-term complications of radiation, such as xerostomia and dental decay. Overall 5-year survival is 60每90%. Most recurrences occur within the first 2 years following diagnosis and are usually local.

Locally or Regionally Advanced Disease

Locally or regionally advanced disease〞disease with a large primary tumor and/or lymph node metastases〞is the stage of presentation for >50% of patients. Such patients can also be treated with curative intent, but not with surgery or radiation therapy alone. Combined modality therapy including surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy is most successful. It can be administered as induction chemotherapy (chemotherapy before surgery and/or radiotherapy) or as concomitant (simultaneous) chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The latter is currently most commonly used and best evidence每supported. In patients with intermediate stage (stage III and early stage IV) concomitant chemoradiotherapy is given postoperatively. It can be administered either as a primary treatment for patients with unresectable disease, to pursue an organ-preserving approach, or in the postoperative setting for intermediate-stage resectable tumors.

Induction Chemotherapy

In this strategy, patients receive chemotherapy [current standard is a three-drug regimen of docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil (5-FU)] before surgery and radiation therapy. Most patients who receive three cycles show tumor reduction, and the response is clinically "complete" in up to half. This "sequential" multimodality therapy allows for organ preservation (omission of surgery) in patients with laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer, and it has been shown to result in higher cure rates compared with radiotherapy alone.

Concomitant Chemoradiotherapy

With the concomitant strategy, chemotherapy and radiation therapy are given simultaneously rather than in sequence. Tumor recurrences from head and neck cancer develop most commonly locoregionally (in the head and neck area of the primary and draining lymph nodes). The concomitant approach is aimed at enhancing tumor cell killing by radiation therapy in the presence of chemotherapy (radiation enhancement). Toxicity (especially mucositis, grade 3 or 4 in 70每80%) is increased with concomitant chemoradiotherapy. However, meta-analyses of randomized trials document an improvement in 5-year survival of 8% with concomitant chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Results seem more favorable in recent trials as more active drugs or more intensive radiotherapy schedules are used. Five-year survival is 34每50%. In addition, concomitant chemoradiotherapy produces better laryngectomy-free survival (organ preservation) than radiation therapy alone in patients with advanced larynx cancer. The use of radiation therapy together with cisplatin has also produced improved survival in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal cancer. The outcome of HPV-related cancers seems to be especially favorable following cisplatin-based chemoradiotherapy.

The success of concomitant chemoradiotherapy in patients with unresectable disease has led to the testing of a similar approach in patients with resected intermediate-stage disease as a postoperative therapy. Concomitant chemoradiotherapy produces a significant improvement over postoperative radiation therapy alone for patients whose tumors demonstrate higher risk features, such as extracapsular spread beyond involved lymph nodes, involvement of multiple lymph nodes, or positive margins at the primary site following surgery.

A monoclonal antibody to the EGFR (cetuximab) increases survival rates when administered during radiotherapy. EGFR blockade results in radiation sensitization and has milder systemic side effects than traditional chemotherapy agents, although an acneiform skin rash is commonly observed. The integration of cetuximab into current standard chemoradiotherapy regimens is under investigation.

Recurrent and/or Metastatic Disease

Ten percent of patients present with metastatic disease, and more than half of patients with locoregionally advanced disease have recurrence, frequently outside the head and neck region. Patients with recurrent and/or metastatic disease are, with few exceptions, treated with palliative intent. Some patients may require local or regional radiation therapy for pain control, but most are given chemotherapy. Response rates to chemotherapy average only 30每50%; the duration of response averages only 3 months, and the median survival time is 6每8 months. Therefore, chemotherapy provides transient symptomatic benefit. Drugs with single-agent activity in this setting include methotrexate, 5-FU, cisplatin, paclitaxel, and docetaxel. Combinations of cisplatin with 5-FU, carboplatin with 5-FU, and cisplatin or carboplatin with paclitaxel or docetaxel are frequently used.

EGFR-directed therapies, including monoclonal antibodies (e.g., cetuximab) and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of the EGFR signaling pathway (e.g., erlotinib or gefitinib) have single-agent activity of approximately 10%. Side effects are usually limited to an acneiform rash and diarrhea (for the TKIs). The addition of cetuximab to standard combination chemotherapy with cis- or carboplatin and 5-FU was shown to result in a significant increase in median survival.

Complications

Complications from treatment of head and neck cancer are usually correlated to the extent of surgery and exposure of normal tissue structures to radiation. Currently, the extent of surgery has been limited or completely replaced by chemotherapy and radiation therapy as the primary approach. Acute complications of radiation include mucositis and dysphagia. Long-term complications include xerostomia, loss of taste, decreased tongue mobility, second malignancies, dysphagia, and neck fibrosis. The complications of chemotherapy vary with the regimen used but usually include myelosuppression, mucositis, nausea and vomiting, and nephrotoxicity (with cisplatin).

The mucosal side effects of therapy can lead to malnutrition and dehydration. Many centers address issues of dentition before starting treatment, and some place feeding tubes to ensure control of hydration and nutrition intake. About 50% of patients develop hypothyroidism from the treatment; thus, thyroid function should be monitored.
 
Salivary Gland Tumors

Most benign salivary gland tumors are treated with surgical excision, and patients with invasive salivary gland tumors are treated with surgery and radiation therapy. These tumors may recur regionally; adenoid cystic carcinoma has a tendency to recur along the nerve tracks. Distant metastases may occur as late as 10每20 years after the initial diagnosis. For metastatic disease, therapy is given with palliative intent, usually chemotherapy with doxorubicin and/or cisplatin. Identification of novel agents with activity in these tumors is a high priority.
 
Further Readings

Ang KK et al: Human papillomavirus and survival of patients with oropharyngeal cancer. N Engl J Med 363:24, 2010[PMID: 20530316] 

 
Bonner JA et al: Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for locoregionally advanced head and neck cancer: 5-year survival data from a phase 3 randomised trial, and relation between cetuximab-induced rash and survival. Lancet 11:21, 2010[PMID: 19897418] 

 
Pharynx. In Cancer Staging Handbook: From the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed, SB Edge et al (eds). New York, Springer, 2009 

 
Haddad RI et al: Recent advances in head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 359:1143, 2008[PMID: 18784104] 

 
Lonneux M et al: Positron emission tomography with [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose improves staging and patient management in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: a multicenter prospective study. J Clin Oncol 27:1190, 2010 

 
Pfister DG et al: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline for the use of larynx-preservation strategies in the treatment of laryngeal cancer. J Clin Oncol 24:3693, 2006[PMID: 16832122] 

 
Pointreau Y et al: Randomized trial of induction chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-flourouracil with or without docetaxel for larynx preservation. J Natl Cancer Inst 101: 498, 2009[PMID: 19318632] 

 
Tobias JS et al: Chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer: 10-year follow-up of the UK Head and Neck (UKHAN1) trial. Lancet 11:66, 2010[PMID: 19875337] 

 
Vermorken JB et al: Platinum-based chemotherapy plus cetuximab in head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med 359:1116, 2008[PMID: 18784101] 
 
 

^^
Neoplasms of the Lung: Introduction

Lung cancer is largely a disease of modern man and was considered quite rare before 1900, with fewer than 400 cases described in the medical literature. However, by the mid-twentieth century lung cancer had become epidemic and firmly established as the leading cause of cancer-related death in North America and Europe, killing more than three times as many men as prostate cancer and nearly twice as many women as breast cancer. This fact is particularly distressing since lung cancer is one of the most preventable of all of the common malignancies. Tobacco consumption is the primary cause of lung cancer, a fact firmly established in the mid-twentieth century and codified with the release of the U.S. Surgeon General's 1964 report on the health effects of tobacco smoking. Following the report, cigarette use started to decline in North America and parts of Europe, and with it so did the incidence of lung cancer. To date, the decline in lung cancer is seen most clearly in men; only recently has the decline become apparent among women in the United States. Unfortunately, in many parts of the world, especially in countries with developing economies, cigarette use continues to increase, and along with it, the incidence of lung cancers is also rising. While tobacco smoking remains the primary cause of lung cancer worldwide, more than 60% of new lung cancers occur in never smokers (smoked <100 cigarettes per lifetime) or former smokers (smoked 100 cigarettes per lifetime, quit 1 year), many of whom quit decades ago. Moreover, 1 in 5 women and 1 in 12 men diagnosed with lung cancer have never smoked. Given the magnitude of the problem, it is incumbent that every internist has a broad knowledge of lung cancer and its management.
 
Epidemiology

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer death among American men and women. More than 220,000 individuals will be diagnosed with lung cancer in the United States in 2010. The incidence of lung cancer peaked among men in the late 1980s and has plateaued in women. Lung cancer is rare below age 40, with rates increasing until age 80, after which the rate tapers off. The projected lifetime probability of developing lung cancer is estimated to be approximately 8% among males and approximately 6% among females. The incidence of lung cancer varies by racial and ethnic group, with the highest age-adjusted incidence rates among African Americans. The excess in age-adjusted rates among African Americans occurs only among men, but age-specific rates show that below age 50 mortality from lung cancer is more than 25% higher among African American than Caucasian women. Incidence and mortality rates among Hispanic and Native and Asian Americans are approximately 40每50% those of whites.

Risk Factors

While the large majority (80每90%) of lung cancers is caused by cigarette smoking, several other factors have been implicated, although none to the extent of tobacco. Cigarette smokers have a tenfold or greater increase in risk of this cancer compared to those who have never smoked. A deep sequencing study suggested that one genetic mutation is induced for every 15 cigarettes smoked. The risk of lung cancer is lower among persons who quit smoking than among those who continue smoking; former smokers have a ninefold increased risk of developing lung cancer compared to men who have never smoked versus the twentyfold excess in those who continue to smoke. The size of the risk reduction increases with the length of time the person has quit smoking, although generally even long-term former smokers have higher risks of lung cancer than those who never smoked. Cigarette smoking increases the risk of all the major lung cancer cell types. Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) or secondhand smoke is also an established cause of lung cancer. The risk from ETS is less than from active smoking, with a 20每30% increase in lung cancer observed among never smokers married for many years to smokers, in comparison to the 2000% increase among continuing active smokers.

While cigarette smoking is the dominant cause of lung cancer, several other risk factors have been identified, including occupational exposures to asbestos, arsenic, bischloromethyl ether, hexavalent chromium, mustard gas, nickel (as in certain nickel-refining processes), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Occupational studies also have provided insight into possible mechanisms of lung cancer induction. For example, the risk of lung cancer among asbestos-exposed workers is increased primarily among those with underlying asbestosis, raising the possibility that the scarring and inflammation produced by this fibrotic nonmalignant lung disease may in many cases (though likely not in all) be the trigger for asbestos-induced lung cancer. Several other occupational exposures have been associated with increased rates of lung cancer, but the causal nature of the association is not as clear.

The risk of lung cancer appears higher among individuals with low fruit and vegetable intake during adulthood. This observation led to hypotheses that specific nutrients, in particular retinoids and carotenoids, might have chemopreventive effects for lung cancer. However, randomized trials failed to validate this hypothesis. In fact, studies found the incidence of lung cancer was increased among smokers with supplementation. Ionizing radiation is also an established lung carcinogen, most convincingly demonstrated from studies showing increased rates of lung cancer among survivors of the atom bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and large excesses among workers exposed to alpha irradiation from radon in underground uranium mining. Prolonged exposure to low-level radon in homes might impart a risk of lung cancer equal or greater than that of ETS. Prior lung diseases such as chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and tuberculosis have been linked to increased risks of lung cancer as well.

Smoking Cessation

Given the undeniable link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer (not even addressing other tobacco-related illnesses), physicians must promote tobacco abstinence. Physicians also must help their patients who smoke to stop smoking. Smoking cessation, even well into middle age, can minimize an individual's subsequent risk of lung cancer. Stopping tobacco use before middle age avoids more than 90% of the lung cancer risk attributable to tobacco. However, little health benefit is derived from just "cutting back." Importantly, smoking cessation can even be beneficial in individuals with an established diagnosis of lung cancer, as it is associated with improved survival, fewer side effects from therapy, and an overall improvement in quality of life. Moreover, smoking can alter the metabolism of many chemotherapy drugs, potentially adversely altering the toxicities and therapeutic benefits of the agents. Consequently, it is important to promote smoking cessation even after the diagnosis of lung cancer is established.

Physicians need to understand the essential elements of smoking cessation therapy. The individual must want to stop smoking and must be willing to work hard to achieve the goal of smoking abstinence. Self-help strategies alone only marginally affect quit rates, whereas individual and combined pharmacotherapies in combination with counseling can significantly increase rates of cessation. Therapy with an antidepressant (e.g., bupropion) or nicotine replacement therapy (varenicline, an 42 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial agonist), are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as first-line treatments for nicotine dependence. However, both drugs have been reported to increase suicidal ideation and must be used with caution. In a randomized trial, varenicline was more efficacious than bupropion or placebo. Prolonged use of varenicline beyond the initial induction phase proved useful in maintaining smoking abstinence. Clonidine and nortriptyline are recommended as second-line treatments (Chap. 395).

Inherited Predisposition to Lung Cancer

Exposure to environmental carcinogens, such as those found in tobacco smoke, induce or facilitate the transformation from bronchoepithelial cells to the malignant phenotype. The contribution of carcinogens on transformation is modulated by polymorphic variations in genes that affect aspects of carcinogen metabolism. Certain genetic polymorphisms of the P450 enzyme system, specifically CYP1A1, or chromosome fragility are associated with the development of lung cancer. These genetic variations occur at relatively high frequency in the population but their contribution to an individual's lung cancer risk is generally low. However, because of their population frequency, the overall impact on lung cancer risk could be high. In addition, environmental factors, as modified by inherited modulators, likely affect specific genes by deregulating important pathways to enable the cancer phenotype.

First-degree relatives of lung cancer probands have a two- to threefold excess risk of lung cancer and other cancers, many of which are not smoking-related. These data suggest that specific genes and/or genetic variants may contribute to susceptibility to lung cancer. However, very few such genes have yet been identified. Individuals with inherited mutations in RB (patients with retinoblastoma living to adulthood) and p53 (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) genes may develop lung cancer. Three genetic loci for lung cancer risk have been identified by genomewide association studies, including 5p15 (TERT-CLPTM1L), 15q25(CHRNA5-CHRNA-3 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits), and 6p21 (BAT3-MSH5). A rare germline mutation (T790M) involving the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) maybe be linked to lung cancer susceptibility in never smokers. Currently, however, no molecular criteria are used to select patients for more intense screening regimens or for specific chemopreventive strategies.

Pathology

The term lung cancer is used for tumors arising from the respiratory epithelium (bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli). Mesotheliomas, lymphomas, and stromal tumors (sarcomas) are distinct from epithelial lung cancers. According to the World Health Organization classification, epithelial lung cancers consist of four major cell types: small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and the so-called non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) histologies including adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and large cell carcinoma (Fig. 89-1). These four histologies account for approximately 90% of all epithelial lung cancers. The remainder include undifferentiated carcinomas, carcinoids, bronchial gland tumors (including adenoid cystic carcinomas and mucoepidermoid tumors), and rarer tumor types. Tumors may occur as single or mixed-type histology.

Figure 89-1

 
 
 
Traditional view of lung cancer.
 
 


All histologic types of lung cancer can be found in current and former smokers. Historically, the histologies associated with heavy tobacco use are squamous and small cell carcinomas. Squamous carcinoma was the most commonly diagnosed form of NSCLC; however, with the steady decline in cigarette consumption over the past four decades and changes in cigarette manufacturing (including use of different types of filters), adenocarcinoma has replaced squamous cell carcinoma as the most frequent histologic subtype in North America. The incidence of small cell carcinoma is also on the decline. In lifetime never smokers, all histologic forms of lung cancer can be found, although adenocarcinoma tends to predominate. Among women and young adults (<60 years), adenocarcinoma tends also to be the most common form of lung cancer.

Small cell carcinoma is a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumor that tends to occur as a central mass with endobronchial growth and is strongly associated with smoking. Small cell carcinoma cells have scant cytoplasm, small hyperchromatic nuclei with a fine ("salt and pepper") chromatin pattern and prominent nucleoli. Tumors might be arranged in diffuse sheets of cells or may show neuroendocrine patterns such as rosettes, trabeculae, or peripheral palisading of cells at the periphery of nests. There is often widespread cellular necrosis. Small cell carcinomas, more often than non-small cell carcinomas, may produce specific peptide hormones such as adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), arginine vasopressin (AVP), atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), and gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP). These hormones may be associated with distinctive paraneoplastic syndromes that prompt workup and eventual diagnosis (Chap. 100).

Squamous cell carcinomas of the lung are morphologically identical to extrapulmonary (i.e., head and neck) squamous cell carcinomas and require clinical correlation to differentiate. These tumors tend to occur centrally and are classically associated with a history of smoking. Histologically, the most common pattern is that of an infiltrating nest of tumor cells that lack intercellular bridges. Keratin can usually be seen when present.

Adenocarcinomas often occur in more peripheral lung locations and may be associated with a history of smoking. However, adenocarcinomas are the most common type of lung cancer occurring in never smokers. Histologically, the tissue may contain the presence of glands, papillary structure, bronchioloalveolar pattern, cellular mucin, or solid pattern if poorly differentiated. Variants of adenocarcinomas include signet-ring, clear cell, and mucinous and fetal adenocarcinomas. Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) is a subtype of adenocarcinoma that grows along the alveoli without invasion and can present radiographically as a single mass, as a diffuse multinodular lesion, as a fluffy infiltrate, and on screening CT scans as a "ground-glass" opacity (GGO). Pure BAC is relatively rare. More common is adenocarcinoma with BAC features. BAC may present in a mucinous form, which tends to be multicentric, and a nonmucinous form, which tends to be solitary.

Large cell carcinomas tend to occur peripherally and are defined as poorly differentiated carcinomas of the lung composed of larger malignant cells without evidence of squamous, glandular differentiation, or features of small cell carcinoma by light microscopy. These tumors usually consist of sheets of large malignant cells, often with associated necrosis. Cytologically, the tumor is also arranged in syncytial groups and single cells. Variants of large cell, carcinoma include basaloid carcinoma, which may present as an endobronchial lesion and may resemble a high-grade neuroendocrine tumor, and lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma, which is similar to the same-named tumor of other sites and is Epstein-Barr virus每related.

Historically, for treatment and prognostication purposes, the major distinction has been between SCLC and NSCLC, as these tumors have quite different natural histories and therapeutic approaches. SCLC is typically widely disseminated at diagnosis. Even if localized, it is rarely curable by surgery. By contrast, NSCLC can be potentially cured by resection in up to 30% of cases. Small cell cancers tend to respond more favorably to traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy agents. Intrinsic drug resistance is the norm for both SCLC and NSCLC. As knowledge of tumor biology improves, more sophisticated classification schemas are under development, including ones based in part on the presence of specific mutations and molecular alterations (Fig. 89-2). Recognition of these molecular distinctions may help guide therapy in the future.

Figure 89-2

 
 
 
2010: Lung adenocarcinoma〞multiple molecular subsets.
 
 

Immunohistochemistry

The diagnosis of lung cancer most often rests on the morphologic or cytologic features correlated with clinical and radiographic findings. Immunohistochemistry may be used to verify neuroendocrine differentiation within a tumor, with markers such as neuron-specific enolase (NSE), CD56 or neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), synaptophysin, chromogranin, and Leu7 (Table 89每1). Immunohistochemistry is also helpful in differentiating primary from metastatic adenocarcinomas. Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), identified in tumors of thyroid and pulmonary origin, is positive in more than 70% of pulmonary adenocarcinomas and is a reliable indicator of primary lung cancer, provided a thyroid primary has been excluded. A negative TTF-1, however, does not exclude the possibility of a lung primary. TTF-1 is also positive in neuroendocrine tumors of pulmonary and extrapulmonary origin. Cytokeratins 7 and 20 used in combination can help narrow the differential diagnosis; nonsquamous NSCLC, SCLC, and mesothelioma may stain positive for CK7 and negative for CK20, while squamous cell lung cancer will be both CK7 and CK20 negative. Mesothelioma can be easily identified ultrastructurally, but it has historically been difficult to differentiate from adenocarcinoma through morphology and immunohistochemical staining. Several markers in the past few years have proven to be more helpful, including CK5/6, calretinin, and Wilms' tumor gene 1 (WT-1), all of which show positivity in mesothelioma.

Table 89每1 Common Immunohistochemical Markers Used in the Diagnosis of Lung Tumors

 
 
Histology Positive Immunohistochemical Markers 
Squamous cell carcinoma Cytokeratin (CK) cocktail, e.g., AE1/AE3

CK5/6

CK7 rare
 
Adenocarcinoma Cytokeratin cocktail, e.g., AE1/AE3

CK7

TTF-1

Neuroendocrine markers rare, e.g., CD56, NSE
 
Large cell carcinoma Cytokeratin

TTF-1 rare

Neuroendocrine markers rare (e.g., CD56, NSE)
 
Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma Cytokeratin cocktail, e.g., AE1/AE3

TTF-1

CD56

Chromogranin

Synaptophysin
 
Small cell carcinoma Cytokeratin cocktail (tends to be patchy)

TTF-1

CD56

Chromogranin

Synaptophysin
 
 


Abbreviation: WT-1, Wilms' tumor gene 1; NSE, neuron-specific enolase; NCAM, neural cell adhesion molecule; TTF-1, thyroid transcription factor 1.
 

Molecular Pathogenesis

Cancer is a disease involving dynamic changes in the genome. As proposed by Hanahan and Weinberg, virtually all cancer cells acquire six hallmark capabilities: self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to antigrowth signals, evading apoptosis, limitless replicative potential, sustained angiogenesis, and tissue invasion and metastasis. The order in which these hallmark capabilities are acquired appears quite variable and can differ from tumor to tumor. Events leading to acquisition of these hallmarks can vary widely; although broadly, cancers arise as a result of accumulations of gain-of-function mutations in oncogenes and loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor genes. Further complicating the study of lung cancer, the sequence of events that lead to disease is clearly different for the various histopathologic entities.

The exact cell of origin for lung cancers is not known. Whether one cell of origin leads to all histologic forms of lung cancer is unclear. However, at least for lung adenocarcinoma, type II epithelial cells (or alveolar epithelial cells) have the capacity to give rise to tumors. For SCLC, cells of neuroendocrine origin have been implicated as precursors.

For cancers in general, one theory holds that a small subset of the cells within a tumor (i.e., "stem cells") are responsible for the full malignant behavior of the tumor. As part of this concept, the large bulk of the cells in a cancer are "offspring" of these cancer stem cells. While clonally related to the cancer stem cell subpopulation, most cells by themselves cannot regenerate the full malignant phenotype. The stem cell concept may explain the failure of standard medical therapies to eradicate lung cancers, even when there is a clinical complete response. Disease recurs because therapies do not eliminate the stem cell component, which may be more resistant to chemotherapy. Precise human lung cancer stem cells have yet to be identified.

Lung cancer cells harbor multiple chromosomal abnormalities, including mutations, amplifications, insertions, deletions, and translocations. One of the earliest set of oncogenes found to be aberrant was the MYC family of transcription factors (MYC, MYCN, and MYCL). MYC is most frequently activated via gene amplification or transcriptional dysregulation in both SCLC and NSCLC, whereas abnormalities of MYCN and MYCL generally occur in SCLC. Currently, there are no MYC-specific drugs.

To date, among lung cancer histologies, adenocarcinomas have been the most extensively catalogued for recurrent genomic gains and losses as well as for somatic mutations. While multiple different kinds of aberrations have been found, a major class involves "driver mutations"〞mutations that occur in genes encoding signaling proteins that when aberrant, drive initiation and maintenance of tumor cells (Table 89每2). Importantly, driver mutations can serve as Achilles' heels for tumors if their gene products can be targeted appropriately. For example, one set of mutations involves the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which belongs to the ERBB (HER) family of protooncogenes, including EGFR (ERBB1), Her2/neu (ERBB2), HER3 (ERBB3), and HER4 (ERBB4). These genes encode cell-surface receptors consisting of an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a transmembrane structure, and an intracellular tyrosine kinase (TK) domain. The binding of ligand to receptor activates receptor dimerization and TK autophosphorylation, initiating a cascade of intracellular events, leading to increased cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and a decrease in apoptosis. Lung adenocarcinomas can arise when tumors express mutant EGFR. These same tumors display high sensitivity to small molecule EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Additional examples of driver mutations in lung adenocarcinoma include those involving the signaling molecules downstream of EGFR, e.g., the tyrosine kinase HER2; the GTPase, KRAS; the serine-threonine kinase, BRAF; and the lipid kinase, PIK3CA. In 2007, other subsets of lung adenocarcinoma were found to be defined by the presence of specific translocations fusing tyrosine kinases such as ALK and ROS to aberrant upstream partners. Notably, at least EGFR, KRAS, and EML4-ALK mutations are mutually exclusive, suggesting that acquisition of one of these driver mutations is sufficient to promote tumorigenesis. Thus far, potentially targetable driver mutations have mostly been identified in lung adenocarcinomas as opposed to lung cancers displaying other types of histologies.

Table 89每2 List of Some Genes Somatically Altered in Different Histologic Subtypes of Lung Cancer

 
 
Histology Oncogene Tumor-Suppressor Genes 
Adenocarcinoma EGFR

KRAS

ALK
 TP53

CDKN2A/B (p16, p14)

LKB1 (STK11)
 
Squamous cell carcinoma EGFR

PIK3CA

IGF-1R
 TP53

TP63
 
Small cell carcinoma MYC

BCL-2
 TP53

RB1

FHIT
 
Large cell carcinoma (not well studied)     
 


Abbreviation: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ALK, anaplastic lymphoma kinase; IGF-1R, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor; RB1, retinoblastoma protein 1.
 

A large number of tumor-suppressor genes (recessive oncogenes) have also been identified that are inactivated during the pathogenesis of lung cancer (Table 89每2). Such genes include TP53, RB1, RASSF1A, CDKN2A/B, LKB1 (STK11), and FHIT. Nearly 90% of SCLCs harbor mutations in TP53 and RB1. Several tumor-suppressor genes on chromosome 3p appear to be involved in nearly all lung cancers. Allelic loss for this region occurs very early in lung cancer pathogenesis, including in histologically normal smoking-damaged lung epithelium.
 
Early Detection and Screening

The clinical outcome for lung cancer is related to the stage at diagnosis. Accordingly, it is presumed that early detection of occult tumors will lead to improved survival. Early detection is a process that involves screening tests, surveillance, diagnosis, and early treatment. By contrast, screening is defined as a systematic testing of asymptomatic individuals for preclinical disease. The majority of patients with lung cancer present with advanced disease, raising the question as to whether screening could detect lung tumors at earlier stages when they are theoretically more curable. In order for a screening program to be successful, the burden of disease within the population must be high, effective treatment must be available that can reduce mortality rate, and the test must be accessible, cost-effective, and both sensitive and specific. With any screening procedure, one must keep in mind the possible influence of lead-time bias (i.e., detecting the cancer earlier without an effect on survival), length time bias (i.e., indolent cancers are detected on screening and may actually not affect survival, while aggressive cancers are likely to cause symptoms earlier in patients and are less likely to be detected), and over diagnosis (i.e., diagnosing cancers so slow growing that they are unlikely to cause the death of the patient)(Chap. 82).

Randomized controlled trials from the 1960s to the 1980s reported no impact on lung cancer每specific mortality rate using screening chest radiographs with or without sputum cytology in high-risk patients (age >50 years or history of smoking). Although these studies have been criticized for their design, statistical analyses, and outdated imaging modalities, they resulted in the current recommendations not to use these tools to screen for lung cancer. The more recent Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial has completed accrual. This study involved more than 150,000 patients randomized to standard care or a baseline single-view posterior-anterior chest radiograph. A total of 5991 (8.9%) baseline chest x-rays were reported as suspicious for lung cancer, highest in current and former smokers. Two hundred six patients had a biopsy, of which 126 (61%) were positive for lung cancer. Among those with positive biopsies, 52% were stage I, 12% were stage II, and 22% were stage III. Long-term follow-up is required to determine the effect on mortality rate, if any.

Low-dose, noncontrast, thin-slice helical or spiral chest CT has emerged as a possible new tool for lung cancer screening. In a spiral chest CT scan, only the pulmonary parenchyma is examined, thus negating the use of intravenous contrast and the necessity of a physician being present at the exam. The scan can usually be done quickly (within a breath) and involves low doses of radiation. However, the benefits of screening with such technology remain to be determined. The International Early Lung Cancer Action Project (I-ECLAP) screened 31,567 asymptomatic patients at high risk for lung cancer (age 60 years with history of at least a 10每pack-year smoking history) using low-dose baseline CT and annual screening in 27,456 study participants. Suspicious lesions requiring biopsies were indicated in 535 participants. Lung cancer was diagnosed in 484 participants; 405 at baseline, 74 on subsequent screening, and 5 participants due to symptoms between annual visits. Of the 484 participants who received a diagnosis of lung cancer, 412 (85%) were clinical stage I with an estimated 10-year survival rate of 88% regardless of treatment and 92% among the 302 participants who underwent resection within 1 month after diagnosis. A second trial randomized 1276 patients to low-dose CT screening and 1196 to baseline chest x-ray followed by yearly medical examination. At 3-year follow-up, this study found a trend toward more patients being diagnosed with stage I lung cancer in the low-dose CT arm, with no difference in the number of patients diagnosed with advanced lung cancer or lung cancer deaths. More mature data from all trials are required to determine whether screening reduces lung cancer mortality rates.

A major challenge confronting advocates of CT screening is the high false-positive rate; on initial screening of at-risk populations, false-positive rates range between 10 and 20% but can be as high as 50%, depending on the geographical region. Positive predictive values range from 2.8 to 11.6%. False positives can have a substantial impact on patients through the expense and risk of unneeded further evaluation and emotional stress. False-positive rates and positive predictive values are somewhat improved in annual follow-up CT scans, but there is still significant room for improvement. Based on extant data, it appears that nodules <0.5 mm are unlikely to be cancerous and those 5每10 mm in diameter (25每40% of noncalcified nodules detected) are of uncertain significance. The management of these patients usually consists of serial CT scans over time to see if the nodules grow, attempted fine-needle aspirates, or surgical resection (Fig. 89-3).

Figure 89-3

 
 
 
Approach to solitary pulmonary nodule.
 
 

Two additional screening studies are ongoing, the National Lung Cancer Screening Trial (NLST), a prospective comparison of spiral CT and standard chest x-ray in 50,000 current or ex-smokers and a similar study in Europe comparing CT scanning with standard of care in subjects with a history of heavy smoking. Until these data and more mature data from the above-mentioned trials become available, routine CT screening for lung cancer cannot be recommended for any risk group. For those patients who want to be screened, physicians need to discuss the possible benefits and risks of screening. While lung cancers may be found, patients are at risk for more radiation exposure and false-positive results. The latter can result in multiple follow-up CTs and possible invasive procedures, with potential added costs, anxiety, and morbidity and mortality rates. There are no data on screening never smokers for lung cancer.
 
Clinical Manifestations

More than half of all patients diagnosed with lung cancer present with advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. The majority of patients present with signs, symptoms, or laboratory abnormalities that can be attributed to the primary lesion, local tumor growth, invasion or obstruction of adjacent structures, growth at distant metastatic sites, or a paraneoplastic syndrome (Tables 89每3 and 89每4). The prototypical lung cancer patient is a current or former smoker of either sex, usually in the seventh decade of life. A history of chronic cough with or without hemoptysis in a current or former smoker with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) aged 40 years or older should prompt a thorough investigation for lung cancer even in the face of a normal chest x-ray. A persistent pneumonia without constitutional symptoms and unresponsive to repeated courses of antibiotics also should prompt an evaluation for the underlying cause.

Table 89每3 Presenting Signs and Symptoms of Lung Cancer

 
 
Symptom and Signs Range of frequency 
Cough 8每75% 
Weight loss 0每68% 
Dyspnea 3每60% 
Chest pain 20每49% 
Hemoptysis 6每35% 
Bone pain 6每25% 
Clubbing 0每20% 
Fever 0每20% 
Weakness 0每10% 
SVCO 0每4% 
Dysphagia 0每2% 
Wheezing and stridor 0每2% 
 


Abbreviation: SVCO, superior vena cava obstruction.

Source: Reproduced with permission from MA Beckles et al: Chest 123:97, 2003.
 
Table 89每4 Clinical Findings Suggestive of Metastatic Disease

 
 
Symptoms elicited in history  Constitutional: weight loss >10 lb

 Musculoskeletal: focal skeletal pain

 Neurologic: headaches, syncope, seizures, extremity weakness, recent change in mental status
 
Signs found on physical examination  Lymphadenopathy (>1 cm)

 Hoarseness, superior vena cava syndrome

 Bone tenderness

 Hepatomegaly (>13 cm span)

 Focal neurologic signs, papilledema

 Soft-tissue mass
 
Routine laboratory tests  Hematocrit: <40% in men, <35% in women

 Elevated alkaline phosphatase, GGT, SGOT, and calcium levels
 
 


Abbreviation: GGT, gamma-glutamyltransferase; SGOT, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase.

Source: Reproduced with permission from GA Silvestri et al: Chest 123(1 Suppl):147S, 2003.
 

Lung cancer arising in a lifetime never smoker is more common in women and East Asians. Such patients also tend to be younger than their smoking counterparts at the time of diagnosis. The clinical presentation of lung cancer in never smokers tends to mirror that of current and former smokers.

Patients with central or endobronchial growth of the primary tumor may present with cough, hemoptysis, wheeze, stridor, dyspnea, or postobstructive pneumonitis. Peripheral growth of the primary tumor may cause pain from pleural or chest wall involvement, dyspnea on a restrictive basis, and symptoms of a lung abscess resulting from tumor cavitation. Regional spread of tumor in the thorax (by contiguous growth or by metastasis to regional lymph nodes) may cause tracheal obstruction, esophageal compression with dysphagia, recurrent laryngeal paralysis with hoarseness, phrenic nerve palsy with elevation of the hemidiaphragm and dyspnea, and sympathetic nerve paralysis with Horner's syndrome (enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis). Malignant pleural effusions can cause pain or dyspnea. Pancoast (or superior sulcus tumor) syndromes result from local extension of a tumor growing in the apex of the lung with involvement of the eighth cervical and first and second thoracic nerves, with shoulder pain that characteristically radiates in the ulnar distribution of the arm, often with radiologic destruction of the first and second ribs. Often Horner's syndrome and Pancoast syndrome coexist. Other problems of regional spread include superior vena cava syndrome from vascular obstruction; pericardial and cardiac extension with resultant tamponade, arrhythmia, or cardiac failure; lymphatic obstruction with resultant pleural effusion; and lymphangitic spread through the lungs with hypoxemia and dyspnea. In addition, lung cancer can spread transbronchially, producing tumor growth along multiple alveolar surfaces with impairment of gas exchange, respiratory insufficiency, dyspnea, hypoxemia, and sputum production. Constitutional symptoms may include anorexia, weight loss, weakness, fever, and night sweats. Apart from the brevity of symptom duration, these parameters fail to clearly distinguish SCLC from NSCLC or even from neoplasms metastatic to lungs.

Extrathoracic metastatic disease is found at autopsy in >50% of patients with squamous carcinoma, 80% of patients with adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma, and >95% of patients with SCLC. Approximately one-third of patients present with symptoms as a result of distant metastases. Lung cancer metastases may occur in virtually every organ system, and the site of metastatic involvement largely determines other symptoms. Patients with brain metastases may present with headache, nausea and vomiting, or neurologic deficits. Patients with bone metastases may present with pain, pathologic fractures, or cord compression. The latter may also occur with epidural metastases. Individuals with bone marrow invasion may present with cytopenias or leukoerythroblastosis. Those with liver metastases may present with hepatomegaly, right upper quadrant pain, anorexia, and weight loss. Liver dysfunction or biliary obstructions are rare. Adrenal metastases are common but rarely cause pain or adrenal insufficiency unless they are large.

Paraneoplastic syndromes are common in patients with lung cancer, especially those with SCLC, and may be the presenting finding or the first sign of recurrence. In addition, paraneoplastic syndromes may mimic metastatic disease and, unless detected, lead to inappropriate palliative rather than curative treatment. Often the paraneoplastic syndrome may be relieved with successful treatment of the tumor. In some cases, the pathophysiology of the paraneoplastic syndrome is known, particularly when a hormone with biologic activity is secreted by a tumor. However, in many cases the pathophysiology is not known. Systemic symptoms of anorexia, cachexia, weight loss (seen in 30% of patients), fever, and suppressed immunity are paraneoplastic syndromes of unknown etiology or at least not well defined. Weight loss greater than 10% of total body weight is considered a bad prognostic sign. Endocrine syndromes are seen in 12% of patients; hypercalcemia resulting from ectopic production of parathyroid hormone (PTH), or more commonly, PTH-related peptide, is the most common life-threatening metabolic complication of malignancy, primarily occurring with squamous cell carcinomas of the lung. Clinical symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, polyuria, thirst, and altered mental status.

Hyponatremia may be caused by the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) or possibly atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). SIADH resolves within 1每4 weeks of initiating chemotherapy in the vast majority of cases. During this period, serum sodium can usually be managed and maintained above 128 meq/L via fluid restriction. Demeclocycline can be a useful adjunctive measure when fluid restriction alone is insufficient. Of note, patients with ectopic ANP may have worsening hyponatremia if sodium intake is not concomitantly increased. Accordingly, if hyponatremia fails to improve or worsens after 3每4 days of adequate fluid restriction, plasma levels of ANP should be measured to determine the causative syndrome.

Ectopic secretion of ACTH by SCLC and pulmonary carcinoids usually results in additional electrolyte disturbances, especially hypokalemia, rather than the changes in body habitus that occur in Cushing's syndrome from a pituitary adenoma. Treatment with standard medications, such as metyrapone and ketoconazole, is largely ineffective due to extremely high cortisol levels. The most effective strategy for management of Cushing's syndrome is effective treatment of the underlying SCLC. Bilateral adrenalectomy may be considered in extreme cases.

Skeletal每connective tissue syndromes include clubbing in 30% of cases (usually NSCLCs) and hypertrophic primary osteoarthropathy in 1每10% of cases (usually adenocarcinomas). Patients may develop periostitis, causing pain, tenderness, and swelling over the affected bones and a positive bone scan. Neurologic每myopathic syndromes are seen in only 1% of patients but are dramatic and include the myasthenic Eaton-Lambert syndrome and retinal blindness with SCLC, while peripheral neuropathies, subacute cerebellar degeneration, cortical degeneration, and polymyositis are seen with all lung cancer types. Many of these are caused by autoimmune responses such as the development of anti每voltage-gated calcium channel antibodies in Eaton-Lambert syndrome. Patients with this disorder present with proximal muscle weakness, usually in the lower extremities, occasional autonomic dysfunction, and rarely with cranial nerve symptoms or involvement of the bulbar or respiratory muscles. Depressed deep tendon reflexes are frequently present. In contrast to patients with myasthenia gravis, strength improves with serial effort. Some patients who respond to chemotherapy will have resolution of the neurologic abnormalities. Thus, chemotherapy is the initial treatment of choice. Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuropathies, cerebellar degeneration, limbic encephalitis, and brainstem encephalitis occur in SCLC in association with a variety of antineuronal antibodies such as anti-Hu, anti-CRMP5, and ANNA-3. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration may be associated with anti-Hu, anti-Yo, or P/Q calcium channel autoantibodies. Coagulation, thrombotic, or other hematologic manifestations occur in 1每8% of patients and include migratory venous thrombophlebitis (Trousseau's syndrome), nonbacterial thrombotic (marantic) endocarditis with arterial emboli, and disseminated intravascular coagulation with hemorrhage, anemia, granulocytosis, and leukoerythroblastosis. Thrombotic disease complicating cancer is usually a poor prognostic sign. Cutaneous manifestations such as dermatomyositis and acanthosis nigricans are uncommon (1%), as are the renal manifestations of nephrotic syndrome and glomerulonephritis (1%).
 
Diagnosing Lung Cancer

Tissue sampling is required to confirm a diagnosis in all patients with suspected lung cancer. Tumor tissue may be obtained via minimally invasive techniques such as bronchial or transbronchial biopsy during fiberoptic bronchoscopy, by fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or percutaneous biopsy using image guidance, or via endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS)-guided biopsy. Depending on the location, lymph node sampling may occur via transesophageal endoscopic ultrasound guide biopsy (EUS), EBUS, or blind biopsy. In patients with clinically palpable lymph nodes, an FNA may be obtained. In patients with suspected metastatic disease, a diagnosis may be confirmed by percutaneous biopsy of a soft tissue mass, lytic bone lesion, bone marrow, pleural or liver lesion, or an adequate cell block obtained from a malignant pleural effusion. In patients with a suspected malignant pleural effusion, if the initial thoracentesis is negative, a repeat thoracentesis is recommended. While the majority of pleural effusions are due to malignant disease, particularly if they are exudative or bloody, some may be parapneumonic. In this case, patients should be considered for possible curative treatment.

The diagnostic yield of any biopsy depends on several factors, including location (accessibility) of the tumor, tumor size, tumor type, and technical aspects of the diagnostic procedure including the experience level of the bronchoscopist and pathologist. In general, central lesions, such as squamous cell carcinomas, small cell carcinomas, or endobronchial lesions, such as carcinoid tumors, are more readily diagnosed by bronchoscopic examination, while peripheral lesions such as adenocarcinomas and large cell carcinomas are more amenable to transthoracic FNA. Diagnostic accuracy for SCLC versus NSCLC for most specimens is excellent, with lesser accuracy for subtypes of NSCLC.

Bronchoscopic specimens include bronchial brush, bronchial wash, bronchioloalveolar lavage, and transbronchial FNA. Of these, transbronchial FNA consistently demonstrates the highest sensitivity, surpassed only by the use of a combination of bronchoscopic specimens. Overall sensitivity for combined use of bronchoscopic methods is approximately 80%, and together with tissue biopsy, the yield increases to 85每90%. Like transbronchial FNA specimens, transthoracic FNA specimens are also very good, yielding diagnostic material in 70每95% of cases. Sensitivity is highest for larger lesions and peripheral tumors. In general, FNA specimens, whether transbronchial, transthoracic, or endoscopic ultrasound-guided, are superior to other specimen types. This is primarily due to the higher percentage of tumor cells with fewer confounding factors, such as obscuring inflammation and reactive nonneoplastic cells. For more accurate histologic classification, mutation analysis, or for investigational purposes, reasonable efforts (e.g., a core-needle biopsy) should be made to obtain more tissue than what is contained in a routine cytology specimen obtained by FNA.

Sputum cytology is inexpensive and noninvasive but has a lower yield than other specimen types due to poor preservation of the cells and more variability in acquiring a good-quality specimen. The yield for sputum cytology is highest for larger and centrally located tumors such as squamous cell carcinoma and small cell carcinoma histology. The specificity for sputum cytology averages close to 100%, although sensitivity is generally less than 70%. The accuracy of sputum cytology improves with increased numbers of specimens analyzed. Consequently, analysis of at least three sputum specimens is recommended.
 
Staging Lung Cancer

Lung cancer staging consists of two parts: first, a determination of the location of the tumor and possible metastatic sites (anatomic staging), and second, an assessment of a patient's ability to withstand various antitumor treatments (physiologic staging). All patients with lung cancer should have a complete history and physical examination, with evaluation of all other medical problems, determination of performance status, and history of weight loss. The most significant dividing line is between those patients who are candidates for surgical resection and those who are inoperable but will benefit from chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both. Staging with regard to a patient's potential for surgical resection is principally applicable to NSCLC.

Anatomic Staging of Patients with Lung Cancer

The accurate staging of patients with NSCLC is essential for determining the appropriate treatment in patients with resectable disease and avoiding unnecessary surgical procedures in patients with advanced disease (Fig. 89-4). All patients with NSCLC should undergo initial radiographic imaging with CT scan, positron emission tomography (PET), or preferably CT-PET. PET scanning attempts to identify sites of malignancy based on glucose metabolism by measuring the uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose F18. Rapidly dividing cells, presumably in the lung tumors, will preferentially take up 18F-FDG and appear as a "hot spot." To date, PET has been mostly used for staging and detection of metastases in lung cancer and in the detection of nodules >15 mm in diameter. Combined 18F-FDG PET-CT imaging has been shown to improve the accuracy of staging in NSCLC compared to visual correlation of PET and CT or either study alone. CT-PET has been found to be superior in identifying pathologically enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and extrathoracic metastases. A standardized uptake value (SUV) of >2.5 on PET is highly suspicious for malignancy. False negatives can be seen in diabetes, in lesions <8 mm, in slow-growing tumors, and in concurrent infections such as tuberculosis. False positives can be seen in infections and granulomatous disease. Thus, PET should never be used alone to diagnose lung cancer, mediastinal involvement, or metastases. Confirmation with tissue biopsy is required. For brain metastases, MRI is the most effective method. MRI can also be useful in selected circumstances, such as for superior sulcus tumors, to rule out brachial plexus involvement, but in general does not play a major role in NSCLC staging.

Figure 89-4

 
 
 
Algorithm for management of non-small cell lung cancer.
 
 


In patients with NSCLC, the following are major contraindications to potential curative resection: extrathoracic metastases; superior vena cava syndrome; vocal cord and, in most cases, phrenic nerve paralysis; malignant pleural effusion; cardiac tamponade; tumor within 2 cm of the carina (potentially curable with combined chemoradiotherapy); metastasis to the contralateral lung; metastases to supraclavicular lymph nodes; contralateral mediastinal node metastases (potentially curable with combined chemoradiotherapy); and involvement of the main pulmonary artery. In situations where it will make a difference in treatment, abnormal scan findings require tissue confirmation of malignancy so that patients are not precluded from having potentially curative surgery.

The best predictor of metastatic disease remains a careful history and physical examination. If signs, symptoms, or findings from physical examination suggest the presence of malignancy, then sequential imaging starting with the most appropriate study should be performed. If the findings from the clinical evaluation are negative, then imaging studies beyond CT-PET are unnecessary and the search for metastatic disease is complete. More controversial is how one should assess patients with known stage III disease. Because these patients are more likely to have asymptomatic occult metastatic disease, current guidelines recommend a more extensive imaging evaluation, including imaging of the brain with either CT scan or MRI. In patients in whom distant metastatic disease has been ruled out, lymph node status needs to be assessed via a combination of radiographic imaging and/or minimally invasive techniques such as those mentioned above and/or invasive techniques such as mediastinoscopy, mediastinotomy, thoracoscopy, and thoracotomy. About a quarter to a half of patients diagnosed with NSCLC will have mediastinal lymph node metastases at the time of diagnosis. Lymph node sampling is recommended in all patients with enlarged nodes detected by CT or PET scan and in patients with large tumors or tumors occupying the inner third of the lung. The extent of mediastinal lymph node involvement is important in determining the appropriate treatment strategy: surgical resection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy versus combined chemoradiotherapy alone (see below). A standard nomenclature for referring to the location of lymph nodes involved with lung cancer has evolved (Fig. 89-5).

Figure 89-5

 
 
 
Lymph node stations in staging non-small cell lung cancer.
 
 


There are limited data on the use of CT-PET in the staging of patients with SCLC (Fig. 89-6). Current staging recommendations include a CT scan of the chest and abdomen (because of the high frequency of hepatic and adrenal involvement), MRI of the brain (positive in 10% of asymptomatic patients), and radionuclide (bone) scan if symptoms or signs suggest disease involvement in these areas. Bone marrow biopsies and aspirations are rarely performed given the low incidence of isolated bone marrow metastases. Confirmation of metastatic disease, ipsilateral or contralateral lung nodules, or metastases beyond the mediastinum may be achieved by the same modalities recommended above for patients with NSCLC.

Figure 89-6

 
 
 
Algorithm for management of small cell lung cancer.
 
 

If a patient has signs or symptoms of spinal cord compression (pain, weakness, paralysis, urinary retention), a spinal CT or MRI scan and examination of the cerebrospinal fluid cytology should be performed. If metastases are evident on imaging, a neurosurgeon should be consulted for possible palliative surgical resection and/or a radiation oncologist should be consulted for palliative radiotherapy to the site of compression. If signs of symptoms of leptomeningitis develop at any time in a patient with lung cancer, an MRI of the brain and spinal cord should be performed as well as a spinal tap for detection of malignant cells. If the spinal tap is negative, a repeat spinal tap should be considered. There is currently no approved therapy for the treatment of leptomeningeal disease.

The Staging System for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

The TNM International Staging System provides useful prognostic information and is used to stage all patients with NSCLC. The various T (tumor size), N (regional node involvement) and M (presence or absence of distant metastasis) are combined to form different stage groups (Table 89每5). The former tumor node metastasis (TNM) staging system for lung cancer (sixth edition) was developed based on a relatively small database of patients from a single institution. In 1999, the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer established the lung cancer staging project and collected data on more than 68,000 cases from 46 sources in more than 19 countries to develop the new TNM (seventh edition) staging system, which has come into use as of 2010. As seen in Tables 89每5 and 89每6, the major distinction between the sixth and seventh edition staging system is within the T classification; T1 tumors are divided into tumors 2 cm in size, as these patients were found to have a better prognosis compared to tumors >2 cm but 3 cm. T2 tumors are divided into those that are >3 cm but 5 cm and those that are >5 cm but 7 cm. T3 tumors are >7 cm. T4 tumors include those that have additional nodules in the same lobe or tumors that have a malignant pleural effusion. No changes have been made to the current classification of lymph node involvement (N). Patients with metastasis may be classified as M1a, malignant pleural or pericardial effusion, pleural nodules or nodules in the contralateral lung, or M1b distant metastasis (e.g., bone, liver, adrenal, or brain metastasis). Based on these data, approximately one-third of patients have localized disease that can be treated with curative attempt (surgery or radiotherapy), one-third have local or regional disease that may or may not be amenable to a curative attempt, and one-third have metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis.

Table 89每5 Comparison of the Sixth and Seventh Edition TNM Staging Systems for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

 
 
  Sixth Edition Seventh Edition 
Tumor (T)  
T1 Tumor 3 cm diameter without invasion more proximal than lobar bronchus Tumor 2 cm diameter, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without invasion more proximal than lobar bronchus 
T1a   Tumor 2 cm in diameter 
T1b   Tumor >2 cm but 3 cm in diameter 
T2 Tumor >3 cm diameter OR tumor of any size with any of the following:

   Visceral pleural invasion

   Atelectasis of less than entire lung

   Proximal extent at least 2 cm from carina
 Tumor >3 cm but 7 cm with any of the following:

   Involves main bronchus, 2 cm distal to carina

   Invades visceral pleura

   Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis extending to hilar region but not involving the entire lung
 
T2a   Tumor >3 cm but 5 cm in diameter 
T2b   Tumor >5 cm but 7 cm in diameter 
T3 Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: chest wall, diaphragm, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium

Tumor <2 cm distal to carina
 Tumor >7 cm or directly invades any of the following: chest wall (including superior sulcus tumors), phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium

Tumor <2 cm distal to carina but without involvement of carina

Tumor with associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of entire lung

Separate tumor nodule(s) in same lobe
 
T4 Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: mediastinum, heart or great vessels, trachea, esophagus, vertebral body, carina

Tumor with malignant pleural or pericardial effusion

Separate tumor nodules in same lobe
 Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: mediastinum, heart or great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, carina

Separate tumor nodule(s) in a different ipsilateral lobe
 
Nodes (N)  
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis No regional lymph node metastasis 
N1 Metastasis in ipsilateral peribronchial and/or hilar lymph node(s) Metastasis in ipsilateral peribronchial and/or hilar lymph node(s) and intrapulmonary node(s), including involvement by direct extensions 
N2 Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal lymph node(s) Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal lymph node(s) 
N3 Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, contralateral hilar, ipsilateral or contralateral scalene or supraclavicular lymph node(s) Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, hilar, ipsilateral or contralateral scalene or supraclavicular lymph node(s) 
Metastasis (M)  
M0 No distant metastasis No distant metastasis 
M1 Distant metastasis (includes tumor nodules in different lobe from primary) Distant metastasis 
M1a   Separate tumor nodules in a contralateral lobe

Tumor with pleural nodules or malignant pleural or pericardial effusion
 
M1b   Distant metastasis 
 


Source: Reproduced with permission from P Goldstraw et al: J Thorac Oncol 2:706, 2007.
 
Table 89每6 Comparison of Survival by Stage in TNM Sixth and Seventh Editions

 
 
Stage TNM Sixth Edition TNM Seventh Edition 5-Year Survival (%)*
  
IA

IB
 T1N0M0

T2N0M0
 T1a-T1bN0M0

T2aN0M0
 73

58
 
IIA

IIB
 T1N1M0

T2N1M0 or

T3N0M0
 T1a-T2aN1M0 or

T2bN0M0

T2bN1M0 or

T3N0M0
 46

36
 
IIIA

IIIB
 T3N1M0 or

T1-3N2M0

Any T N3M0

T4 Any N M0
 T1a-T3N2M0 or

T3N1M0 or

T4N0-1M0

T4N2M0 or

T1a-T4N3M0
 24

9
 
IV Any T Any N M1 Any T Any N M1a or M1b 13 
 


*Survival according to the seventh edition.
 

The Staging System for Small Cell Lung Cancer

Small cell lung cancer has a distinct two-stage system. Patients with limited-stage disease (LD) have cancer that is confined to the ipsilateral hemithorax and can be encompassed within a tolerable radiation port. Thus, contralateral supraclavicular nodes, recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement, and superior vena caval obstruction can all be part of limited-stage disease. Patients with extensive-stage disease (ED) have overt metastatic disease by imaging or physical examination. Cardiac tamponade, malignant pleural effusion, and bilateral pulmonary parenchymal involvement generally qualify disease as extensive-stage, because the involved organs cannot be encompassed safely or effectively within a single radiation therapy port. Sixty to 70% of patients are diagnosed with extensive disease at presentation.

Physiologic Staging

Patients with lung cancer often have other comorbid conditions related to smoking, including cardiovascular disease and COPD. To improve their preoperative condition, correctable problems (e.g., anemia, electrolyte and fluid disorders, infections, cardiac disease, and arrhythmias) should be addressed, appropriate chest physical therapy instituted, and patients should be encouraged to stop smoking. Since it is not always possible to predict whether a lobectomy or pneumonectomy will be required until the time of operation, a conservative approach is to restrict surgical resection to patients who could potentially tolerate a pneumonectomy. Patients with an FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) of greater than 2 L or greater than 80% of predicted can tolerate a pneumonectomy, and those with an FEV1 greater than 1.5 L have adequate reserve for a lobectomy. In patients with borderline lung function but a resectable tumor, cardiopulmonary exercise testing could be performed as part of the physiologic evaluation. This test allows an estimate of the maximal oxygen consumption (Vo2max). A Vo2max <15 mL/(kg﹞min) predicts for a higher risk of postoperative complications. Patients deemed unable to tolerate lobectomy or pneumonectomy from a pulmonary functional standpoint may be candidates for more limited resections, such as wedge or anatomic segmental resection, although such procedures are associated with significantly higher rates of local recurrence and a trend toward decreased overall survival. All patients should be assessed for cardiovascular risk using American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines. A myocardial infarction within the past 3 months is a contraindication to thoracic surgery because 20% of patients will die of reinfarction. An infarction in the past 6 months is a relative contraindication. Other major contraindications include uncontrolled arrhythmias, an FEV1 of less than 1 L, CO2 retention (resting PCO2 >45 mmHg), DLCO <40%, and severe pulmonary hypertension.

Treatment: Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

The overall treatment approach to patients with NSCLC is shown in Fig. 89-4.

Management of Occult and Stage 0 Carcinomas

Patients with severe atypia on sputum cytology have an increased risk of developing lung cancer compared to those without atypia. In the uncommon circumstance where malignant cells are identified in a sputum or bronchial washing specimen but the chest imaging appears normal (TX tumor stage), the lesion must be localized. More than 90% of tumors can be localized by meticulous examination of the bronchial tree with a fiberoptic bronchoscope under general anesthesia and collection of a series of differential brushings and biopsies. Surgical resection following bronchoscopic localization improves survival compared to no treatment. Close follow-up of these patients is indicated because of the high incidence of second primary lung cancers (5% per patient per year).

Solitary Pulmonary Nodule and "Ground-Glass" Opacities

A solitary pulmonary nodule is defined as an x-ray density completely surrounded by normal aerated lung with circumscribed margins, of any shape, usually 1每6 cm at greatest diameter. The approach to a patient with a solitary pulmonary nodule is based on an estimate of the probability of cancer, determined according to the patient's smoking history, age, and characteristics on imaging (Table 89每7). Prior chest x-rays and CT scans should be obtained if available for comparison. A PET scan may be useful if the lesion is greater than 7每8 mm in diameter. If no diagnosis is apparent, Mayo Clinic investigators reported that clinical characteristics (age, cigarette smoking status, and prior cancer diagnosis) and three radiologic characteristics (nodule diameter, spiculation, and upper lobe location) were independent predictors of malignancy. At present, only two radiographic criteria are thought to predict the benign nature of a solitary pulmonary nodule: lack of growth over a period >2 years and certain characteristic patterns of calcification. Calcification alone, however, does not exclude malignancy; a dense central nidus, multiple punctate foci, and "bull's-eye" (granuloma) and "popcorn ball" (hamartoma) calcifications are highly suggestive of a benign lesion. In contrast, a relatively large lesion, lack of or asymmetric calcification, chest symptoms, associated atelectasis, pneumonitis, or growth of the lesion revealed by comparison with an old x-ray or CT scan or a positive PET scan are suggestive of a malignant process and warrant further attempts to establish a histologic diagnosis. An algorithm for assessing these lesions is shown in Fig. 89-3.

Table 89每7 Assessment of Risk of Cancer in Patients with Solitary Pulmonary Nodules

 
 
  Risk 
Variable Low Intermediate High 
Diameter (cm) <1.5 1.5每2.2 2.3 
Age (years) <45 45每60 >60 
Smoking status Never smoker Current smoker (<20 cigarettes/d) Current smoker (>20 cigarettes/d) 
Smoking cessation status Quit 7 years ago or quit Quit <7 years ago Never quit 
Characteristics of nodule margins Smooth Scalloped Corona radiata or spiculated 
 


Source: Reproduced with permission from D Ost et al: N Engl J Med 348:2535, 2003.
 

Since the advent of screening CTs, small GGOs have often been observed, particularly as the increased sensitivity of CTs enables detection of smaller lesions. Many of these GGOs, when biopsied, are found to be BAC. Some of the GGOs are semiopaque and referred to as "partial" GGOs. These are often more slow-growing and harbor atypical adenomatous hyperplasia histology, and are thought to be precursors to adenocarcinoma. By contrast, "solid" GGOs have faster growth rates and are usually typical adenocarcinoma histologically.

Management of Stages I and II NSCLC

Surgical Resection for Stages I and II NSCLC

Surgical resection by an experienced surgeon is the treatment of choice for patients with clinical stage I or II NSCLC who are able to tolerate the procedure. A retrospective review indicated that operative mortality rates for patients whose tumors were resected by noncardiothoracic or cardiothoracic surgeons were lower compared to general surgeons (5.8% vs 5.6% vs 7.6%, p = .001). The extent of resection is a matter of surgical judgment based on findings at exploration. A clinical trial in patients with stage IA NSCLC found that lobectomy was superior to wedge resection in reducing the rate of local recurrence, with a trend toward improvement in overall survival. A retrospective review of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database also reported a survival benefit for lobectomy compared to wedge resection. A limited resection, wedge resection, and segmentectomy [potentially by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS)] may be more appropriate in patients with comorbidities, including compromised pulmonary reserve and small peripheral lesions. Pneumonectomy is reserved for patients with very central tumors and should only be performed in patients with excellent pulmonary reserve. The 5-year survival rates are 60每80% for patients with stage I NSCLC and 40每50% for patients with stage II NSCLC.

Accurate pathologic staging requires adequate segmental, hilar, and mediastinal lymph node sampling. Mediastinal lymph node dissection provides for a significantly larger amount of material, which can refine pathologic (nodal) stage. On the right side, mediastinal stations 2R, 4R, 7, 8R, and 9R should be dissected; on the left side, stations 5, 6, 7, 8L, and 9L should be dissected (Fig. 89-5). Hilar lymph nodes are typically resected and sent with the specimen, although it is helpful to specifically dissect and label level 10 lymph nodes when possible. On the left side, level 2 and sometimes level 4 lymph nodes are generally obscured by the aorta. Although the therapeutic benefit of nodal dissection versus nodal sampling remains controversial, in a recent pooled analysis of three trials, 4-year survival was superior in patients undergoing resection with stages I每IIIA NSCLC who had complete mediastinal lymph node dissection compared with lymph node sampling. Moreover, a complete mediastinal lymphadenectomy adds little morbidity to a pulmonary resection for lung cancer. Thus, the recommendation at this time is that patients should have a complete mediastinal node dissection.

Radiation Therapy in Stages I and II NSCLC

There is currently no role for adjuvant radiation therapy in patients following resection of stage I or II NSCLC. Patients with stage I or II disease who refuse or are not candidates for pulmonary resection should be considered for radiation therapy with curative intent. The decision to administer high-dose radiotherapy is based on the extent of disease and the volume of the chest that requires radiation. A systematic review reported 5-year survival rates of 13每39% in patients with stage I or II NSCLC treated with radical radiotherapy. Stereotactic radiation therapy and cryoablation are relatively new techniques that are being used in the treatment of patients with isolated pulmonary nodules who are not candidates for or refuse surgical resection, but their use may be limited by tumor size: 5 cm for stereotactic radiotherapy and 3 cm for cryoablation therapy.

Chemotherapy in Stages I and II NSCLC

A multitude of trials have evaluated the role of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with resected stage IA每IIIA NSCLC with conflicting results (Table 89每8). A meta-analysis, the Lung Adjuvant Cisplatin Evaluation Study (LACE), reported a 5.4% improvement in 5-year survival for adjuvant chemotherapy compared to surgery alone in patients with stage I每IIIA NSCLC. The effect of cisplatin plus vinorelbine appeared marginally better than other cisplatin-based doublet regimens. The analysis, however, reported a harmful effect for chemotherapy in patients with stage IA disease, with questionable benefit in patients with stage IB disease. Chemotherapy also appeared to be detrimental in patients with poor performance status (ECOG PS2). The results of these studies have led to the recommendation for adjuvant chemotherapy only in patients with stage II or III NSCLC. Chemotherapy should start 6 to 8 weeks after surgery, if the patient has recovered, and should be administered for four cycles. All patients should be treated with a cisplatin-based regimen. Carboplatin is a reasonable consideration in patients who are unlikely to tolerate cisplatin for reasons such as reduced renal function, presence of neuropathy, or hearing impairment.

Table 89每8 Adjuvant Chemotherapy Trials in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

 
 
Trial Stage Treatment N 5-Year Survival p  
IALT I每III Cisplatin-based

Control
 932

835
 44.5

40.4
 <.03 
BR10 IB每II Cisplatin + vinorelbine

Control
 242

240
 69

54
 .03 
ANITA IB每IIIA Cisplatin + vinorelbine

Control
 407

433
 60

58
 .017 
ALPI I每III MVP

Control
 548

540
 50

45
 .49 
BLT I每III Cisplatin-based

Control
 192

189
 60

58
 .90 
CALGB IB Carboplatin + paclitaxel 173

171
 59

57
 .10 
 


Abbreviation: IALT, International Adjuvant Lung Cancer Trial; ANITA, Adjuvant Navelbine International Trialist Association; ALPI, Adjuvant Lung Cancer Project Italy; BLT, Big Lung Trial; CALGB, Cancer and Lung Cancer Group B; MVP, mitomycin, vindesine, and cisplatin.
 

The treatment of patients with stage IB NSCLC remains controversial. Retrospective subset analyses of randomized phase III trials have reported no benefit for adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with stage IB disease. The only trial to evaluate adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with stage IB NSCLC reported no improvement in overall survival; however, a retrospective analysis of the trial reported a benefit in patients with tumors that were 4 cm. At this time, the risks and benefits of chemotherapy should be considered on an individual patient basis.

Four trials have evaluated neoadjuvant chemotherapy (chemotherapy before surgery) in patients with stage I每III NSCLC, of which three reported a trend toward improvement in progression-free and overall survival. However, at this time, no data support the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in NSCLC patients.

All patients with resected NSCLC are at high risk of recurrence or developing a second primary lung cancer. Thus, it is reasonable to follow these patients with regular imaging. The most appropriate modality and frequency has not been defined. Given that the majority of patients recur within the first 2 years after therapy, one guideline suggests CT scans of the chest with contrast every 6 months for the first 2 years after surgery, followed by yearly CT scans of the chest without contrast thereafter.

Management of Stage III NSCLC

The interpretation of the results of clinical trials involving patients with stage III NSCLC has been clouded by a number of issues, including changing diagnostic techniques, different staging systems, and heterogeneous patient populations. In prior studies, patients may have had tumors ranging from nonbulky stage IIIA (clinical N1 nodes with N2 nodes discovered only at the time of surgery, despite a negative mediastinoscopy) to bulky N2 nodes (lymph nodes >2 cm clearly visible on imaging, or multilevel ipsilateral mediastinal nodes) to clearly inoperable nodes.

Surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for patients with stage IIIA disease due to hilar nodal involvement (T3N1). Surgery for N2 disease is more controversial. A randomized phase III trial demonstrated an improvement in progression-free survival but no improvement in overall survival when patients with pathologically staged N2 NSCLC were treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (cisplatin and etoposide) and 45 Gy of radiation followed by surgery compared to chemotherapy and 61 Gy of radiotherapy without surgery. Treatment-related mortality rate greater in the surgery arm (8% vs 2%), with the majority of deaths occurring in patients undergoing pneumonectomy. In subset analysis, the investigators found survival was improved if a lobectomy was performed but not pneumonectomy compared to chemoradiotherapy alone.

In spite of a careful preoperative staging evaluation, as many as a quarter of patients will be found to have metastases to N2 nodes on frozen-section examination at the time of thoracotomy or on final pathologic examination of the surgical specimen. For patients with an occult, single-station mediastinal node metastasis recognized at thoracotomy in which a complete resection of the nodes and primary tumor is technically possible, most thoracic surgeons proceed with the planned lung resection and a mediastinal lymphadenectomy. If a complete resection is not possible or there is multistation or bulky nodal disease or extracapsular nodal disease, then the planned lung resection should be aborted. These patients can then be considered for combined chemoradiotherapy as described below. Although incomplete resection rarely results in long-term survival, collected results indicate that surgery alone in stage IIIA disease (N2 disease) is associated with a 14每30% 5-year survival. The best survival rate is seen in cases with minimal N2 disease and complete resection.

Chemotherapy plus radiation therapy is the treatment of choice for patients with N3 nodal involvement or bulky stage IIIA disease. In general, patients with histologically involved lymph nodes >2 cm in short-axis diameter measured by CT, who have extranodal involvement or multistation disease along with groups of multiple smaller lymph nodes involved, are considered to have bulky, unresectable disease. Randomized phase III trials initially demonstrated an improvement in median and long-term survival for chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy, compared with radiation therapy alone. Subsequent trials demonstrated administering concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy results in improved survival compared to sequential therapy, albeit with more side effects, such as fatigue, esophagitis, and neutropenia. Therefore, combined modality treatment with chemotherapy and radiation therapy is recommended in patients who are able to tolerate the treatment.

Superior Sulcus or Pancoast Tumors

Superior sulcus tumors arise in the apex of the lung and invade adjacent structures producing Pancoast's syndrome: Horner's syndrome, shoulder and/or arm pain, and weakness and atrophy of the muscles of the hand. Patients with these tumors should undergo the same staging procedures as all patients with stage II or III NSCLC. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy is typically reserved for those patients with N0 or N1 involvement. This approach results in a 33-month median survival and 44% 5-year survival for all patients, and a 94-month median survival and 54% 5-year survival in patients with an R0 resection. For patients with Pancoast tumors that have metastatic disease at the time of presentation, radiation therapy with or without chemotherapy may be offered for palliation of symptoms.

Treatment of Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

Approximately two-thirds of NSCLC patients present with advanced disease (stage IIIB with a pleural effusion or stage IV) at the time of diagnosis. These patients have a median survival of 4每5 months and a 1-year survival of 10% when managed with best supportive care alone. In addition, a significant number of patients who present with early-stage NSCLC eventually relapse with distant disease. Patients who have recurrent disease have a better prognosis than those presenting with metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. Standard medical management, the judicious use of pain medications, and the appropriate use of radiotherapy and chemotherapy form the cornerstone of management.

Chemotherapy palliates symptoms, improves the quality of life, and improves survival in patients with stage IV NSCLC, particularly in patients with good performance status. In addition, economic analysis has found chemotherapy to be cost-effective palliation for stage IV NSCLC. However, the use of chemotherapy for NSCLC requires clinical experience and careful judgment to balance potential benefits and toxicities.

First-Line Chemotherapy for Metastatic or Recurrent Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

The first indication of the benefit of chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC came from a meta-analysis published in 1995 that reported a survival advantage in patients treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy compared to those receiving supportive care alone (HR = 0.73, p < .0001). This led to a multitude of clinical trials comparing different cisplatin-based regimens in patients with advanced NSCLC all reporting a similar magnitude of benefit; 20每30% response rate and an 8- to 10-month median survival (Table 89每9). Chemotherapy was well tolerated in all studies in patients with a good performance status, ECOG PS 0每1.

Table 89每9 First-Line Chemotherapy Trials for Metastatic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

 
 
Trial Regimen N  RR (%) Median Survival (months) 
ECOG1594 Cisplatin + paclitaxel

Cisplatin + gemcitabine

Cisplatin + docetaxel

Carboplatin + paclitaxel
 288

288

289

290
 21

22

17

17
 7.8

8.1

7.4

8.1
 
TAX-326 Cisplatin + docetaxel

Cisplatin + vinorelbine

Carboplatin + docetaxel
 406

394

404
 32

25

24
 11.3

10.1

9.4
 
EORTC Cisplatin + paclitaxel

Cisplatin + gemcitabine

Paclitaxel + gemcitabine
 159

160

161
 32

37

28
 8.1

8.9

6.7
 
ILCP Cisplatin + gemcitabine

Carboplatin + paclitaxel

Cisplatin + vinorelbine
 205

204

203
 30

32

30
 9.8

9.9

9.5
 
SWOG Cisplatin + vinorelbine

Carboplatin + paclitaxel
 202

206
 28

25
 8.0

8.0
 
FACS Cisplatin + irinotecan

Carboplatin + paclitaxel

Cisplatin + gemcitabine

Cisplatin + vinorelbine
 145

145

146

145
 31

32

30

33
 13.9

12.3

14.0

11.4
 
Scagliotti Cisplatin + gemcitabine

Cisplatin + pemetrexed
 863

862
 28

31
 10.3

10.3
 
iPASS*
  Carboplatin + paclitaxel

Gefitinib
 608

609
 32

43
 17.3

18.6
 
 


*Enrolled selected patients: 18 years of age or older, had histologic or cytologically confirmed stage IIIB or IV non-small cell lung cancer with histologic features of adenocarcinoma (including bronchioloalveolar carcinoma), were nonsmokers (defined as patients who had smoked <100 cigarettes in their lifetime) or former light smokers (those who had stopped smoking at least 15 years previously and had a total of 10 pack-years of smoking), and had had no previous chemotherapy or biologic or immunologic therapy.

Abbreviation: ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; EORTC, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer; ILCP, Italian Lung Cancer Project; SWOG, South-Western Oncology Group; FACS, Follow-up After Colorectal Surgery; iPASS, Iressa Pan-Asian Study.
 

An ongoing debate in the treatment of patients with NSCLC is the appropriate duration of platinum-based chemotherapy. Several large phase III randomized trials have failed to show a benefit for increasing the duration of platinum-based doublet chemotherapy beyond four to six cycles. In fact, longer duration of chemotherapy has been associated with increased toxicities and impaired quality of life. Therefore, prolonged therapy (beyond four to six cycles) with platinum-based regimens is not recommended in patients with advanced NSCLC.

Tumor histology has emerged as an important consideration in the treatment of patients with NSCLC. A randomized phase III trial found that patients with nonsquamous NSCLC had an improved survival when treated with cisplatin and pemetrexed compared to cisplatin and gemcitabine, while patients with squamous carcinoma had an improved survival when treated with cisplatin and gemcitabine. This difference in survival is thought to be related to the differential expression of thymidylate synthase, one of the targets of pemetrexed, between tumor types. Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody against VEGF, when combined with chemotherapy improves response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival in patients with advanced disease (see below). However, bevacizumab cannot be given to patients with squamous cell histology NSCLC because of the risk of serious hemorrhagic effects.

Second-Line Chemotherapy and beyond

As first-line chemotherapy regimens improve, a substantial number of patients will maintain a good performance status and a desire for further therapy when they develop recurrent disease. At present only three drugs are FDA-approved for second-line therapy of NSCLC in the United States, i.e., docetaxel, pemetrexed, and erlotinib. In general, these agents have similar overall response rates of 5每10% (depending on the patient's prior exposure to taxanes and platinum) and yield median survivals of 6每8 months. However, the available drugs have distinct toxicity profiles that can influence their use in the second-line setting. Hematologic toxicity including febrile neutropenia is greater for docetaxel compared with pemetrexed and erlotinib, whereas nonhematologic toxicity, namely rash and diarrhea, is greater with erlotinib. Most of the survival benefit for any of these agents is realized in those patients who maintain a good performance status.

Agents that Inhibit Angiogenesis

Bevacizumab was the first antiangiogenic agent approved for the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC in the United States. This drug primarily acts by sponging up VEGF and blocking the growth of new blood vessels, which are required for tumor viability. Two randomized phase III trials of chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab had conflicting results. The first trial, conducted in North America, compared carboplatin/paclitaxel with or without bevacizumab in patients with recurrent or advanced nonsquamous NSCLC and reported a significant improvement in response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival for chemotherapy-plus-bevacizumab每treated patients compared to chemotherapy alone. Toxicities were more frequent in bevacizumab-treated patients. The second trial, conducted in Europe, compared cisplatin/gemcitabine with or without bevacizumab in patients with recurrent or advanced nonsquamous NSCLC and reported a significant improvement in progression-free survival but no improvement in overall survival for bevacizumab-treated patients. Therefore, at this time carboplatin/paclitaxel and bevacizumab is an approved regimen for first-line treatment of nonsquamous NSCLC in the United States but not in Europe.

Agents that Inhibit the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor

Erlotinib and gefitinib are oral small-molecule kinase inhibitors that inhibit signaling via EGFR. These were the first EGFR inhibitors to be approved for the treatment of patients with NSCLC. A randomized phase III trial compared erlotinib to placebo in previously treated patients with advanced NSCLC and reported an improvement in overall survival for erlotinib compared to placebo. Gefitinib received premarketing approval by the FDA after impressive results seen in phase II trials in patients with previously treated NSCLC; however, a randomized phase III trial found no difference in overall survival between patients treated with gefitinib compared to placebo. These results led to a U.S. FDA-mandated change in the gefitinib indication to include only patients who have previously benefited from this drug. However, gefitinib is still available for the treatment of NSCLC patients in Europe and Asia. Clinical features that have been shown to correlate with responsiveness to EGFR TKI treatment include female sex, never smoking status, adenocarcinoma histology, and Asian ethnicity. Somatic mutations in the kinase domain of EGFR and high EGFR copy number have also been shown to correlate with response and improved survival with oral EGFR inhibitors.

Two randomized phase III trials conducted in Asia have compared gefitinib to platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with NSCLC. The first trial compared first-line gefitinib to carboplatin/paclitaxel in never or light ex-smokers with newly diagnosed advanced NSCLC. Treatment with gefitinib was associated with a significant improvement in response rate and 12-month progression-free survival. In patients with tumors available for mutation analysis, treatment with gefitinib was favored over chemotherapy in patients with tumors that harbored an EGFR mutation and chemotherapy was favored in patients with tumors that were EGFR mutation negative. Quality of life favored treatment with gefitinib. The second trial enrolled only patients with tumors that were EGFR mutation positive and reported a significant improvement in progression-free survival and disease control for patients treated with gefitinib compared to cisplatin/docetaxel. These and related results suggest standard chemotherapy regimens or gefitinib and erlotinib could be considered for first-line therapy in a subset of advanced NSCLC patients with tumors that harbor the EGFR mutation.

Cetuximab is an intravenously administered chimeric antibody directed against EGFR. A randomized phase III trial evaluated treatment with cisplatin/vinorelbine with or without cetuximab in patients with advanced NSCLC and at least one EGFR-positive cell as determined by immunohistochemistry. The results showed no difference in progression-free survival but a significant improvement in response rate and overall survival in patients treated with cetuximab compared to placebo. A prespecified subgroup analysis showed no improvement in overall survival among patients of Asian ethnicity receiving cetuximab compared with placebo. However, a significant improvement in overall survival was noted among Caucasian patients receiving cetuximab; this appeared true regardless of histology. Contrary to patients with colon cancer, KRAS mutation status did not predict response to therapy with cetuximab, although the number of cases examined at the molecular level was suboptimal. Development of acneiform rash was associated with improved overall survival compared to patients with no rash. A second phase III trial in patients with advanced NSCLC with no required EGFR testing reported no difference in overall survival between patients randomized to carboplatin/paclitaxel or docetaxel with or without cetuximab.

Maintenance Therapy

Maintenance chemotherapy in nonprogressing patients (patients with a complete response, partial response, or stable disease) is a controversial topic in the treatment of NSCLC patients. Two studies have investigated maintenance single-agent chemotherapy with docetaxel or pemetrexed in nonprogressing patients following treatment with first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. Both trials randomized patients to immediate single-agent therapy versus observation and reported improvements in progression-free and overall survival. In both trials, a significant portion of patients in the observation arm did not receive therapy with the agent under investigation upon disease progression; 37% of study patients never received docetaxel in the docetaxel study and 81% of patients never received pemetrexed in the pemetrexed study. In the trial of maintenance docetaxel versus observation, survival was identical to the treatment group in the subset of patients who received docetaxel on progression, indicating this is an active agent in NSCLC. These data are not available for the pemetrexed study. Currently maintenance pemetrexed is the only therapy approved by the U.S. FDA following platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC. However, maintenance chemotherapy is not without toxicity and at this time should be considered on an individual patient basis.

Two randomized controlled trials have reported improvements in progression-free survival from maintenance treatment with erlotinib compared to placebo in patients with advanced NSCLC following platinum-based chemotherapy.

Treatment: Small Cell Lung Cancer

Treatment of Limited Disease Small Cell Lung Cancer

Surgery

SCLC is a highly aggressive disease characterized by its rapid doubling time, high growth fraction, early development of disseminated disease, and dramatic response to first-line chemotherapy and radiation. Surgical resection is not routinely recommended for patients because even those patients with LD-SCLC still have occult micrometastases. If the histologic diagnosis of SCLC is made in patients on review of a resected surgical specimen, such patients should receive standard SCLC chemotherapy as described below. If one employs classic TNM staging categories, two retrospective series have reported high cure rates for adjuvant chemotherapy following resection in patients with stage I or II SCLC.

Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy significantly prolongs survival in patients with SCLC. Combination chemotherapy with a platinum agent (cisplatin or carboplatin) and etoposide for four to six cycles is the mainstay of treatment and has not changed in almost three decades. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and vincristine (CAV) may be an alternative for patients who are unable to tolerate a platinum-based regimen. Despite response rates to first-line therapy as high as 80%, the median survival ranges from 12 to 20 months for patients with LD and from 7 to 11 months for patients with ED. Regardless of disease extent, the majority of patients relapse and develop chemotherapy-resistant disease. Only 6每12% of patients with LD- and 2% of patients with ED-SCLC live beyond 5 years. The prognosis is especially poor for patients who relapse within the first 3 months of therapy; these patients are said to have platinum-resistant disease. Patients are said to have sensitive disease if they relapse more than 3 months after their initial therapy and are thought to have a somewhat better overall survival. Those patients with sensitive disease are thought to have the greatest potential benefit from second-line chemotherapy. Topotecan is the only FDA-approved agent with modest activity as second-line therapy in patients with SCLC.

Radiation Therapy

Patients with LD-SCLC are treated with combined modality therapy with cisplatin and etoposide chemotherapy and radiation therapy. A retrospective analysis of patients with SCLC treated with once-daily fractionation found improved local control rates as the total dose delivered was increased from 30 to 50 Gy. Chemotherapy when given concurrently with radiation is more effective than sequential chemoradiation but is associated with significantly more esophagitis and hematologic toxicity. The addition of radiation therapy early on is preferred. Twice-daily (hyperfractionated) radiation has been shown to improve survival in patients with LD-SCLC but is associated with higher rates of grade 3 esophagitis and pulmonary toxicity. It is feasible to deliver once-daily radiation therapy doses up to at least 70 Gy when administered concurrently with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. This higher dose of once-daily radiotherapy may be equivalent or superior to the 45-Gy twice-daily radiotherapy dose. Patients should be carefully selected for concurrent chemoradiation therapy based on good performance status and pulmonary reserve.

Prophylactic Cranial Irradiation

Prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) should be considered in all patients with LD- and ED-SCLC who have responded to initial therapy. A meta-analysis including 7 trials and 987 patients with LD-SCLC who had achieved a complete remission following primary chemotherapy reported a 5.4% improvement in overall survival for patients treated with PCI. In patients with ED-SCLC who had responded to first-line chemotherapy, PCI reduced the occurrence of symptomatic brain metastases and prolonged disease-free and overall survival compared to no radiation therapy. Long-term toxicities including deficits in cognition have been reported following PCI and are difficult to sort out from the effects of chemotherapy or normal aging.

Molecularly Tailored Lung Cancer Therapy

In the past 40 years, clinical research in lung cancer has demonstrated that surgery, systemic chemotherapy, and radiation therapy can all be used to prolong patient survival and/or improve quality of life. However, conventional approaches, especially those that classify patients according to disease histology alone, appear to have reached a therapeutic plateau of effectiveness. One promising future approach to improve the outcome for patients with lung cancer is tailored therapy based on individualized phenotypic or genotypic tumor characteristics. Such a strategy is based upon an understanding of the molecular underpinnings of the disease, recognizing that although tumors may appear similar at the histologic level, they do differ from individual to individual. It is hoped that better outcomes can be achieved by matching the most appropriate therapy to a patient at the right time.

For example, one subset of lung cancer can be defined by somatic mutations in EGFR. EGFR mutations are almost exclusively found in lung adenocarcinoma and are more common in females, never smokers compared to former or current smokers, and in East Asians compared to Western populations (30每70% vs 8%). These mutations, primarily in-frame deletions in exon 19 and point mutations in exon 21 (L858R), result in constitutive activation of the receptor and are associated with very high response rates (60每90%) to the specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib. Almost all patients with these dramatic responses, however, develop acquired resistance. In about half of patients, resistance can be attributed to the emergence of clones harboring a second-site mutation in exon 20 (T790M), which alters binding of drug to the receptor. About 20% of EGFR mutant tumors from patients with acquired resistance display amplification of a gene encoding a different tyrosine kinase, MET. As a result of these findings, many trials are being conducted in these patients using second-generation EGFR inhibitors that can overcome T790M-mediated resistance or MET inhibitors to target MET-dependent cells.

Another subset of lung adenocarcinoma can be defined by EML4-ALK fusion proteins. These translocations arise from a small inversion within chromosome 2p that leads to the formation of a fusion-gene comprising the N terminal of the echinoderm microtubule每associated protein-like 4 (EML4) gene and the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene. Patients with lung cancers harboring an ALK fusion protein have demonstrated dramatic responses to small-molecule ALK inhibitors in early clinical trials. The ALK fusion protein is relatively rare, occurring in 3每7% of NSCLCs. Clinical characteristics associated with EML4-ALK每positive lung cancer appears to be a younger age at diagnosis, minimal smoking history, male sex, and adenocarcinoma histology with signet-ring features.

Other biomarkers being explored include molecules that may predict outcomes with conventional chemotherapy. For example, low expression of the DNA repair gene excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) correlates with improved survival after treatment with platinum drugs, whereas tumors that have high expression of ERCC1 are less sensitive to therapy with a platinum agent. In the absence of treatment, lung cancer with low ERCC1 expression has a poorer prognosis.

Ribonucleotide reductase M1 (RRM1) encodes the regulatory subunit of ribonucleotide reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in DNA synthesis. Ribonucleotide reductase converts ribonucleotide 5-diphosphate to deoxyribonucleotide 5-diphosphate. Notably, gemcitabine, an agent commonly used in the treatment of NSCLC, competes with ribonucleotide 5-diphosphate for incorporation into DNA. Levels of RRM1 expression are significantly and inversely correlated with disease response after two cycles of gemcitabine and carboplatin in patients with locally advanced NSCLC. In addition, low RRM1 mRNA expression levels are associated with a significantly longer median survival compared to high levels.

Thymidylate synthase (TS) catalyzes the methylation of dUMP to dTMP and is the rate-limiting irreversible step in de novo DNA synthesis. TS is one of the targets of the novel folate-based drug pemetrexed, an agent that is FDA-approved as second-line treatment in patients with NSCLC. TS expression is an independent prognostic and predictive factor in several cancers, including lung cancers, and overexpression of TS has been linked to resistance to pemetrexed, an agent commonly employed as second-line treatment in patients with nonsquamous NSCLC. TS mRNA and protein levels are significantly higher in squamous cell carcinomas and small cell carcinomas of the lung as compared with adenocarcinomas. A randomized phase III trial reported that cisplatin plus gemcitabine was more effective in squamous cell carcinomas while, cisplatin plus pemetrexed was found to be more effective in adenocarcinomas and large cell carcinomas. Molecular markers are likely to play an increasing role in helping guide treatment decisions.
 
Benign Lung Neoplasms

Benign tumors account for about 5% of all lung cancers. About half are hamartomas; the lungs are the site of about 90% of all hamartomas. The other half are bronchial adenomas.

Hamartomas

Lung hamartomas are usually peripheral lung masses composed of normal pulmonary tissue components such as smooth muscle and collagen. They are more common in men than in women and have a peak incidence in the 60s. They are often incidental radiographic findings as solitary nodules. They have a pathognomonic "popcorn" pattern of calcification in some cases; however, without such a finding, resection is necessary to rule out malignancy, especially in smokers.

Bronchial Adenomas

These are centrally located slow-growing endobronchial lesions that are generally carcinoid tumors (80%; Chap. 350), adenocystic tumors (so called cylindromas, 10每15%), or mucoepidermoid tumors (2每3%). Mean age at presentation is 45 years (range 15每60). Patients often give a history of chronic cough, intermittent hemoptysis, or repeated episodes of airway obstruction with atelectasis, or pneumonias with abscess formation due to endobronchial lesions obstructing the airway. They are usually visible at bronchoscopy but are highly vascular and may bleed profusely after a bronchoscopic biopsy. They are largely curable by surgical resection (local excision), but they may recur locally or become invasive and metastasize. Five-year survival after resection is 95% if the disease is localized. For bronchial adenomas that spread, the course of disease can become highly aggressive, such as SCLC, or somewhat slower, such as carcinoid tumors. Therapy is generally dictated by the pace of the disease.
 
Further Readings

Azzoli CG et al: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update on chemotherapy for stage IV non-small cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol 27:6251, 2009[PMID: 19917871] 

 
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57, 2000[PMID: 10647931] 

 
Herbst RS et al: Lung cancer. N Engl J Med 359: 1367, 2008[PMID: 18815398] 

 
Jackman DM, Johnson BE: Small-cell lung cancer. Lancet 366:1385, 2005[PMID: 16226617] 

 
Kwak EL et al: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 363:1693, 2010[PMID: 20979469] 

 
Milroy R: New American College of Chest Physicians Lung Cancer Guidelines: An important addition to the lung cancer guidelines armamentarium. Chest 132:744, 2007[PMID: 17873186] 

 
Ost D et al: The solitary pulmonary nodule. N Engl J Med 348:2535, 2003[PMID: 12815140] 
 
 

^^
Breast Cancer: Introduction

Breast cancer is a malignant proliferation of epithelial cells lining the ducts or lobules of the breast. In the year 2010, about 180,000 cases of invasive breast cancer and 40,000 deaths will occur in the United States. In addition, about 2000 men will be diagnosed with breast cancer. Epithelial malignancies of the breast are the most common cause of cancer in women (excluding skin cancer), accounting for about one-third of all cancer in women. As a result of improved treatment and earlier detection, mortality rate from breast cancer has begun to decrease very

substantially in the United States. This chapter will not consider rare malignancies presenting in the breast, such as sarcomas and lymphomas, but will focus on the epithelial cancers. Human breast cancer is a clonal disease; a single transformed cell〞the product of a series of somatic (acquired) or germ-line mutations〞is eventually able to express full malignant potential. Thus, breast cancer may exist for a long period as either a noninvasive disease or an invasive but nonmetastatic disease. These facts have significant clinical ramifications.
 
Genetic Considerations

Not more than 10% of human breast cancers can be linked directly to germ-line mutations. Several genes have been implicated in familial cases. The Li-Fraumeni syndrome is characterized by inherited mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, which lead to an increased incidence of breast cancer, osteogenic sarcomas, and other malignancies. Inherited mutations in PTEN have also been reported in breast cancer.

Another tumor-suppressor gene, BRCA-1, has been identified at the chromosomal locus 17q21; this gene encodes a zinc finger protein, and the product therefore may function as a transcription factor. The gene appears to be involved in gene repair. Women who inherit a mutated allele of this gene from either parent have at least a 60每80% lifetime chance of developing breast cancer and about a 33% chance of developing ovarian cancer. The risk is higher among women born after 1940, presumably due to promotional effects of hormonal factors. Men who carry a mutant allele of the gene have an increased incidence of prostate cancer and breast cancer. A fourth gene, termed BRCA-2, which has been localized to chromosome 13q12, is also associated with an increased incidence of breast cancer in men and women.

Germ-line mutations in BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 can be readily detected; patients with these mutations can be counseled appropriately. All women with strong family histories for breast cancer should be referred to genetic screening programs, particularly women of Ashkenazi Jewish descent who have a high likelihood of a specific BRCA-1 mutation (substitution of adenine for guanine at position 185).

Even more important than the role these genes play in inherited forms of breast cancer may be their role in sporadic breast cancer. A p53 mutation is present in nearly 40% of human breast cancers as an acquired defect. Acquired mutations in PTEN occur in about 10% of the cases. BRCA-1 mutation in sporadic primary breast cancer has not been reported. However, decreased expression of BRCA-1 mRNA (possibly via gene methylation) and abnormal cellular location of the BRCA-1 protein have been found in some breast cancers. Loss of heterozygosity of BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 suggests that tumor-suppressor activity may be inactivated in sporadic cases of human breast cancer. Finally, increased expression of a dominant oncogene plays a role in about a quarter of human breast cancer cases. The product of this gene, a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor superfamily, is called erbB2 (HER/2 neu) and is overexpressed in these breast cancers due to gene amplification; this overexpression can contribute to transformation of human breast epithelium and is the target of effective systemic therapy in adjuvant and metastatic disease settings.
 
Epidemiology

Breast cancer is a hormone-dependent disease. Women without functioning ovaries who never receive estrogen-replacement therapy do not develop breast cancer. The female-male ratio is about 150:1. For most epithelial malignancies, a log-log plot of incidence versus age shows a single-component straight-line increase with every year of life. A similar plot for breast cancer shows two components: a straight-line increase with age but with a decrease in slope beginning at the age of menopause. The three dates in a woman's life that have a major impact on breast cancer incidence are age at menarche, age at first full-term pregnancy, and age at menopause. Women who experience menarche at age 16 years have only 50每60% of the breast cancer risk of a woman having menarche at age 12 years; the lower risk persists throughout life. Similarly, menopause occurring 10 years before the median age of menopause (52 years), whether natural or surgically induced, reduces lifetime breast cancer risk by about 35%. Women who have a first full-term pregnancy by age 18 years have a 30每40% lower risk of breast cancer compared with nulliparous women. Thus, length of menstrual life〞particularly the fraction occurring before first full-term pregnancy〞is a substantial component of the total risk of breast cancer. These three factors (menarche, age of first full-term pregnancy, and menopause) can account for 70每80% of the variation in breast cancer frequency in different countries. A meta-analysis has shown that duration of maternal nursing correlates with substantial risk reduction independent of either parity or age at first full-term pregnancy.

International variation in incidence has provided some of the most important clues on hormonal carcinogenesis. A woman living to age 80 years in North America has one chance in nine of developing invasive breast cancer. Asian women have one-fifth to one-tenth the risk of breast cancer of women in North America or Western Europe. Asian women have substantially lower concentrations of estrogens and progesterone. These differences cannot be explained on a genetic basis because Asian women living in a Western environment have sex steroid hormone concentrations and risks identical to those of their Western counterparts. These migrant women, and more notably their daughters, also differ markedly in height and weight from Asian women in Asia; height and weight are critical regulators of age of menarche and have substantial effects on plasma concentrations of estrogens.

The role of diet in breast cancer etiology is controversial. While there are associative links between total caloric and fat intake and breast cancer risk, the exact role of fat in the diet is unproven. Increased caloric intake contributes to breast cancer risk in multiple ways: earlier menarche, later age at menopause, and increased postmenopausal estrogen concentrations reflecting enhanced aromatase activities in fatty tissues. Moderate alcohol intake also increases the risk by an unknown mechanism. Folic acid supplementation appears to modify risk in women who use alcohol but is not additionally protective in abstainers. Recommendations favoring abstinence from alcohol must be weighed against other social pressures and the possible cardioprotective effect of moderate alcohol intake. Chronic low-dose aspirin use also appears associated with a decreased incidence of breast cancer.

Understanding the potential role of exogenous hormones in breast cancer is of extraordinary importance because millions of American women regularly use oral contraceptives and postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy. The most credible meta-analyses of oral contraceptive use suggest that these agents cause a small increased risk of breast cancer. By contrast, oral contraceptives offer a substantial protective effect against ovarian epithelial tumors and endometrial cancers. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has a powerful effect on breast cancer risk. Data from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) trial showed that conjugated equine estrogens plus progestins increased the risk of breast cancer and adverse cardiovascular events but with decreases in bone fractures and colorectal cancer. On balance, there were more negative events with HRT; 6 to 7 years of HRT nearly doubled the risk of breast cancer. A parallel WHI trial with >12,000 women enrolled testing conjugated estrogens alone (ERT in women who have had hysterectomies) showed no significant increase in breast cancer incidence. A meta-analysis of nonrandomized HRT studies suggests that most of the previously attributed benefit of HRT can be accounted for by higher socioeconomic status among users, which is presumably associated with better access to health care and healthier behaviors. Certain potential benefits of HRT were not assessed in WHI. HRT is an area of rapid reevaluation, but it would appear (at least from breast cancer and cardiovascular disease vantage points) that there are serious concerns about long-term HRT use. HRT in women previously diagnosed with breast cancer increases recurrence rates. Rapid decrease in the number of women on HRT has already led to a coincident decrease in breast cancer incidence.

In addition to the other factors, radiation is a risk factor in younger women. Women who have been exposed before age 30 years to radiation in the form of multiple fluoroscopies (200每300 cGy) or treatment for Hodgkin's disease (>3600 cGy) have a substantial increase in risk of breast cancer, whereas radiation exposure after age 30 years appears to have a minimal carcinogenic effect on the breast.
 
Evaluation of Breast Masses in Men and Women

Because the breasts are a common site of potentially fatal malignancy in women, examination of the breast is an essential part of the physical examination. Unfortunately, internists frequently do not examine breasts in men, and, in women, they are apt to defer this evaluation to gynecologists. Because of the plausible association between early detection and improved outcome, it is the duty of every physician to identify breast abnormalities at the earliest possible stage and to institute a diagnostic workup. Women should be trained in breast self-examination (BSE). Although breast cancer in men is unusual, unilateral lesions should be evaluated in the same manner as in women, with the recognition that gynecomastia in men can sometimes begin unilaterally and is often asymmetric.

Virtually all breast cancer is diagnosed by biopsy of a nodule detected either on a mammogram or by palpation. Algorithms have been developed to enhance the likelihood of diagnosing breast cancer and reduce the frequency of unnecessary biopsy (Fig. 90-1).

Figure 90-1

 
 
 
Approach to a palpable breast mass.
 
 

The Palpable Breast Mass

Women should be strongly encouraged to examine their breasts monthly. A potentially flawed study from China has suggested that BSE does not alter survival, but given its safety, the procedure should still be encouraged. At worst, this practice increases the likelihood of detecting a mass at a smaller size when it can be treated with more limited surgery. Breast examination by the physician should be performed in good light so as to see retractions and other skin changes. The nipple and areolae should be inspected, and an attempt should be made to elicit nipple discharge. All regional lymph node groups should be examined, and any lesions should be measured. Physical examination alone cannot exclude malignancy. Lesions with certain features are more likely to be cancerous (hard, irregular, tethered or fixed, or painless lesions). A negative mammogram in the presence of a persistent lump in the breast does not exclude malignancy. Palpable lesions require additional diagnostic procedures, including biopsy.

In premenopausal women, lesions that are either equivocal or nonsuspicious on physical examination should be reexamined in 2每4 weeks, during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Days 5每7 of the cycle are the best time for breast examination. A dominant mass in a postmenopausal woman or a dominant mass that persists through a menstrual cycle in a premenopausal woman should be aspirated by fine-needle biopsy or referred to a surgeon. If nonbloody fluid is aspirated, the diagnosis (cyst) and therapy have been accomplished together. Solid lesions that are persistent, recurrent, complex, or bloody cysts require mammography and biopsy, although in selected patients the so-called triple diagnostic techniques (palpation, mammography, aspiration) can be used to avoid biopsy (Figs. 90-1, 90-2, and 90-3). Ultrasound can be used in place of fine-needle aspiration to distinguish cysts from solid lesions. Not all solid masses are detected by ultrasound; thus, a palpable mass that is not visualized on ultrasound must be presumed to be solid.

Figure 90-2

 
 
 
The "triple diagnosis" technique.
 
 

Figure 90-3

 
 
 
Management of a breast cyst.
 
 

Several points are essential in pursuing these management decision trees. First, risk-factor analysis is not part of the decision structure. No constellation of risk factors, by their presence or absence, can be used to exclude biopsy. Second, fine-needle aspiration should be used only in centers that have proven skill in obtaining such specimens and analyzing them. The likelihood of cancer is low in the setting of a "triple negative" (benign-feeling lump, negative mammogram, and negative fine-needle aspiration), but it is not zero. The patient and physician must be aware of a 1% risk of false negatives. Third, additional technologies such as MRI, ultrasound, and sestamibi imaging cannot be used to exclude the need for biopsy, although in unusual circumstances they may provoke a biopsy.

The Abnormal Mammogram

Diagnostic mammography should not be confused with screening mammography, which is performed after a palpable abnormality has been detected. Diagnostic mammography is aimed at evaluating the rest of the breast before biopsy is performed or occasionally is part of the triple-test strategy to exclude immediate biopsy.

Subtle abnormalities that are first detected by screening mammography should be evaluated carefully by compression or magnified views. These abnormalities include clustered microcalcifications, densities (especially if spiculated), and new or enlarging architectural distortion. For some nonpalpable lesions, ultrasound may be helpful either to identify cysts or to guide biopsy. If there is no palpable lesion and detailed mammographic studies are unequivocally benign, the patient should have routine follow-up appropriate to the patient's age. It cannot be stressed too strongly that in the presence of a breast lump a negative mammogram does not rule out cancer.

If a nonpalpable mammographic lesion has a low index of suspicion, mammographic follow-up in 3每6 months is reasonable. Workup of indeterminate and suspicious lesions has been rendered more complex by the advent of stereotactic biopsies. Morrow and colleagues have suggested that these procedures are indicated for lesions that require biopsy but are likely to be benign〞that is, for cases in which the procedure probably will eliminate additional surgery. When a lesion is more probably malignant, open biopsy should be performed with a needle localization technique. Others have proposed more widespread use of stereotactic core biopsies for nonpalpable lesions on economic grounds and because diagnosis leads to earlier treatment planning. However, stereotactic diagnosis of a malignant lesion does not eliminate the need for definitive surgical procedures, particularly if breast conservation is attempted. For example, after a breast biopsy with needle localization (i.e., local excision) of a stereotactically diagnosed malignancy, reexcision may still be necessary to achieve negative margins. To some extent, these issues are decided on the basis of referral pattern and the availability of the resources for stereotactic core biopsies. A reasonable approach is shown in Fig. 90-4.

Figure 90-4

 
 
 
Approaches to abnormalities detected by mammogram.
 
 

Breast Masses in the Pregnant or Lactating Woman

During pregnancy, the breast grows under the influence of estrogen, progesterone, prolactin, and human placental lactogen. Lactation is suppressed by progesterone, which blocks the effects of prolactin. After delivery, lactation is promoted by the fall in progesterone levels, which leaves the effects of prolactin unopposed. The development of a dominant mass during pregnancy or lactation should never be attributed to hormonal changes. A dominant mass must be treated with the same concern in a pregnant woman as any other. Breast cancer develops in 1 in every 3000每4000 pregnancies. Stage for stage, breast cancer in pregnant patients is no different from premenopausal breast cancer in nonpregnant patients. However, pregnant women often have more advanced disease because the significance of a breast mass was not fully considered and/or because of endogenous hormone stimulation. Persistent lumps in the breast of pregnant or lactating women cannot be attributed to benign changes based on physical findings; such patients should be promptly referred for diagnostic evaluation.

Benign Breast Masses

Only about 1 in every 5每10 breast biopsies leads to a diagnosis of cancer, although the rate of positive biopsies varies in different countries and clinical settings. (These differences may be related to interpretation, medicolegal considerations, and availability of mammograms.) The vast majority of benign breast masses are due to "fibrocystic" disease, a descriptive term for small fluid-filled cysts and modest epithelial cell and fibrous tissue hyperplasia. However, fibrocystic disease is a histologic, not a clinical, diagnosis, and women who have had a biopsy with benign findings are at greater risk of developing breast cancer than those who have not had a biopsy. The subset of women with ductal or lobular cell proliferation (about 30% of patients), particularly the small fraction (3%) with atypical hyperplasia, have a fourfold greater risk of developing breast cancer than those women who have not had a biopsy, and the increase in the risk is about ninefold for women in this category who also have an affected first-degree relative. Thus, careful follow-up of these patients is required. By contrast, patients with a benign biopsy without atypical hyperplasia are at little risk and may be followed routinely.
 
Screening

Breast cancer is virtually unique among the epithelial tumors in adults in that screening (in the form of annual mammography) improves survival. Meta-analysis examining outcomes from every randomized trial of mammography conclusively shows a 25每30% reduction in the chance of dying from breast cancer with annual screening after age 50 years; the data for women between ages 40 and 50 years are almost as positive; however, since the incidence is much lower in younger women, there are more false positives. While controversy continues to surround the assessment of screening mammography, the preponderance of data strongly supports the benefits of screening mammography. New analyses of older randomized studies have occasionally suggested that screening may not work. While the design defects in some older studies cannot be retrospectively corrected, most experts, including panels of the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the American Cancer Society (ACS), continue to believe that screening conveys substantial benefit. Furthermore, the profound drop in breast cancer mortality rate seen over the past decade is unlikely to be solely attributable to improvements in therapy. It seems prudent to recommend annual or biannual mammography for women past the age of 40 years. Although no randomized study of BSE has ever shown any improvement in survival, its major benefit is identification of tumors appropriate for conservative local therapy. Better mammographic technology, including digitized mammography, routine use of magnified views, and greater skill in mammographic interpretation, combined with newer diagnostic techniques (MRI, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, positron emission tomography, etc.) may make it possible to identify breast cancers even more reliably and earlier. Screening by any technique other than mammography is not indicated; however, the ACS recommends younger women who are BRCA-1 or BRCA-2 carriers or their untested first-degree relative; history of radiation therapy to the chest between ages 10 and 30 years; a lifetime risk of breast cancer of at least 20%; or a history of Li-Fraumeni, Cowden, or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes benefit from MRI screening, where the higher sensitivity may outweigh the loss of specificity.
 
Staging

Correct staging of breast cancer patients is of extraordinary importance. Not only does it permit an accurate prognosis, but in many cases therapeutic decision-making is based largely on the TNM (primary tumor, regional nodes, metastasis) classification (Table 90每1). Comparison with historic series should be undertaken with caution, as the staging has changed several times in the past 20 years. The current staging is complex and results in significant changes in outcome by stage as compared with prior staging systems.

Table 90每1 Staging of Breast Cancer

 
 
Primary Tumor (T)  
T0 No evidence of primary tumor 
TIS Carcinoma in situ 
T1 Tumor 2 cm 
T1a Tumor >0.1 cm but 0.5 cm 
T1b Tumor >0.5 but 1 cm 
T1c Tumor >1 cm but 2 cm 
T2 Tumor >2 cm but 5 cm 
T3 Tumor >5 cm 
T4 Extension to chest wall, inflammation, satellite lesions, ulcerations 
Regional Lymph Nodes (N)  
PN0(i每) No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, negative IHC 
PN0(i+) No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, positive IHC, no IHC cluster greater than 0.2 mm 
PN0(mol每) No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, negative molecular findings (RT-PCR) 
PN0(mol+) No regional lymph node metastasis histologically, positive molecular findings (RT-PCR) 
PN1 Metastasis in one to three axillary lymph nodes, or in internal mammary nodes with microscopic disease detected by sentinel lymph node dissection but not clinically apparent 
PN1mi Micrometastasis (>0.2 mm, none >2 mm) 
PN1a Metastasis in one to three axillary lymph nodes 
PN1b Metastasis in internal mammary nodes with microscopic disease detected by sentinel lymph node dissection but not clinically apparent?a  
PN1c Metastasis in one to three axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes with microscopic disease detected by sentinel lymph node dissection but not clinically apparent.a (If associated with greater than three positive axillary lymph nodes, the internal mammary nodes are classified as pN3b to reflect increased tumor burden.)  
pN2 Metastasis in four to nine axillary lymph nodes, or in clinically apparent internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastasis  
pN3 Metastasis in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes, or in infraclavicular lymph nodes, or in clinically apparenta ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of 1 or more positive axillary lymph nodes; or in more than 3 axillary lymph nodes with clinically negative microscopic metastasis in internal mammary lymph nodes; or in ipsilateral subcarinal lymph nodes  
Distant Metastasis (M)    
M0 No distant metastasis 
M1 Distant metastasis (includes spread to ipsilateral supraclavicular nodes) 
 

 
Stage Grouping  
Stage 0 TIS N0 M0 
Stage I T1 N0 M0 
Stage IIA T0 N1 M0 
  T1 N1 M0 
  T2 N0 M0 
Stage IIB T2 N1 M0 
  T3 N0 M0 
Stage IIIA T0 N2 M0 
  T1 N2 M0 
  T2 N2 M0 
  T3 N1, N2 M0 
Stage IIIB T4 Any N M0 
  Any T N3 M0 
Stage IIIC Any T N3 M0 
Stage IV Any T Any N M1 
 


aClinically apparent is defined as detected by imaging studies (excluding lymphoscintigraphy) or by clinical examination. Abbreviation: IHC, immunohistochemistry; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain reaction. Source: Used with permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. New York, Springer, 2010; www.springeronline.com.
 

Treatment: Breast Cancer

One of the most exciting aspects of breast cancer biology has been its recent subdivision into at least five subtypes based upon gene expression profiling.

1.Luminal A: The luminal tumors express cytokeratins 8 and 18, have the highest levels of estrogen receptor expression, tend to be low-grade, are most likely to respond to endocrine therapy, and have a favorable prognosis. They tend to be less responsive to chemotherapy.

2. Luminal B: Tumor cells are also of luminal epithelial origin, but with a gene expression pattern distinct from luminal A. Prognosis is somewhat worse that luminal A.

3. Normal breast〞like: These tumors have a gene expression profile reminiscent of nonmalignant "normal" breast epithelium. Prognosis is similar to the luminal B group.

4. HER2 amplified: These tumors have amplification of the HER2 gene on chromosome 17q and frequently exhibit coamplification and overexpression of other genes adjacent to HER2. Historically the clinical prognosis of such tumors was poor. However, with the advent of trastuzumab, the clinical outcome of HER2-positive patients is markedly improving.

5. Basal: These estrogen-receptor/progesterone receptor-negative and HER2-negative tumors (so-called triple negative) are characterized by markers of basal/myoepithelial cells. They tend to be high-grade, and express cytokeratins 5/6 and 17 as well as vimentin, p63, CD10, 汐-smooth muscle actin, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Patients with BRCA mutations also fall within this molecular subtype. They also have stem cell characteristics.

Primary Breast Cancer

Breast-conserving treatments, consisting of the removal of the primary tumor by some form of lumpectomy with or without irradiating the breast, result in a survival that is as good as (or slightly superior to) that after extensive surgical procedures, such as mastectomy or modified radical mastectomy, with or without further irradiation. Postlumpectomy breast irradiation greatly reduces the risk of recurrence in the breast. While breast conservation is associated with a possibility of recurrence in the breast, 10-year survival is at least as good as that after more extensive surgery. Postoperative radiation to regional nodes following mastectomy is also associated with an improvement in survival. Since radiation therapy can also reduce the rate of local or regional recurrence, it should be strongly considered following mastectomy for women with high-risk primary tumors (i.e., T2 in size, positive margins, positive nodes). At present, nearly one-third of women in the United States are managed by lumpectomy. Breast-conserving surgery is not suitable for all patients: it is not generally suitable for tumors >5 cm (or for smaller tumors if the breast is small), for tumors involving the nipple areola complex, for tumors with extensive intraductal disease involving multiple quadrants of the breast, for women with a history of collagen-vascular disease, and for women who either do not have the motivation for breast conservation or do not have convenient access to radiation therapy. However, these groups probably do not account for more than one-third of patients who are treated with mastectomy. Thus, a great many women still undergo mastectomy who could safely avoid this procedure and probably would if appropriately counseled.

An extensive intraductal component is a predictor of recurrence in the breast, and so are several clinical variables. Both axillary lymph node involvement and involvement of vascular or lymphatic channels by metastatic tumor in the breast are associated with a higher risk of relapse in the breast but are not contraindications to breast-conserving treatment. When these patients are excluded, and when lumpectomy with negative tumor margins is achieved, breast conservation is associated with a recurrence rate in the breast of substantially <10%. The survival of patients who have recurrence in the breast is somewhat worse than that of women who do not. Thus, recurrence in the breast is a negative prognostic variable for long-term survival. However, recurrence in the breast is not the cause of distant metastasis. If recurrence in the breast caused metastatic disease, then women treated with lumpectomy, who have a higher rate of recurrence in the breast, should have poorer survival than women treated with mastectomy, and they do not. Most patients should consult with a radiation oncologist before making a final decision concerning local therapy. However, a multimodality clinic in which the surgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, and other caregivers cooperate to evaluate the patient and develop a treatment is usually considered a major advantage by patients.

Adjuvant Therapy

The use of systemic therapy after local management of breast cancer substantially improves survival. More than half of the women who would otherwise die of metastatic breast cancer remain disease-free when treated with the appropriate systemic regimen. These data have grown more and more impressive with longer follow-up and more effective regimens.

Prognostic Variables

The most important prognostic variables are provided by tumor staging. The size of the tumor and the status of the axillary lymph nodes provide reasonably accurate information on the likelihood of tumor relapse. The relation of pathologic stage to 5-year survival is shown in Table 90每2. For most women, the need for adjuvant therapy can be readily defined on this basis alone. In the absence of lymph node involvement, involvement of microvessels (either capillaries or lymphatic channels) in tumors is nearly equivalent to lymph node involvement. The greatest controversy concerns women with intermediate prognoses. There is rarely justification for adjuvant chemotherapy in most women with tumors <1 cm in size whose axillary lymph nodes are negative. HER2-positive tumors are a potential exception. Detection of breast cancer cells either in the circulation or bone marrow is associated with an increased relapse rate. The most exciting development in this area is the use of gene expression arrays to analyze patterns of tumor gene expression. Several groups have independently defined gene sets that reliably predict disease-free and overall survival far more accurately than any single prognostic variable including the Oncotype DX? analysis of 21 genes. Also the use of such standardized risk assessment tools such as Adjuvant! Online (www.adjuvantonline.com) are very helpful. These tools are highly recommended in otherwise ambiguous circumstances. Estrogen and progesterone receptor status are of prognostic significance. Tumors that lack either or both of these receptors are more likely to recur than tumors that have them.

Table 90每2 5-Year Survival Rate for Breast Cancer by Stage

 
 
Stage 5-Year Survival, % 
0 99 
I 92 
IIA 82 
IIB 65 
IIIA 47 
IIIB 44 
IV 14 
 


Source: Modified from data of the National Cancer Institute: Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER).
 

Several measures of tumor growth rate correlate with early relapse. S-phase analysis using flow cytometry is the most accurate measure. Indirect S-phase assessments using antigens associated with the cell cycle, such as PCNA (Ki67), are also valuable. Tumors with a high proportion (more than the median) of cells in S-phase pose a greater risk of relapse; chemotherapy offers the greatest survival benefit for these tumors. Assessment of DNA content in the form of ploidy is of modest value, with nondiploid tumors having a somewhat worse prognosis.

Histologic classification of the tumor has also been used as a prognostic factor. Tumors with a poor nuclear grade have a higher risk of recurrence than tumors with a good nuclear grade. Semiquantitative measures such as the Elston score improve the reproducibility of this measurement.

Molecular changes in the tumor are also useful. Tumors that overexpress erbB2 (HER2/neu) or have a mutated p53 gene have a worse prognosis. Particular interest has centered on erbB2 overexpression as measured by histochemistry or by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Tumors that overexpress erbB2 are more likely to respond to higher doses of doxorubicin-containing regimens and predict those tumors that will respond to HER2/neu antibodies (trastuzumab) (herceptin) and HER2/neu kinase inhibitors.

To grow, tumors must generate a neovasculature (Chap. 84). The presence of more microvessels in a tumor, particularly when localized in so-called hot spots, is associated with a worse prognosis. This may assume even greater significance in light of blood vessel〞targeting therapies such as bevacizumab (avastin). While the benefits of bevacizumab in metastatic disease have been modest, close attention should be paid to the soon-to-be reported studies evaluating its role in adjuvant therapy.

Other variables that have also been used to evaluate prognosis include proteins associated with invasiveness, such as type IV collagenase, cathepsin D, plasminogen activator, plasminogen activator receptor, and the metastasis-suppressor gene nm23. None of these has been widely accepted as a prognostic variable for therapeutic decision-making. One problem in interpreting these prognostic variables is that most of them have not been examined in a study using a large cohort of patients.

Adjuvant Regimens

Adjuvant therapy is the use of systemic therapies in patients whose known disease has received local therapy but who are at risk of relapse. Selection of appropriate adjuvant chemotherapy or hormone therapy is highly controversial in some situations. Meta-analyses have helped to define broad limits for therapy but do not help in choosing optimal regimens or in choosing a regimen for certain subgroups of patients. A summary of recommendations is shown in Table 90每3. In general, premenopausal women for whom any form of adjuvant systemic therapy is indicated should receive multidrug chemotherapy. Antihormone therapy improves survival in premenopausal patients with positive estrogen receptors and should be added following completion of chemotherapy. Prophylactic castration may also be associated with a substantial survival benefit (primarily in estrogen receptor〞positive patients) but is not widely used in this country.

Table 90每3 Suggested Approaches to Adjuvant Therapy

 
 
Age Group Lymph Node Statusa  Estrogen Receptor (ER) Status Tumor Recommendation 
Premenopausal Positive Any Any Multidrug chemotherapy + tamoxifen if ER-positive + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
Premenopausal Negative Any >2 cm, or 1每2 cm with other poor prognostic variables Multidrug chemotherapy + tamoxifen if ER-positive + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
Postmenopausal Positive Negative Any Multidrug chemotherapy + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
Postmenopausal Positive Positive Any Aromatase inhibitors and tamoxifen with or without chemotherapy + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
Postmenopausal Negative Positive >2 cm, or 1每2 cm with other poor prognostic variables Aromatase inhibitors and tamoxifen + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
Postmenopausal Negative Negative >2 cm, or 1每2 cm with other poor prognostic variables Consider multidrug chemotherapy + trastuzumab in HER2/neu每positive tumors 
 


aAs determined by pathologic examination.
 

Data on postmenopausal women are also controversial. The impact of adjuvant chemotherapy is quantitatively less clear-cut than in premenopausal patients, particularly in estrogen receptor〞positive cases, although survival advantages have been shown. The first decision is whether chemotherapy or endocrine therapy should be used. While adjuvant endocrine therapy (aromatase inhibitors and tamoxifen) improves survival regardless of axillary lymph node status, the improvement in survival is modest for patients in whom multiple lymph nodes are involved. For this reason, it has been usual to give chemotherapy to postmenopausal patients who have no medical contraindications and who have more than one positive lymph node; hormone therapy is commonly given subsequently. For postmenopausal women for whom systemic therapy is warranted but who have a more favorable prognosis (based more commonly on analysis such as the Oncotype DX methodology), hormone therapy may be used alone. Large clinical trials have shown superiority for aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen alone in the adjuvant setting. Unfortunately the optimal plan is unclear. Tamoxifen for 5 years followed by an aromatase inhibitor, the reverse strategy, or even switching to an aromatase inhibitor after 2每3 years of tamoxifen has been shown to be better than tamoxifen alone. No valid information currently permits selection among the three clinically approved aromatase inhibitors. Large clinical trials currently underway will help address these questions. Concomitant use of bisphosphonates is almost always warranted; however, it is not finally settled as to whether their prophylactic use increases survival in addition to just decreasing recurrences in bone.

Most comparisons of adjuvant chemotherapy regimens show little difference among them, although small advantages for doxorubicin-containing regimens and "dose sense" regimens are usually seen.

One approach〞so-called neoadjuvant chemotherapy〞involves the administration of adjuvant therapy before definitive surgery and radiation therapy. Because the objective response rates of patients with breast cancer to systemic therapy in this setting exceed 75%, many patients will be "down-staged" and may become candidates for breast-conserving therapy. However, overall survival has not been improved using this approach. Patients who achieve a pathologic complete remission after neoadjuvant chemotherapy not unexpectedly have a substantially improved survival. The neoadjuvant setting also provides a wonderful opportunity for the evaluation of new agents.

Other adjuvant treatments under investigation include the use of taxanes, such as paclitaxel and docetaxel, and therapy based on alternative kinetic and biologic models. In such approaches, high doses of single agents are used separately in relatively dose-intensive cycling regimens. Node-positive patients treated with doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide for four cycles followed by four cycles of a taxane have a substantial improvement in survival as compared with women receiving doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide alone, particularly in women with estrogen receptor〞negative tumors. In addition, administration of the same drug combinations at the same dose but at more frequent intervals (q2 weeks with cytokine support as compared with the standard q3 weeks) is even more effective. Among the 25% of women whose tumors overexpress HER2/neu, addition of trastuzumab given concurrently with a taxane and then for a year after chemotherapy produces significant improvement in survival. Though longer follow-up will be important, this is now the standard care for most women with HER2/neu〞positive breast cancers. Cardiotoxicity, immediate and long-term, remains a concern, and further efforts to exploit non〞anthracycline-containing regimens are being pursued. Very high dose therapy with stem cell transplantation in the adjuvant setting has not proved superior to standard-dose therapy and should not be routinely used. A variety of exciting approaches are close to adoption and the literature needs to be followed attentively. These include the use of antiangiogenics such as bevacizumab. In addition, tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as lapatinib that target the HER2 kinase are very promising. Finally, as described in the next section, a novel class of agents targeting DNA repair〞the so-called poly〞ADP ribose polymerase [PARP] inhibitors〞is likely to have a major impact on breast cancers either caused by BRCA-1 or -2 mutations or sharing similar defects in DNA repair in their etiology.

Systemic Therapy of Metastatic Disease

About one-third of patients treated for apparently localized breast cancer develop metastatic disease. Although a small number of these patients enjoy long remissions when treated with combinations of systemic and local therapy, most eventually succumb to metastatic disease. The median survival for all patients diagnosed with mestastatic breast cancer is less than 3 years. Soft tissue, bony, and visceral (lung and liver) metastases each account for approximately one-third of sites of initial relapses. However, by the time of death, most patients will have bony involvement. Recurrences can appear at any time after primary therapy. A very cruel fact about breast cancer recurrences is that at least half of all breast cancer recurrences occur >5 years after initial therapy.

Because the diagnosis of metastatic disease alters the outlook for the patient so drastically, it should rarely be made without a confirmatory biopsy. Every oncologist has seen patients with tuberculosis, gallstones, sarcoidosis, or other nonmalignant diseases misdiagnosed and treated as though they had metastatic breast cancer or even second malignancies such as multiple myeloma thought to be recurrent breast cancer. This is a catastrophic mistake and justifies biopsy for virtually every patient at the time of initial suspicion of metastatic disease.

The choice of therapy requires consideration of local therapy needs, the overall medical condition of the patient, and the hormone receptor status of the tumor, as well as clinical judgment. Because therapy of systemic disease is palliative, the potential toxicities of therapies should be balanced against the response rates. Several variables influence the response to systemic therapy. For example, the presence of estrogen and progesterone receptors is a strong indication for endocrine therapy. On the other hand, patients with short disease-free intervals, rapidly progressive visceral disease, lymphangitic pulmonary disease, or intracranial disease are unlikely to respond to endocrine therapy.

In many cases, systemic therapy can be withheld while the patient is managed with appropriate local therapy. Radiation therapy and occasionally surgery are effective at relieving the symptoms of metastatic disease, particularly when bony sites are involved. Many patients with bone-only or bone-dominant disease have a relatively indolent course. Under such circumstances, systemic chemotherapy has a modest effect, whereas radiation therapy may be effective for long periods. Other systemic treatments, such as strontium 89 and/or bisphosphonates, may provide a palliative benefit without inducing objective responses. Most patients with metastatic disease, and certainly all who have bone involvement, should receive concurrent bisphosphonates. Since the goal of therapy is to maintain well-being for as long as possible, emphasis should be placed on avoiding the most hazardous complications of metastatic disease, including pathologic fracture of the axial skeleton and spinal cord compression. New back pain in patients with cancer should be explored aggressively on an emergent basis; to wait for neurologic symptoms is a potentially catastrophic error. Metastatic involvement of endocrine organs can cause profound dysfunction, including adrenal insufficiency and hypopituitarism. Similarly, obstruction of the biliary tree or other impaired organ function may be better managed with a local therapy than with a systemic approach.

Endocrine Therapy

Normal breast tissue is estrogen dependent. Both primary and metastatic breast cancer may retain this phenotype. The best means of ascertaining whether a breast cancer is hormone dependent is through analysis of estrogen and progesterone receptor levels on the tumor. Tumors that are positive for the estrogen receptor and negative for the progesterone receptor have a response rate of ~30%. Tumors that have both receptors have a response rate approaching 70%. If neither receptor is present, the objective response rates are <5%. Receptor analyses provide information as to the correct ordering of endocrine therapies as opposed to chemotherapy. Because of their lack of toxicity and because some patients whose receptor analyses are reported as negative respond to endocrine therapy, an endocrine treatment should be attempted in virtually every patient with metastatic breast cancer. Potential endocrine therapies are summarized in Table 90每4. The choice of endocrine therapy is usually determined by toxicity profile and availability. In most patients, the initial endocrine therapy should be an aromatase inhibitor rather than tamoxifen. For the subset of postmenopausal women who are estrogen receptor〞positive but also HER2/neu positive, response rates to aromatase inhibitors are substantially higher than to tamoxifen. Newer "pure" antiestrogens that are free of agonistic effects are also effective. Cases in which tumors shrink in response to tamoxifen withdrawal (as well as withdrawal of pharmacologic doses of estrogens) have been reported. Endogenous estrogen formation may be blocked by analogues of luteinizing hormone〞releasing hormone in premenopausal women. Additive endocrine therapies, including treatment with progestogens, estrogens, and androgens, may also be tried in patients who respond to initial endocrine therapy; the mechanism of action of these latter therapies is unknown. Patients who respond to one endocrine therapy have at least a 50% chance of responding to a second endocrine therapy. It is not uncommon for patients to respond to two or three sequential endocrine therapies; however, combination endocrine therapies do not appear to be superior to individual agents, and combinations of chemotherapy with endocrine therapy are not useful. The median survival of patients with metastatic disease is approximately 2 years, and many patients, particularly older persons and those with hormone-dependent disease, may respond to endocrine therapy for 3每5 years or longer.

Table 90每4 Endocrine Therapies for Breast Cancer

 
 
Therapy Comments 
Castration

Surgical

LHRH agonists
 For premenopausal women 
Antiestrogens  
Tamoxifen Useful in pre- and postmenopausal women 
"Pure" antiestrogens Responses in tamoxifen-resistant and aromatase inhibitor每resistant patients 
Surgical adrenalectomy Rarely employed second-line choice 
Aromatase inhibitors Low toxicity; now first choice for metastatic disease 
High-dose progestogens Common fourth-line choice after AIs, tamoxifen and fulvestrant 
Hypophysectomy Rarely used 
Additive androgens or estrogens Plausible fourth-line therapies; potentially toxic 
 


Abbreviation: AI, aromatase inhibitor; LHRH, luteinizing hormone每releasing hormone.
 

Chemotherapy

Unlike many other epithelial malignancies, breast cancer responds to multiple chemotherapeutic agents, including anthracyclines, alkylating agents, taxanes, and antimetabolites. Multiple combinations of these agents have been found to improve response rates somewhat, but they have had little effect on duration of response or survival. The choice among multidrug combinations frequently depends on whether adjuvant chemotherapy was administered and, if so, what type. While patients treated with adjuvant regimens such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF regimens) may subsequently respond to the same combination in the metastatic disease setting, most oncologists use drugs to which the patients have not been previously exposed. Once patients have progressed after combination drug therapy, it is most common to treat them with single agents. Given the significant toxicity of most drugs, the use of a single effective agent will minimize toxicity by sparing the patient exposure to drugs that would be of little value. No method to select the drugs most efficacious for a given patient has been demonstrated to be useful.

Most oncologists use either an anthracycline or paclitaxel following failure with the initial regimen. However, the choice has to be balanced with individual needs. One randomized study has suggested docetaxel may be superior to paclitaxel. A nanoparticle formulation of paclitaxel (Abraxane) is also effective.

The use of a humanized antibody to erbB2 [trastuzumab (Herceptin)] combined with paclitaxel can improve response rate and survival for women whose metastatic tumors overexpress erbB2. The magnitude of the survival extension is modest in patients with metastatic disease. Similarly, the use of bevacizumab (avastin) has improved the response rate and response duration to paclitaxel. Objective responses in previously treated patients may also be seen with gemcitabine, vinca alkaloids, capecitabine, Navelbine, and oral etoposide and a new class of agents, epothilones.

High-Dose Chemotherapy Including Autologous Bone Marrow Transplantation

Autologous bone marrow transplantation combined with high doses of single agents can produce objective responses even in heavily pretreated patients. However, such responses are rarely durable and do not alter the clinical course for most patients with advanced metastatic disease.

Stage III Breast Cancer

Between 10 and 25% of patients present with so-called locally advanced, or stage III, breast cancer at diagnosis. Many of these cancers are technically operable, whereas others, particularly cancers with chest wall involvement, inflammatory breast cancers, or cancers with large matted axillary lymph nodes, cannot be managed with surgery initially. Although no randomized trials have proved the efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, this approach has gained widespread use. More than 90% of patients with locally advanced breast cancer show a partial or better response to multidrug chemotherapy regimens that include an anthracycline. Early administration of this treatment reduces the bulk of the disease and frequently makes the patient a suitable candidate for salvage surgery and/or radiation therapy. These patients should be managed in multimodality clinics to coordinate surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic chemotherapy. Such approaches produce long-term disease-free survival in about 30每50% of patients.

Breast Cancer Prevention

Women who have one breast cancer are at risk of developing a contralateral breast cancer at a rate of approximately 0.5% per year. When adjuvant tamoxifen is administered to these patients, the rate of development of contralateral breast cancers is reduced. In other tissues of the body, tamoxifen has estrogen-like effects that are beneficial: preservation of bone mineral density and long-term lowering of cholesterol. However, tamoxifen has estrogen-like effects on the uterus, leading to an increased risk of uterine cancer (0.75% incidence after 5 years on tamoxifen). Tamoxifen also increases the risk of cataract formation. The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT) revealed a >49% reduction in breast cancer among women with a risk of at least 1.66% taking the drug for 5 years. Raloxifene has shown similar breast cancer prevention potency but may have different effects on bone and heart. The two agents have been compared in a prospective randomized prevention trial [the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) trial]. The agents are approximately equivalent in preventing breast cancer with fewer thromboembolic events and endometrial cancers with raloxifene; however, raloxifene did not reduce noninvasive cancers as effectively as tamoxifen, so no clear winner has emerged. A newer selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), lasofoxifene has recently been shown to reduce cardiovascular events in addition to breast cancer and fractures, and further studies of this agent should be watched with interest. It should be recalled that prevention of contralateral breast cancers in women diagnosed with onc cancer is a reasonable surrogate for breast cancer prevention as these are second primaries not recurrences. In this regard, the aromatase inhibitors are all considerably more effective than tamoxifen; however, they are not approved for primary breast cancer prevention. It remains puzzling that agents with the safety profile of raloxifene, which can reduce breast cancer risk by 50% with additional benefits in preventing osteoporotic fracture, are still so infrequently prescribed.

Noninvasive Breast Cancer

Breast cancer develops as a series of molecular changes in the epithelial cells that lead to ever more malignant behavior. Increased use of mammography has led to more frequent diagnoses of noninvasive breast cancer. These lesions fall into two groups: ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and lobular carcinoma in situ (lobular neoplasia). The management of both entities is controversial.

Ductal Carcinoma In Situ

Proliferation of cytologically malignant breast epithelial cells within the ducts is termed DCIS. Atypical hyperplasia may be difficult to differentiate from DCIS. At least one-third of patients with untreated DCIS develop invasive breast cancer within 5 years. For many years, the standard treatment for this disease was mastectomy. However, treatment of this condition by lumpectomy and radiation therapy gives survival that is as good as the survival for invasive breast cancer treated by mastectomy. In one randomized trial, the combination of wide excision plus irradiation for DCIS caused a substantial reduction in the local recurrence rate as compared with wide excision alone with negative margins, though survival was identical in the two arms. No studies have compared either of these regimens to mastectomy. Addition of tamoxifen to any DCIS surgical/radiation therapy regimen further improves local control. Data for aromatase inhibitors in this setting are not available.

Several prognostic features may help to identify patients at high risk for local recurrence after either lumpectomy alone or lumpectomy with radiation therapy. These include extensive disease; age <40; and cytologic features such as necrosis, poor nuclear grade, and comedo subtype with overexpression of erbB2. Some data suggest that adequate excision with careful determination of pathologically clear margins is associated with a low recurrence rate. When surgery is combined with radiation therapy, recurrence (which is usually in the same quadrant) occurs with a frequency of 10%. Given the fact that half of these recurrences will be invasive, about 5% of the initial cohort will eventually develop invasive breast cancer. A reasonable expectation of mortality for these patients is about 1%, a figure that approximates the mortality rate for DCIS managed by mastectomy. Although this train of reasoning has not formally been proved valid, it is reasonable to recommend that patients who desire breast preservation, and in whom DCIS appears to be reasonably localized, be managed by adequate surgery with meticulous pathologic evaluation, followed by breast irradiation and tamoxifen. For patients with localized DCIS, axillary lymph node dissection is unnecessary. More controversial is the question of what management is optimal when there is any degree of invasion. Because of a significant likelihood (10每15%) of axillary lymph node involvement even when the primary lesion shows only microscopic invasion, it is prudent to do at least a level 1 and 2 axillary lymph node dissection for all patients with any degree of invasion, or sentinel node biopsy may be substituted. Further management is dictated by the presence of nodal spread.

Lobular Neoplasia

Proliferation of cytologically malignant cells within the lobules is termed lobular neoplasia. Nearly 30% of patients who have had adequate local excision of the lesion develop breast cancer (usually infiltrating ductal carcinoma) over the next 15每20 years. Ipsilateral and contralateral cancers are equally common. Therefore, lobular neoplasia may be a premalignant lesion that suggests an elevated risk of subsequent breast cancer, rather than a form of malignancy itself, and aggressive local management seems unreasonable. Most patients should be treated with an SERM for 5 years and followed with careful annual mammography and semiannual physical examinations. Additional molecular analysis of these lesions may make it possible to discriminate between patients who are at risk of further progression and require additional therapy and those in whom simple follow-up is adequate.

Male Breast Cancer

Breast cancer is about 1/150th as frequent in men as in women; 1720 men developed breast cancer in 2006. It usually presents as a unilateral lump in the breast and is frequently not diagnosed promptly. Given the small amount of soft tissue and the unexpected nature of the problem, locally advanced presentations are somewhat more common. When male breast cancer is matched to female breast cancer by age and stage, its overall prognosis is identical. Although gynecomastia may initially be unilateral or asymmetric, any unilateral mass in a man older than age 40 years should receive a careful workup including biopsy. On the other hand, bilateral symmetric breast development rarely represents breast cancer and is almost invariably due to endocrine disease or a drug effect. It should be kept in mind, nevertheless, that the risk of cancer is much greater in men with gynecomastia; in such men, gross asymmetry of the breasts should arouse suspicion of cancer. Male breast cancer is best managed by mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection (modified radical mastectomy). Patients with locally advanced disease or positive nodes should also be treated with irradiation. Approximately 90% of male breast cancers contain estrogen receptors, and approximately 60% of cases with metastatic disease respond to endocrine therapy. No randomized studies have evaluated adjuvant therapy for male breast cancer. Two historic experiences suggest that the disease responds well to adjuvant systemic therapy, and, if not medically contraindicated, the same criteria for the use of adjuvant therapy in women should be applied to men.

The sites of relapse and spectrum of response to chemotherapeutic drugs are virtually identical for breast cancers in either sex.

Follow-Up of Breast Cancer Patients

Despite the availability of sophisticated and expensive imaging techniques and a wide range of serum tumor marker tests, survival is not influenced by early diagnosis of relapse. Surveillance guidelines are given in Table 90每5. Despite pressure from patients and their families, routine CAT scans etc. are not recommended.

Table 90每5 Breast Cancer Surveillance Guidelines

 
 
Test Frequency 
Recommended  
History; eliciting symptoms; physical examination q3每6 months x 3 years; q6每12 months x 2 years; then annually 
Breast self-examination Monthly 
Mammography Annually 
Pelvic examination Annually 
Patient education about symptoms of recurrence Ongoing 
Coordination of care Ongoing 
Not Recommended  
Complete blood count   
Serum chemistry studies   
Chest radiographs   
Bone scans   
Ultrasound examination of the liver   
Computed tomography of chest, abdomen, or pelvis   
Tumor marker CA 15-3, CA 27-29   
Tumor marker CEA   
 


Source: Recommended Breast Cancer Surveillance Guidelines, ASCO Education Book, Fall, 1997.
 
 
Further Readings

Chlebowski RT et al: Breast cancer after use of estrogen plus progestin in postme nopausal women. N Engl J Med 360:6, 2009 

 
Clarke M et al: Adjuvant chemotherapy in oestrogen-receptor-poor breast cancer: Patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet 371:29, 2008[PMID: 18177773] 

 
Foulkes WD et al: Triple-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med 363:1938, 2010[PMID: 21067385] 

 
Geyer CE et al: Lapatinib plus capecitabine for HER2-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med 355:2733, 2006[PMID: 17192538] 

 
Mansel RE et al: Randomized multicenter trial of sentinel node biopsy versus standard axillary treatment in operable breast cancer: The ALMANAC Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst98:599, 2006[PMID: 16670385] 

 
Miller K et al: Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 357:26, 2007 

 
Olivotto IA et al: Population-based validation of the prognostic model ADJUVANT! for early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 23:2716, 2005[PMID: 15837986] 

 
Paik S et al: Gene expression and benefit of chemotherapy in women with node-negative, estrogen receptor〞positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 24:3726, 2006[PMID: 16720680] 

 
Shipitsin M et al: Molecular definition of breast tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Cell 11:259, 2007[PMID: 17349583] 

 
Sorlie T et al: Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas distinguished tumor subclasses with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:10869, 2001[PMID: 11553815] 

 
Sotiriou C, Pusztai L: Gene-expression signatures in breast cancer. N Engl J Med360:8, 2009 
 
 

^^
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer: Introduction

The gastrointestinal tract is the second most common noncutaneous site for cancer and the second major cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States.
 
Esophageal Cancer

Incidence and Etiology

Cancer of the esophagus is a relatively uncommon but extremely lethal malignancy. The diagnosis was made in 16,640 Americans in 2010 and led to 14,500 deaths. Worldwide, the incidence, of esophageal cancer varies strikingly. It occurs frequently within a geographic region extending from the southern shore of the Caspian Sea on the west to northern China on the east and encompassing parts of Iran, Central Asia, Afghanistan, Siberia, and Mongolia. Familial increased risk has been seen in regions with high incidence, though gene associations are not yet defined. High-incidence "pockets" of the disease are also present in such disparate locations as Finland, Iceland, Cura?ao, southeastern Africa, and northwestern France. In North America and western Europe, the disease is more common in blacks than whites and in males than females; it appears most often after age 50 and seems to be associated with a lower socioeconomic status.

A variety of causative factors have been implicated in the development of the disease (Table 91每1). In the United States, esophageal cancer cases are either squamous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas. The etiology of squamous cell esophageal cancer is related to excess alcohol consumption and/or cigarette smoking. The relative risk increases with the amount of tobacco smoked or alcohol consumed, with these factors acting synergistically. The consumption of whiskey is linked to a higher incidence than the consumption of wine or beer. Squamous cell esophageal carcinoma has also been associated with the ingestion of nitrites, smoked opiates, and fungal toxins in pickled vegetables, as well as mucosal damage caused by such physical insults as long-term exposure to extremely hot tea, the ingestion of lye, radiation-induced strictures, and chronic achalasia. The presence of an esophageal web in association with glossitis and iron deficiency (i.e., Plummer-Vinson or Paterson-Kelly syndrome) and congenital hyperkeratosis and pitting of the palms and soles (i.e., tylosis palmaris et plantaris) have each been linked with squamous cell esophageal cancer, as have dietary deficiencies of molybdenum, zinc, selenium, and vitamin A. Bisphosphonates may increase the risk in patients with Barrett's esophagus. Patients with head and neck cancer are at increased risk of squamous cell cancer of the esophagus.

Table 91每1 Some Etiologic Factors Believed to Be Associated with Esophageal Cancer

 
 
Excess alcohol consumption 
Cigarette smoking 
Other ingested carcinogens 
  Nitrates (converted to nitrites) 
  Smoked opiates 
  Fungal toxins in pickled vegetables 
Mucosal damage from physical agents 
  Hot tea 
  Lye ingestion 
  Radiation-induced strictures 
  Chronic achalasia 
Host susceptibility 
Esophageal web with glossitis and iron deficiency (i.e., Plummer-Vinson or Paterson-Kelly syndrome) 
Congenital hyperkeratosis and pitting of the palms and soles (i.e., tylosis palmaris et plantaris) 
Dietary deficiencies of selenium, molybdenum, zinc, and vitamin A 
Celiac sprue 
Chronic gastric reflux (i.e., Barrett's esophagus) for adenocarcinoma 
 

 

For unclear reasons, the incidence of squamous cell esophageal cancer has decreased somewhat in both the black and white population in the United States over the past 30 years, while the rate of adenocarcinoma has risen dramatically, particularly in white males (M:F 6:1). Adenocarcinomas arise in the distal esophagus in the presence of chronic gastric reflux and gastric metaplasia of the epithelium (Barrett's esophagus), which is more common in obese persons. Adenocarcinomas arise within dysplastic columnar epithelium in the distal esophagus. Even before frank neoplasia is detectable, aneuploidy and p53 mutations are found in the dysplastic epithelium. These adenocarcinomas behave clinically like gastric adenocarcinoma and now account for >70% of esophageal cancers.

Clinical Features

About 10% of esophageal cancers occur in the upper third of the esophagus (cervical esophagus), 35% in the middle third, and 55% in the lower third. Squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas cannot be distinguished radiographically or endoscopically.

Progressive dysphagia and weight loss of short duration are the initial symptoms in the vast majority of patients. Dysphagia initially occurs with solid foods and gradually progresses to include semisolids and liquids. By the time these symptoms develop, the disease is usually incurable, since difficulty in swallowing does not occur until >60% of the esophageal circumference is infiltrated with cancer. Dysphagia may be associated with pain on swallowing (odynophagia), pain radiating to the chest and/or back, regurgitation or vomiting, and aspiration pneumonia. The disease most commonly spreads to adjacent and supraclavicular lymph nodes, liver, lungs, pleura, and bone. Tracheoesophageal fistulas may develop as the disease advances, leading to severe suffering. As with other squamous cell carcinomas, hypercalcemia may occur in the absence of osseous metastases, probably from parathormone-related peptide secreted by tumor cells (Chap. 100).

Diagnosis

Attempts at endoscopic and cytologic screening for carcinoma in patients with Barrett's esophagus, while effective as a means of detecting high-grade dysplasia, have not yet been shown to improve the prognosis in individuals found to have a carcinoma. Routine contrast radiographs effectively identify esophageal lesions large enough to cause symptoms. In contrast to benign esophageal leiomyomas, which result in esophageal narrowing with preservation of a normal mucosal pattern, esophageal carcinomas show ragged, ulcerating changes in the mucosa in association with deeper infiltration, producing a picture resembling achalasia. Smaller, potentially resectable tumors are often poorly visualized despite technically adequate esophagograms. Because of this, esophagoscopy should be performed in all patients suspected of having an esophageal abnormality, to visualize the tumor and to obtain histopathologic confirmation of the diagnosis. Because the population of persons at risk for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus (i.e., smokers and drinkers) also has a high rate of cancers of the lung and the head and neck region, endoscopic inspection of the larynx, trachea, and bronchi should also be done. A thorough examination of the fundus of the stomach (by retroflexing the endoscope) is imperative as well. Endoscopic biopsies of esophageal tumors fail to recover malignant tissue in one-third of cases because the biopsy forceps cannot penetrate deeply enough through normal mucosa pushed in front of the carcinoma. Taking multiple biopsies increases the yield. Cytologic examination of tumor brushings complements standard biopsies and should be performed routinely. The extent of tumor spread to the mediastinum and para-aortic lymph nodes should be assessed by CT scans of the chest and abdomen and by endoscopic ultrasound. Positron emission tomography scanning provides a useful assessment of resectability, offering accurate information regarding spread to mediastinal lymph nodes. Most patients have advanced disease at presentation.

Treatment: Esophageal Cancer

The prognosis for patients with esophageal carcinoma is poor. Fewer than 5% of patients survive 5 years after the diagnosis; thus, management focuses on symptom control. Surgical resection of all gross tumor (i.e., total resection) is feasible in only 45% of cases, with residual tumor cells frequently present at the resection margins. Such esophagectomies have been associated with a postoperative mortality rate of approximately 5% due to anastomotic fistulas, subphrenic abscesses, and respiratory complications. About 20% of patients who survive a total resection live 5 years. The efficacy of primary radiation therapy (5500每6000 cGy) for squamous cell carcinomas is similar to that of radical surgery, sparing patients perioperative morbidity but often resulting in less satisfactory palliation of obstructive symptoms. The evaluation of chemotherapeutic agents in patients with esophageal carcinoma has been hampered by ambiguity in the definition of "response" and the debilitated physical condition of many treated individuals. Nonetheless, significant reductions in the size of measurable tumor masses have been reported in 15每25% of patients given single-agent treatment and in 30每60% of patients treated with drug combinations that include cisplatin. Combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy as the initial therapeutic approach, either alone or followed by an attempt at operative resection, seems to be beneficial. When administered along with radiation therapy, chemotherapy produces a better survival outcome than radiation therapy alone. The use of preoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by esophageal resection appears to prolong survival as compared with controls in small, randomized trials, and some reports suggest that no additional benefit accrues when surgery is added if significant shrinkage of tumor has been achieved by the chemoradiation combination.

For the incurable, surgically unresectable patient with esophageal cancer, dysphagia, malnutrition, and the management of tracheoesophageal fistulas are major issues. Approaches to palliation include repeated endoscopic dilatation, the surgical placement of a gastrostomy or jejunostomy for hydration and feeding, and endoscopic placement of an expansive metal stent to bypass the tumor. Endoscopic fulguration of the obstructing tumor with lasers is the most promising of these techniques.
 
Tumors of the Stomach

Gastric Adenocarcinoma

Incidence and Epidemiology

For unclear reasons, the incidence and mortality rates for gastric cancer have decreased markedly worldwide during the past 75 years. The mortality rate from gastric cancer in the United States has dropped in men from 28 to 5.8 per 100,000 persons, while in women the rate has decreased from 27 to 2.8 per 100,000. Nonetheless, 21,000 new cases of stomach cancer were diagnosed in the United States, and 10,570 Americans died of the disease in 2010. Gastric cancer incidence has decreased worldwide but remains high in Japan, China, Chile, and Ireland.

The risk of gastric cancer is greater among lower socioeconomic classes. Migrants from high- to low-incidence nations maintain their susceptibility to gastric cancer, while the risk for their offspring approximates that of the new homeland. These findings suggest that an environmental exposure, probably beginning early in life, is related to the development of gastric cancer, with dietary carcinogens considered the most likely factor(s).

Pathology

About 85% of stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas, with 15% due to lymphomas and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and leiomyosarcomas. Gastric adenocarcinomas may be subdivided into two categories: a diffuse type, in which cell cohesion is absent, so that individual cells infiltrate and thicken the stomach wall without forming a discrete mass; and an intestinal type, characterized by cohesive neoplastic cells that form glandlike tubular structures. The diffuse carcinomas occur more often in younger patients, develop throughout the stomach (including the cardia), result in a loss of distensibility of the gastric wall (so-called linitis plastica, or "leather bottle" appearance), and carry a poorer prognosis. Diffuse cancers have defective intercellular adhesion, mainly as a consequence of loss of expression of E-cadherin. Intestinal-type lesions are frequently ulcerative, more commonly appear in the antrum and lesser curvature of the stomach, and are often preceded by a prolonged precancerous process, often initiated by Helicobacter pylori infection. While the incidence of diffuse carcinomas is similar in most populations, the intestinal type tends to predominate in the high-risk geographic regions and is less likely to be found in areas where the frequency of gastric cancer is declining. Thus, different etiologic factor(s) are likely involved in these two subtypes. In the United States, 30% of gastric cancers originate in the distal stomach, 20% arise in the midportion of the stomach, and 37% originate in the proximal third of the stomach. The remaining 13% involve the entire stomach.

Etiology

The long-term ingestion of high concentrations of nitrates in dried, smoked, and salted foods appears to be associated with a higher risk. The nitrates are thought to be converted to carcinogenic nitrites by bacteria (Table 91每2). Such bacteria may be introduced exogenously through the ingestion of partially decayed foods, which are consumed in abundance worldwide by the lower socioeconomic classes. Bacteria such as H. pylori may also contribute to this effect by causing chronic gastritis, loss of gastric acidity, and bacterial growth in the stomach. The effect of H. pylori eradication on the subsequent risk for gastric cancer in high-incidence areas is under investigation. Loss of acidity may occur when acid-producing cells of the gastric antrum have been removed surgically to control benign peptic ulcer disease or when achlorhydria, atrophic gastritis, and even pernicious anemia develop in the elderly. Serial endoscopic examinations of the stomach in patients with atrophic gastritis have documented replacement of the usual gastric mucosa by intestinal-type cells. This process of intestinal metaplasia may lead to cellular atypia and eventual neoplasia. Since the declining incidence of gastric cancer in the United States primarily reflects a decline in distal, ulcerating, intestinal-type lesions, it is conceivable that better food preservation and the availability of refrigeration to all socioeconomic classes have decreased the dietary ingestion of exogenous bacteria. H. pylori has not been associated with the diffuse, more proximal form of gastric carcinoma.

Table 91每2 Nitrate-Converting Bacteria as a Factor in the Causation of Gastric Carcinomaa

 
 
Exogenous sources of nitrate-converting bacteria: 
  Bacterially contaminated food (common in lower socioeconomic classes, who have a higher incidence of the disease; diminished by improved food preservation and refrigeration) 
  ?Helicobacter pylori infection  
Endogenous factors favoring growth of nitrate-converting bacteria in the stomach: 
  Decreased gastric acidity 
  Prior gastric surgery (antrectomy) (15- to 20-year latency period) 
  Atrophic gastritis and/or pernicious anemia 
  ? Prolonged exposure to histamine H2-receptor antagonists
  
 


aHypothesis: Dietary nitrates are converted to carcinogenic nitrites by bacteria.
 

Several additional etiologic factors have been associated with gastric carcinoma. Gastric ulcers and adenomatous polyps have occasionally been linked, but data on a cause-and-effect relationship are unconvincing. The inadequate clinical distinction between benign gastric ulcers and small ulcerating carcinomas may, in part, account for this presumed association. The presence of extreme hypertrophy of gastric rugal folds (i.e., M谷n谷trier's disease), giving the impression of polypoid lesions, has been associated with a striking frequency of malignant transformation; such hypertrophy, however, does not represent the presence of true adenomatous polyps. Individuals with blood group A have a higher incidence of gastric cancer than persons with blood group O; this observation may be related to differences in the mucous secretion, leading to altered mucosal protection from carcinogens. A germ-line mutation in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1), inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and coding for a cell adhesion protein, has been linked to a high incidence of occult diffuse-type gastric cancers in young asymptomatic carriers. Duodenal ulcers are not associated with gastric cancer.

In keeping with the stepwise model of carcinogenesis, K-ras mutations appear to be early events in intestinal-type gastric cancer. C-met expression is amplified in about 1 in 5 cases and correlates with advanced stage. About half of intestinal-type tumors have mutations in tumor suppressor genes such as TP53, TP73, APC (adenomatous polyposis coli), TFF (trefoid factor family), DCC (deleted in colon cancer), and FHIT (fragile histidine triad). Cyclin E overexpression is associated with progression from dysplasia. Epigenetic changes (especially increased methylation) has been correlated with higher risk of invasive disease. Beta-catenin has been found in the nucleus of tumor cells at the leading edge of invasion.

Clinical Features

Gastric cancers, when superficial and surgically curable, usually produce no symptoms. As the tumor becomes more extensive, patients may complain of an insidious upper abdominal discomfort varying in intensity from a vague, postprandial fullness to a severe, steady pain. Anorexia, often with slight nausea, is very common but is not the usual presenting complaint. Weight loss may eventually be observed, and nausea and vomiting are particularly prominent with tumors of the pylorus; dysphagia and early satiety may be the major symptoms caused by diffuse lesions originating in the cardia. There are no early physical signs. A palpable abdominal mass indicates long-standing growth and predicts regional extension.

Gastric carcinomas spread by direct extension through the gastric wall to the perigastric tissues, occasionally adhering to adjacent organs such as the pancreas, colon, or liver. The disease also spreads via lymphatics or by seeding of peritoneal surfaces. Metastases to intraabdominal and supraclavicular lymph nodes occur frequently, as do metastatic nodules to the ovary (Krukenberg's tumor), periumbilical region ("Sister Mary Joseph node"), or peritoneal cul-de-sac (Blumer's shelf palpable on rectal or vaginal examination); malignantascites may also develop. The liver is the most common site for hematogenous spread of tumor.

The presence of iron-deficiency anemia in men and of occult blood in the stool in both sexes mandates a search for an occult gastrointestinal tract lesion. A careful assessment is of particular importance in patients with atrophic gastritis or pernicious anemia. Unusual clinical features associated with gastric adenocarcinomas include migratory thrombophlebitis, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, diffuse seborrheic keratoses (so-called Leser-Tr谷lat sign), and acanthosis nigricans.

Diagnosis

A double-contrast radiographic examination is the simplest diagnostic procedure for the evaluation of a patient with epigastric complaints. The use of double-contrast techniques helps to detect small lesions by improving mucosal detail. The stomach should be distended at some time during every radiographic examination, since decreased distensibility may be the only indication of a diffuse infiltrative carcinoma. Although gastric ulcers can be detected fairly early, distinguishing benign from malignant lesions radiographically is difficult. The anatomic location of an ulcer is not in itself an indication of the presence or absence of a cancer.

Gastric ulcers that appear benign by radiography present special problems. Some physicians believe that gastroscopy is not mandatory if the radiographic features are typically benign, if complete healing can be visualized by x-ray within 6 weeks, and if a follow-up contrast radiograph obtained several months later shows a normal appearance. However, we recommend gastroscopic biopsy and brush cytology for all patients with a gastric ulcer in order to exclude a malignancy. Malignant gastric ulcers must be recognized before they penetrate into surrounding tissues, because the rate of cure of early lesions limited to the mucosa or submucosa is >80%. Since gastric carcinomas are difficult to distinguish clinically or radiographically from gastric lymphomas, endoscopic biopsies should be made as deeply as possible, due to the submucosal location of lymphoid tumors.

The staging system for gastric carcinoma is shown in Table 91每3.

Table 91每3 Staging System for Gastric Carcinoma

 
 
      Data from ACS 
Stage TNM Features No. of Cases, % 5-Year Survival, % 
0 TisN0M0
  Node negative; limited to mucosa 1 90 
IA T1N0M0 Node negative; invasion of lamina propria or submucosa 7 59 
IB T2N0M0

T1N1M0
 Node negative; invasion of muscularis propria 10 44 
II T1N2M0

T2N1M0
 Node positive; invasion beyond mucosa but within wall 17 29 
    or      
  T3N0M0 Node negative; extension through wall     
IIIA T2N2M0

T3N1-2M0
 Node positive; invasion of muscularis propria or through wall 21 15 
IIIB T4N0-1M0 Node negative; adherence to surrounding tissue 14 9 
IIIC T4N2-3M0

T3N3M0
 >3 nodes positive; invasion of serosa or adjacent structures

7 or more positive nodes; penetrates wall without invading serosa or adjacent structures
     
IV T4N2M0 Node positive; adherence to surrounding tissue 30 3 
    or      
  T1-4N0-2

M1
 Distant metastases     
 


Abbreviation: ACS, American Cancer Society; TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
 

Treatment: Gastric Adenocarcinoma

Complete surgical removal of the tumor with resection of adjacent lymph nodes offers the only chance for cure. However, this is possible in less than a third of patients. A subtotal gastrectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with distal carcinomas, while total or near-total gastrectomies are required for more proximal tumors. The inclusion of extended lymph node dissection in these procedures appears to confer an added risk for complications without enhancing survival. The prognosis following complete surgical resection depends on the degree of tumor penetration into the stomach wall and is adversely influenced by regional lymph node involvement, vascular invasion, and abnormal DNA content (i.e., aneuploidy), characteristics found in the vast majority of American patients. As a result, the probability of survival after 5 years for the 25每30% of patients able to undergo complete resection is 20% for distal tumors and <10% for proximal tumors, with recurrences continuing for at least 8 years after surgery. In the absence of ascites or extensive hepatic or peritoneal metastases, even patients whose disease is believed to be incurable by surgery should be offered resection of the primary lesion. Reduction of tumor bulk is the best form of palliation and may enhance the probability of benefit from subsequent therapy.

Gastric adenocarcinoma is a relatively radioresistant tumor, and adequate control of the primary tumor requires doses of external beam irradiation that exceed the tolerance of surrounding structures, such as bowel mucosa and spinal cord. As a result, the major role of radiation therapy in patients has been palliation of pain. Radiation therapy alone after a complete resection does not prolong survival. In the setting of surgically unresectable disease limited to the epigastrium, patients treated with 3500每4000 cGy did not live longer than similar patients not receiving radiotherapy; however, survival was prolonged slightly when 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus leucovorin was given in combination with radiation therapy (3-year survival 50% vs 41% for radiation therapy alone). In this clinical setting, the 5-FU may be functioning as a radiosensitizer.

The administration of combinations of cytotoxic drugs to patients with advanced gastric carcinoma has been associated with partial responses in 30每50% of cases; responders appear to benefit from treatment. Such drug combinations have generally included cisplatin combined with epirubicin or docetaxel and infusional 5-FU, or with irinotecan. Despite this encouraging response rate, complete remissions are uncommon, the partial responses are transient, and the overall influence of multidrug therapy on survival has been unclear. The use of adjuvant chemotherapy alone following the complete resection of a gastric cancer has only minimally improved survival. However, combination chemotherapy administered before and after surgery (perioperative treatment) as well as postoperative chemotherapy combined with radiation therapy reduces the recurrence rate and prolongs survival.

Primary Gastric Lymphoma

Primary lymphoma of the stomach is relatively uncommon, accounting for <15% of gastric malignancies and 2% of all lymphomas. The stomach is, however, the most frequent extranodal site for lymphoma, and gastric lymphoma has increased in frequency during the past 30 years. The disease is difficult to distinguish clinically from gastric adenocarcinoma; both tumors are most often detected during the sixth decade of life; present with epigastric pain, early satiety, and generalized fatigue; and are usually characterized by ulcerations with a ragged, thickened mucosal pattern demonstrated by contrast radiographs. The diagnosis of lymphoma of the stomach may occasionally be made through cytologic brushings of the gastric mucosa but usually requires a biopsy at gastroscopy or laparotomy. Failure of gastroscopic biopsies to detect lymphoma in a given case should not be interpreted as being conclusive, since superficial biopsies may miss the deeper lymphoid infiltrate. The macroscopic pathology of gastric lymphoma may also mimic adenocarcinoma, consisting of either a bulky ulcerated lesion localized in the corpus or antrum or a diffuse process spreading throughout the entire gastric submucosa and even extending into the duodenum. Microscopically, the vast majority of gastric lymphoid tumors are non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of B cell origin; Hodgkin's disease involving the stomach is extremely uncommon. Histologically, these tumors may range from well-differentiated, superficial processes [mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)] to high-grade, large-cell lymphomas. Like gastric adenocarcinoma, infection with H. pylori increases the risk for gastric lymphoma in general and MALT lymphomas in particular. Gastric lymphomas spread initially to regional lymph nodes (often to Waldeyer's ring) and may then disseminate. Gastric lymphomas are staged like other lymphomas (Chap. 110).

Treatment: Primary Gastric Lymphoma

Primary gastric lymphoma is a far more treatable disease than adenocarcinoma of the stomach, a fact that underscores the need for making the correct diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment to eradicate H. pylori infection has led to regression of about 75% of gastric MALT lymphomas and should be considered before surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy are undertaken in patients having such tumors. A lack of response to such antimicrobial treatment has been linked to a specific chromosomal abnormality, i.e., t(11;18). Responding patients should undergo periodic endoscopic surveillance because it remains unclear whether the neoplastic clone is eliminated or merely suppressed, although the response to antimicrobial treatment is quite durable. Subtotal gastrectomy, usually followed by combination chemotherapy, has led to 5-year survival rates of 40每60% in patients with localized high-grade lymphomas. The need for a major surgical procedure has been questioned, particularly in patients with preoperative radiographic evidence of nodal involvement, for whom chemotherapy [CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone)] plus rituximab is effective therapy. A role for radiation therapy is not defined because most recurrences develop at distant sites.

Gastric (Nonlymphoid) Sarcoma

Leiomyosarcomas and GISTs make up 1每3% of gastric neoplasms. They most frequently involve the anterior and posterior walls of the gastric fundus and often ulcerate and bleed. Even those lesions that appear benign on histologic examination may behave in a malignant fashion. These tumors rarely invade adjacent viscera and characteristically do not metastasize to lymph nodes, but they may spread to the liver and lungs. The treatment of choice is surgical resection. Combination chemotherapy should be reserved for patients with metastatic disease. All such tumors should be analyzed for a mutation in the c-kit receptor. GISTs are unresponsive to conventional chemotherapy; yet 50% of patients experience objective response and prolonged survival when treated with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) (400每800 mg PO daily), a selective inhibitor of the c-kit tyrosine kinase. Many patients with GIST whose tumors have become refractory to imatinib subsequently benefit from sunitinib (Sutent), another inhibitor of the c-kit tyrosine kinase.
 
Colorectal Cancer

Incidence

Cancer of the large bowel is second only to lung cancer as a cause of cancer death in the United States: 142,570 new cases occurred in 2010, and 51,370 deaths were due to colorectal cancer. The incidence rate has decreased significantly during the past 20 years, likely due to enhanced and more compliantly followed screening practices. Similarly, mortality rates in the United States have decreased by approximately 25%, resulting largely from improved treatment and earlier detection.

Polyps and Molecular Pathogenesis

Most colorectal cancers, regardless of etiology, arise from adenomatous polyps. A polyp is a grossly visible protrusion from the mucosal surface and may be classified pathologically as a nonneoplastic hamartoma (juvenile polyp), a hyperplastic mucosal proliferation (hyperplastic polyp), or an adenomatous polyp. Only adenomas are clearly premalignant, and only a minority of such lesions becomes cancer. Adenomatous polyps may be found in the colons of 30% of middle-aged and 50% of elderly people; however, <1% of polyps ever become malignant. Most polyps produce no symptoms and remain clinically undetected. Occult blood in the stool is found in <5% of patients with polyps.

A number of molecular changes are noted in adenomatous polyps, dysplastic lesions, and polyps containing microscopic foci of tumor cells (carcinoma in situ), which are thought to reflect a multistep process in the evolution of normal colonic mucosa to life-threatening invasive carcinoma. These developmental steps toward carcinogenesis include, but are not restricted to, point mutations in the K-ras protooncogene; hypomethylation of DNA, leading to gene activation; loss of DNA (allelic loss) at the site of a tumor-suppressor gene [the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene] on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q21); allelic loss at the site of a tumor-suppressor gene located on chromosome 18q [the deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) gene]; and allelic loss at chromosome 17p, associated with mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene (see Fig. 83-2). Thus, the altered proliferative pattern of the colonic mucosa, which results in progression to a polyp and then to carcinoma, may involve the mutational activation of an oncogene followed by and coupled with the loss of genes that normally suppress tumorigenesis. It remains uncertain whether the genetic aberrations always occur in a defined order. Based on this model, however, cancer is believed to develop only in those polyps in which most (if not all) of these mutational events take place.

Clinically, the probability of an adenomatous polyp becoming a cancer depends on the gross appearance of the lesion, its histologic features, and its size. Adenomatous polyps may be pedunculated (stalked) or sessile (flat-based). Cancers develop more frequently in sessile polyps. Histologically, adenomatous polyps may be tubular, villous (i.e., papillary), or tubulovillous. Villous adenomas, most of which are sessile, become malignant more than three times as often as tubular adenomas. The likelihood that any polypoid lesion in the large bowel contains invasive cancer is related to the size of the polyp, being negligible (<2%) in lesions <1.5 cm, intermediate (2每10%) in lesions 1.5每2.5 cm, and substantial (10%) in lesions >2.5 cm in size.

Following the detection of an adenomatous polyp, the entire large bowel should be visualized endoscopically or radiographically, since synchronous lesions are noted in about one-third of cases. Colonoscopy should then be repeated periodically, even in the absence of a previously documented malignancy, since such patients have a 30每50% probability of developing another adenoma and are at a higher-than-average risk for developing a colorectal carcinoma. Adenomatous polyps are thought to require >5 years of growth before becoming clinically significant; colonoscopy need not be carried out more frequently than every 3 years.

Etiology and Risk Factors

Risk factors for the development of colorectal cancer are listed in Table 91每4.

Table 91每4 Risk Factors for the Development of Colorectal Cancer

 
 
Diet: Animal fat 
Hereditary syndromes (autosomal dominant inheritance) 
  Polyposis coli 
  Nonpolyposis syndrome (Lynch syndrome) 
Inflammatory bowel disease 
Streptococcus bovis bacteremia 
Ureterosigmoidostomy 
? Tobacco use 
 

 

Diet

The etiology for most cases of large-bowel cancer appears to be related to environmental factors. The disease occurs more often in upper socioeconomic populations who live in urban areas. Mortality from colorectal cancer is directly correlated with per capita consumption of calories, meat protein, and dietary fat and oil as well as elevations in the serum cholesterol concentration and mortality from coronary artery disease. Geographic variations in incidence are unrelated to genetic differences, since migrant groups tend to assume the large-bowel cancer incidence rates of their adopted countries. Furthermore, population groups such as Mormons and Seventh Day Adventists, whose lifestyle and dietary habits differ somewhat from those of their neighbors, have significantly lower-than-expected incidence and mortality rates for colorectal cancer. Colorectal cancer has increased in Japan since that nation has adopted a more "Western" diet. At least three hypotheses have been proposed to explain the relationship to diet, none of which is fully satisfactory.

Animal Fats

One hypothesis is that the ingestion of animal fats found in red meats and processed meat leads to an increased proportion of anaerobes in the gut microflora, resulting in the conversion of normal bile acids into carcinogens. This provocative hypothesis is supported by several reports of increased amounts of fecal anaerobes in the stools of patients with colorectal cancer. Diets high in animal (but not vegetable) fats are also associated with high serum cholesterol, which is also associated with enhanced risk for the development of colorectal adenomas and carcinomas.

Insulin Resistance

The large number of calories in Western diets coupled with physical inactivity has been associated with a higher prevalence of obesity. Obese persons develop insulin resistance with increased circulating levels of insulin, leading to higher circulating concentrations of insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I). This growth factor appears to stimulate proliferation of the intestinal mucosa.

Fiber

Contrary to prior beliefs, the results of randomized trials and case-controlled studies have failed to show any value for dietary fiber or diets high in fruits and vegetables in preventing the recurrence of colorectal adenomas or the development of colorectal cancer. The weight of epidemiologic evidence, however, implicates diet as being the major etiologic factor for colorectal cancer, particularly diets high in animal fat and in calories.

Hereditary Factors and Syndromes

Up to 25% of patients with colorectal cancer have a family history of the disease, suggesting a hereditary predisposition. Inherited large-bowel cancers can be divided into two main groups: the well-studied but uncommon polyposis syndromes and the more common nonpolyposis syndromes (Table 91每5).

Table 91每5 Hereditable (Autosomal Dominant) Gastrointestinal Polyposis Syndromes

 
 
Syndrome Distribution of Polyps Histologic Type Malignant Potential Associated Lesions 
Familial adenomatous polyposis Large intestine Adenoma Common None 
Gardner's syndrome Large and small intestines Adenoma Common Osteomas, fibromas, lipomas, epidermoid cysts, ampullary cancers, congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium 
Turcot's syndrome Large intestine Adenoma Common Brain tumors 
Nonpolyposis syndrome (Lynch syndrome) Large intestine (often proximal) Adenoma Common Endometrial and ovarian tumors 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome Small and large intestines, stomach Hamartoma Rare Mucocutaneous pigmentation; tumors of the ovary, breast, pancreas, endometrium 
Juvenile polyposis Large and small intestines, stomach Hamartoma, rarely progressing to adenoma Rare Various congenital abnormalities 
 

 

Polyposis Coli

Polyposis coli (familial polyposis of the colon) is a rare condition characterized by the appearance of thousands of adenomatous polyps throughout the large bowel. It is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait; the occasional patient with no family history probably developed the condition due to a spontaneous mutation. Polyposis coli is associated with a deletion in the long arm of chromosome 5 [including the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene] in both neoplastic (somatic mutation) and normal (germ-line mutation) cells. The loss of this genetic material (i.e., allelic loss) results in the absence of tumor-suppressor genes whose protein products would normally inhibit neoplastic growth. The presence of soft tissue and bony tumors, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, mesenteric desmoid tumors, and ampullary cancers in addition to the colonic polyps characterizes a subset of polyposis coli known as Gardner's syndrome. The appearance of malignant tumors of the central nervous system accompanying polyposis coli defines Turcot's syndrome. The colonic polyps in all these conditions are rarely present before puberty but are generally evident in affected individuals by age 25. If the polyposis is not treated surgically, colorectal cancer will develop in almost all patients before age 40. Polyposis coli results from a defect in the colonic mucosa, leading to an abnormal proliferative pattern and impaired DNA repair mechanisms. Once the multiple polyps are detected, patients should undergo a total colectomy. Medical therapy with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as sulindac and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib can decrease the number and size of polyps in patients with polyposis coli; however, this effect on polyps is only temporary, and NSAIDs are not proven to reduce the risk of cancer. Colectomy remains the primary therapy/prevention. The offspring of patients with polyposis coli, who often are prepubertal when the diagnosis is made in the parent, have a 50% risk for developing this premalignant disorder and should be carefully screened by annual flexible sigmoidoscopy until age 35. Proctosigmoidoscopy is a sufficient screening procedure because polyps tend to be evenly distributed from cecum to anus, making more-invasive and expensive techniques such as colonoscopy or barium enema unnecessary. Testing for occult blood in the stool is an inadequate screening maneuver. An alternative method for identifying carriers is testing DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells for the presence of a mutated APC gene. The detection of such a germ-line mutation can lead to a definitive diagnosis before the development of polyps.

Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer

Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), also known as Lynch syndrome, is another autosomal dominant trait. It is characterized by the presence of three or more relatives with histologically documented colorectal cancer, one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other two; one or more cases of colorectal cancer diagnosed before age 50 in the family; and colorectal cancer involving at least two generations. In contrast to polyposis coli, HNPCC is associated with an unusually high frequency of cancer arising in the proximal large bowel. The median age for the appearance of an adenocarcinoma is <50 years, 10每15 years younger than the median age for the general population. Despite having a poorly differentiated histologic appearance, the proximal colon tumors in HNPCC have a better prognosis than sporadic tumors from patients of similar age. Families with HNPCC often include individuals with multiple primary cancers; the association of colorectal cancer with either ovarian or endometrial carcinomas is especially strong in women. It has been recommended that members of such families undergo biennial colonoscopy beginning at age 25 years, with intermittent pelvic ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy for afflicted women; such a screening strategy has not yet been validated. HNPCC is associated with germ-line mutations of several genes, particularly hMSH2 on chromosome 2 and hMLH1 on chromosome 3. These mutations lead to errors in DNA replication and are thought to result in DNA instability because of defective repair of DNA mismatches resulting in abnormal cell growth and tumor development. Testing tumor cells through molecular analysis of DNA or immunohistochemical staining of paraffin-fixed tissue for "microsatellite instability" (sequence changes reflecting defective mismatch repair) in patients younger than age 50 with colorectal cancer and a positive family history for colorectal or endometrial cancer may identify probands with HNPCC.

Inflammatory Bowel Disease

(Chap. 295) Large-bowel cancer is increased in incidence in patients with long-standing inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Cancers develop more commonly in patients with ulcerative colitis than in those with granulomatous colitis, but this impression may result in part from the occasional difficulty of differentiating these two conditions. The risk of colorectal cancer in a patient with IBD is relatively small during the initial 10 years of the disease, but then it appears to increase at a rate of 0.5每1% per year. Cancer may develop in 8每30% of patients after 25 years. The risk is higher in younger patients with pancolitis.

Cancer surveillance in patients with IBD is unsatisfactory. Symptoms such as bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramping, and obstruction, which may signal the appearance of a tumor, are similar to the complaints caused by a flare-up of the underlying disease. In patients with a history of IBD lasting 15 years who continue to experience exacerbations, the surgical removal of the colon can significantly reduce the risk for cancer and also eliminate the target organ for the underlying chronic gastrointestinal disorder. The value of such surveillance techniques as colonoscopy with mucosal biopsies and brushings for less-symptomatic individuals with chronic IBD is uncertain. The lack of uniformity regarding the pathologic criteria that characterize dysplasia and the absence of data that such surveillance reduces the development of lethal cancers have made this costly practice an area of controversy.

Other High-Risk Conditions

Streptococcus Bovis Bacteremia

For unknown reasons, individuals who develop endocarditis or septicemia from this fecal bacterium have a high incidence of occult colorectal tumors and, possibly, upper gastrointestinal cancers as well. Endoscopic or radiographic screening appears advisable.

Tobacco Use

Cigarette smoking is linked to the development of colorectal adenomas, particularly after >35 years of tobacco use. No biologic explanation for this association has yet been proposed.

Primary Prevention

Several orally administered compounds have been assessed as possible inhibitors of colon cancer. The most effective class of chemopreventive agents is aspirin and other NSAIDs, which are thought to suppress cell proliferation by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Regular aspirin use reduces the risk of colon adenomas and carcinomas as well as death from large-bowel cancer; such use also appears to diminish the likelihood for developing additional premalignant adenomas following treatment for a prior colon carcinoma. This effect of aspirin on colon carcinogenesis increases with the duration and dosage of drug use. Oral folic acid supplements and oral calcium supplements reduce the risk of adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancers in case-controlled studies. The value of vitamin D as a form of chemo-prevention is under study. Antioxidant vitamins such as ascorbic acid, tocopherols, and -carotene are ineffective at reducing the incidence of subsequent adenomas in patients who have undergone the removal of a colon adenoma. Estrogen-replacement therapy has been associated with a reduction in the risk of colorectal cancer in women, conceivably by an effect on bile acid synthesis and composition or by decreasing synthesis of IGF-I. The otherwise unexplained reduction in colorectal cancer mortality rate in women may be a result of the widespread use of estrogen replacement in postmenopausal individuals.

Screening

The rationale for colorectal cancer screening programs is that earlier detection of localized, superficial cancers in asymptomatic individuals will increase the surgical cure rate. Such screening programs are important for individuals having a family history of the disease in first-degree relatives. The relative risk for developing colorectal cancer increases to 1.75 in such individuals and may be even higher if the relative was afflicted before age 60. The prior use of proctosigmoidoscopy as a screening tool was based on the observation that 60% of early lesions are located in the rectosigmoid. For unexplained reasons, however, the proportion of large-bowel cancers arising in the rectum has been decreasing during the past several decades, with a corresponding increase in the proportion of cancers in the more proximal descending colon. As such, the potential for rigid proctosigmoidoscopy to detect a sufficient number of occult neoplasms to make the procedure cost-effective has been questioned. Flexible, fiberoptic sigmoidoscopes permit trained operators to visualize the colon for up to 60 cm, which enhances the capability for cancer detection. However, this technique still leaves the proximal half of the large bowel unscreened.

Most programs directed at the early detection of colorectal cancers have focused on digital rectal examinations and fecal occult blood testing. The digital examination should be part of any routine physical evaluation in adults older than age 40 years, serving as a screening test for prostate cancer in men, a component of the pelvic examination in women, and an inexpensive maneuver for the detection of masses in the rectum. The development of the Hemoccult test has greatly facilitated the detection of occult fecal blood. Unfortunately, even when performed optimally, the Hemoccult test has major limitations as a screening technique. About 50% of patients with documented colorectal cancers have a negative fecal Hemoccult test, consistent with the intermittent bleeding pattern of these tumors. When random cohorts of asymptomatic persons have been tested, 2每4% have Hemoccult-positive stools. Colorectal cancers have been found in <10% of these "test-positive" cases, with benign polyps being detected in an additional 20每30%. Thus, a colorectal neoplasm will not be found in most asymptomatic individuals with occult blood in their stool. Nonetheless, persons found to have Hemoccult-positive stool routinely undergo further medical evaluation, including sigmoidoscopy, barium enema, and/or colonoscopy〞procedures that are not only uncomfortable and expensive but also associated with a small risk for significant complications. The added cost of these studies would appear justifiable if the small number of patients found to have occult neoplasms because of Hemoccult screening could be shown to have an improved prognosis and prolonged survival. Prospectively controlled trials showed a statistically significant reduction in mortality rate from colorectal cancer for individuals undergoing annual screening. However, this benefit only emerged after >13 years of follow-up and was extremely expensive to achieve, since all positive tests (most of which were false-positive) were followed by colonoscopy. Moreover, these colonoscopic examinations quite likely provided the opportunity for cancer prevention through the removal of potentially premalignant adenomatous polyps since the eventual development of cancer was reduced by 20% in the cohort undergoing annual screening.

Screening techniques for large-bowel cancer in asymptomatic persons remain unsatisfactory. Compliance with any screening strategy within the general population is poor. At present, the American Cancer Society suggests fecal Hemoccult screening annually and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years beginning at age 50 for asymptomatic individuals having no colorectal cancer risk factors. The American Cancer Society has also endorsed a "total colon examination" (i.e., colonoscopy or double-contrast barium enema) every 10 years as an alternative to Hemoccult testing with periodic flexible sigmoidoscopy. Colonoscopy has been shown to be superior to double-contrast barium enema and also to have a higher sensitivity for detecting villous or dysplastic adenomas or cancers than the strategy employing occult fecal blood testing and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Whether colonoscopy performed every 10 years beginning after age 50 will prove to be cost-effective and whether it may be supplanted as a screening maneuver by sophisticated radiographic techniques ("virtual colonoscopy") remains unclear. More effective techniques for screening are needed, perhaps taking advantage of the molecular changes that have been described in these tumors. Analysis of fecal DNA for multiple mutations associated with colorectal cancer is being tested.

Clinical Features

Presenting Symptoms

Symptoms vary with the anatomic location of the tumor. Since stool is relatively liquid as it passes through the ileocecal valve into the right colon, cancers arising in the cecum and ascending colon may become quite large without resulting in any obstructive symptoms or noticeable alterations in bowel habits. Lesions of the right colon commonly ulcerate, leading to chronic, insidious blood loss without a change in the appearance of the stool. Consequently, patients with tumors of the ascending colon often present with symptoms such as fatigue, palpitations, and even angina pectoris and are found to have a hypochromic, microcytic anemia indicative of iron deficiency. Since the cancer may bleed intermittently, a random fecal occult blood test may be negative. As a result, the unexplained presence of iron-deficiency anemia in any adult (with the possible exception of a premenopausal, multiparous woman) mandates a thorough endoscopic and/or radiographic visualization of the entire large bowel (Fig. 91-1).

Figure 91-1

 
 
 
Double-contrast air-barium enema revealing a sessile tumor of the cecum in a patient with iron-deficiency anemia and guaiac-positive stool. The lesion at surgery was a stage II adenocarcinoma.
 
 


Since stool becomes more formed as it passes into the transverse and descending colon, tumors arising there tend to impede the passage of stool, resulting in the development of abdominal cramping, occasional obstruction, and even perforation. Radiographs of the abdomen often reveal characteristic annular, constricting lesions ("apple-core" or "napkin-ring") (Fig. 91-2).

Figure 91-2

 
 
 
Annular, constricting adenocarcinoma of the descending colon. This radiographic appearance is referred to as an "apple-core" lesion and is always highly suggestive of malignancy.
 
 

Cancers arising in the rectosigmoid are often associated with hematochezia, tenesmus, and narrowing of the caliber of stool; anemia is an infrequent finding. While these symptoms may lead patients and their physicians to suspect the presence of hemorrhoids, the development of rectal bleeding and/or altered bowel habits demands a prompt digital rectal examination and proctosigmoidoscopy.

Staging, Prognostic Factors, and Patterns of Spread

The prognosis for individuals having colorectal cancer is related to the depth of tumor penetration into the bowel wall and the presence of both regional lymph node involvement and distant metastases. These variables are incorporated into the staging system introduced by Dukes and applied to a TNM classification method, in which T represents the depth of tumor penetration, N the presence of lymph node involvement, and M the presence or absence of distant metastases (Fig. 91-3). Superficial lesions that do not involve regional lymph nodes and do not penetrate through the submucosa (T1) or the muscularis (T2) are designated as stage I (T1每2N0M0) disease; tumors that penetrate through the muscularis but have not spread to lymph nodes are stage II disease (T3N0M0); regional lymph node involvement defines stage III (TXN1M0) disease; and metastatic spread to sites such as liver, lung, or bone indicates stage IV (TXNXM1) disease. Unless gross evidence of metastatic disease is present, disease stage cannot be determined accurately before surgical resection and pathologic analysis of the operative specimens. It is not clear whether the detection of nodal metastases by special immunohistochemical molecular techniques has the same prognostic implications as disease detected by routine light microscopy.

Figure 91-3

 
 
 
Staging and prognosis for patients with colorectal cancer.
 
 

Most recurrences after a surgical resection of a large-bowel cancer occur within the first 4 years, making 5-year survival a fairly reliable indicator of cure. The likelihood for 5-year survival in patients with colorectal cancer is stage-related (Fig. 91-3). That likelihood has improved during the past several decades when similar surgical stages have been compared. The most plausible explanation for this improvement is more thorough intraoperative and pathologic staging. In particular, more exacting attention to pathologic detail has revealed that the prognosis following the resection of a colorectal cancer is not related merely to the presence or absence of regional lymph node involvement. Prognosis may be more precisely gauged by the number of involved lymph nodes (one to three lymph nodes versus four or more lymph nodes) and the number of nodes examined. A minimum of 12 sampled lymph nodes is thought necessary to accurately define tumor stage, and the more nodes examined the better. Other predictors of a poor prognosis after a total surgical resection include tumor penetration through the bowel wall into pericolic fat, poorly differentiated histology, perforation and/or tumor adherence to adjacent organs (increasing the risk for an anatomically adjacent recurrence), and venous invasion by tumor (Table 91每6). Regardless of the clinicopathologic stage, a preoperative elevation of the plasma carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level predicts eventual tumor recurrence. The presence of aneuploidy and specific chromosomal deletions, such as allelic loss in chromosome 18q (involving the DCC gene) in tumor cells, appears to predict a higher risk for metastatic spread, particularly in patients with stage II (T3N0M0) disease. Conversely, the detection of microsatellite instability in tumor tissue indicates a more favorable outcome. In contrast to most other cancers, the prognosis in colorectal cancer is not influenced by the size of the primary lesion when adjusted for nodal involvement and histologic differentiation.

Table 91每6 Predictors of Poor Outcome Following Total Surgical Resection of Colorectal Cancer

 
 
Tumor spread to regional lymph nodes 
Number of regional lymph nodes involved 
Tumor penetration through the bowel wall 
Poorly differentiated histology 
Perforation 
Tumor adherence to adjacent organs 
Venous invasion 
Preoperative elevation of CEA titer (<5 ng/mL) 
Aneuploidy 
Specific chromosomal deletion (e.g., allelic loss on chromosome 18q) 
 


Abbreviation: CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen.
 

Cancers of the large bowel generally spread to regional lymph nodes or to the liver via the portal venous circulation. The liver represents the most frequent visceral site of metastasis; it is the initial site of distant spread in one-third of recurring colorectal cancers and is involved in more than two-thirds of such patients at the time of death. In general, colorectal cancer rarely spreads to the lungs, supraclavicular lymph nodes, bone, or brain without prior spread to the liver. A major exception to this rule occurs in patients having primary tumors in the distal rectum, from which tumor cells may spread through the paravertebral venous plexus, escaping the portal venous system and thereby reaching the lungs or supraclavicular lymph nodes without hepatic involvement. The median survival after the detection of distant metastases has ranged in the past from 6每9 months (hepatomegaly, abnormal liver chemistries) to 24每30 months (small liver nodule initially identified by elevated CEA level and subsequent CT scan), but effective systemic therapy is improving the prognosis.

Efforts to use gene expression profiles to identify patients at risk of recurrence or those particularly likely to benefit from adjuvant therapy have not yet yielded practice-changing results. Despite a burgeoning literature examining a host of prognostic factors, pathologic stage at diagnosis is the best predictor of long-term prognosis. Patients with lymphovascular invasion and high preoperative CEA levels are likely to have a more aggressive clinical course.

Treatment: Colorectal Cancer

Total resection of tumor is the optimal treatment when a malignant lesion is detected in the large bowel. An evaluation for the presence of metastatic disease, including a thorough physical examination, chest radiograph, biochemical assessment of liver function, and measurement of the plasma CEA level, should be performed before surgery. When possible, a colonoscopy of the entire large bowel should be performed to identify synchronous neoplasms and/or polyps. The detection of metastases should not preclude surgery in patients with tumor-related symptoms such as gastrointestinal bleeding or obstruction, but it often prompts the use of a less radical operative procedure. At the time of laparotomy, the entire peritoneal cavity should be examined, with thorough inspection of the liver, pelvis, and hemidiaphragm and careful palpation of the full length of the large bowel. Following recovery from a complete resection, patients should be observed carefully for 5 years by semiannual physical examinations and yearly blood chemistry measurements. If a complete colonoscopy was not performed preoperatively, it should be carried out within the first several postoperative months. Some authorities favor measuring plasma CEA levels at 3-month intervals because of the sensitivity of this test as a marker for otherwise undetectable tumor recurrence. Subsequent endoscopic or radiographic surveillance of the large bowel, probably at triennial intervals, is indicated, since patients who have been cured of one colorectal cancer have a 3每5% probability of developing an additional bowel cancer during their lifetime and a >15% risk for the development of adenomatous polyps. Anastomotic ("suture-line") recurrences are infrequent in colorectal cancer patients, provided the surgical resection margins are adequate and free of tumor. The value of periodic CT scans of the abdomen, assessing for an early, asymptomatic indication of tumor recurrence, is an area of uncertainty, with some experts recommending the test be performed annually for the first 3 postoperative years.

Radiation therapy to the pelvis is recommended for patients with rectal cancer because it reduces the 20每25% probability of regional recurrences following complete surgical resection of stage II or III tumors, especially if they have penetrated through the serosa. This alarmingly high rate of local disease recurrence is believed to be due to the fact that the contained anatomic space within the pelvis limits the extent of the resection and because the rich lymphatic network of the pelvic side wall immediately adjacent to the rectum facilitates the early spread of malignant cells into surgically inaccessible tissue. The use of sharp rather than blunt dissection of rectal cancers (total mesorectal excision) appears to reduce the likelihood of local disease recurrence to 10%. Radiation therapy, either pre- or postoperatively, reduces the likelihood of pelvic recurrences but does not appear to prolong survival. Combining postoperative radiation therapy with 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy lowers local recurrence rates and improves overall survival. Preoperative radiotherapy is indicated for patients with large, potentially unresectable rectal cancers; such lesions may shrink enough to permit subsequent surgical removal. Radiation therapy is not effective in the primary treatment of colon cancer.

Systemic therapy for patients with colorectal cancer has become more effective. 5-FU remains the backbone of treatment for this disease. Partial responses are obtained in 15每20% of patients. The probability of tumor response appears to be somewhat greater for patients with liver metastases when chemotherapy is infused directly into the hepatic artery, but intraarterial treatment is costly and toxic and does not appear to appreciably prolong survival. The concomitant administration of folinic acid (leucovorin) improves the efficacy of 5-FU in patients with advanced colorectal cancer, presumably by enhancing the binding of 5-FU to its target enzyme, thymidylate synthase. A threefold improvement in the partial response rate is noted when folinic acid is combined with 5-FU; however, the effect on survival is marginal, and the optimal dose schedule remains to be defined. 5-FU is generally administered intravenously but may also be given orally in the form of capecitabine (Xeloda) with seemingly similar efficacy.

Irinotecan (CPT-11), a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, prolongs survival when compared to supportive care in patients whose disease has progressed on 5-FU. Furthermore, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and leucovorin (LV) improves response rates and survival of patients with metastatic disease. The FOLFIRI regimen is as follows: irinotecan, 180 mg/m2 as a 90-min infusion on day 1; LV, 400 mg/m2 as a 2-h infusion during irinotecan administration; immediately followed by 5-FU bolus, 400 mg/m2, and 46-h continuous infusion of 2.4每3 g/m2 every 2 weeks. Diarrhea is the major side effect from irinotecan. Oxaliplatin, a platinum analogue, also improves the response rate when added to 5-FU and LV as initial treatment of patients with metastatic disease. The FOLFOX regimen is the following: 2-h infusion of LV (400 mg/m2 per day) followed by a 5-FU bolus (400 mg/m2 per day) and 22-h infusion (1200 mg/m2) every 2 weeks, together with oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2 as a 2-h infusion on day 1. Oxaliplatin frequently causes a dose-dependent sensory neuropathy that often resolves following the cessation of therapy. FOLFIRI and FOLFOX are equal in efficacy. In metastatic disease, these regimens may produce median survivals of 2 years.

Monoclonal antibodies are also effective in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Cetuximab (Erbitux) and panitumumab (Vectibix) are directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a transmembrane glycoprotein involved in signaling pathways affecting growth and proliferation of tumor cells. Both cetuximab and panitumumab, when given alone, have been shown to benefit a small proportion of previously treated patients, and cetuximab appears to have therapeutic synergy with such chemotherapeutic agents as irinotecan, even in patients previously resistant to this drug; this suggests that cetuximab can reverse cellular resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy. The antibodies are not effective in the subset of colon tumors that contain mutated K-ras. The use of both cetuximab and panitumumab can lead to an acne-like rash, with the development and severity of the rash being correlated with the likelihood of antitumor efficacy. Inhibitors of the EGFR tyrosine kinase such as erlotinib (Tarceva) do not appear to be effective in colorectal cancer.

Bevacizumab (Avastin) is a monoclonal antibody directed against the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and is thought to act as an anti-angiogenesis agent. The addition of bevacizumab to irinotecan-containing combinations and to FOLFOX initially appeared to improve the outcome observed with chemotherapy alone, but subsequent studies have been less convincing. The use of bevacizumab can lead to hypertension, proteinuria, and an increased likelihood of thromboembolic events.

Patients with solitary hepatic metastases without clinical or radiographic evidence of additional tumor involvement should be considered for partial liver resection, because such procedures are associated with 5-year survival rates of 25每30% when performed on selected individuals by experienced surgeons.

The administration of 5-FU and LV for 6 months after resection of tumor in patients with stage III disease leads to a 40% decrease in recurrence rates and 30% improvement in survival. The likelihood of recurrence has been further reduced when oxaliplatin has been combined with 5-FU and LV (e.g., FOLFOX); unexpectedly, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and LV as well as the addition of either bevacizumab or cetuximab to FOLFOX did not enhance outcome. Patients with stage II tumors do not appear to benefit applicably from adjuvant therapy with the use of such treatment generally restricted to those patients having biologic characteristics (e.g., perforated tumors, Ty lesions, lymphovascular invasion) that place them at higher than usual risk for recurrence. In rectal cancer, the delivery of preoperative or postoperative combined modality therapy (5-FU plus radiation therapy) reduces the risk of recurrence and increases the chance of cure for patients with stages II and III tumors, with the preoperative approach being better tolerated. The 5-FU acts as a radiosensitizer when delivered together with radiation therapy. Life-extending adjuvant therapy is used in only about half of patients older than age 65 years. This age bias is completely inappropriate as the benefits and likely the tolerance of adjuvant therapy in patients aged 65+ years appear similar to those seen in younger individuals.
 
Tumors of the Small Intestine

Small-bowel tumors comprise <3% of gastrointestinal neoplasms. Because of their rarity, a correct diagnosis is often delayed. Abdominal symptoms are usually vague and poorly defined, and conventional radiographic studies of the upper and lower intestinal tract often appear normal. Small-bowel tumors should be considered in the differential diagnosis in the following situations: (1) recurrent, unexplained episodes of crampy abdominal pain; (2) intermittent bouts of intestinal obstruction, especially in the absence of IBD or prior abdominal surgery; (3) intussusception in the adult; and (4) evidence of chronic intestinal bleeding in the presence of negative conventional contrast radiographs. A careful small-bowel barium study is the diagnostic procedure of choice; the diagnostic accuracy may be improved by infusing barium through a nasogastric tube placed into the duodenum (enteroclysis).

Benign Tumors

The histology of benign small-bowel tumors is difficult to predict on clinical and radiologic grounds alone. The symptomatology of benign tumors is not distinctive, with pain, obstruction, and hemorrhage being the most frequent symptoms. These tumors are usually discovered during the fifth and sixth decades of life, more often in the distal rather than the proximal small intestine. The most common benign tumors are adenomas, leiomyomas, lipomas, and angiomas.

Adenomas

These tumors include those of the islet cells and Brunner's glands as well as polypoid adenomas. Islet cell adenomas are occasionally located outside the pancreas; the associated syndromes are discussed in Chap. 350. Brunner's gland adenomas are not truly neoplastic but represent a hypertrophy or hyperplasia of submucosal duodenal glands. These appear as small nodules in the duodenal mucosa that secrete a highly viscous alkaline mucus. Most often, this is an incidental radiographic finding not associated with any specific clinical disorder.

Polypoid Adenomas

About 25% of benign small-bowel tumors are polypoid adenomas (Table 91每5). They may present as single polypoid lesions or, less commonly, as papillary villous adenomas. As in the colon, the sessile or papillary form of the tumor is sometimes associated with a coexisting carcinoma. Occasionally, patients with Gardner's syndrome develop premalignant adenomas in the small bowel; such lesions are generally in the duodenum. Multiple polypoid tumors may occur throughout the small bowel (and occasionally the stomach and colorectum) in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. The polyps are usually hamartomas (juvenile polyps) having a low potential for malignant degeneration. Mucocutaneous melanin deposits as well as tumors of the ovary, breast, pancreas, and endometrium are also associated with this autosomal dominant condition.

Leiomyomas

These neoplasms arise from smooth-muscle components of the intestine and are usually intramural, affecting the overlying mucosa. Ulceration of the mucosa may cause gastrointestinal hemorrhage of varying severity. Cramping or intermittent abdominal pain is frequently encountered.

Lipomas

These tumors occur with greatest frequency in the distal ileum and at the ileocecal valve. They have a characteristic radiolucent appearance and are usually intramural and asymptomatic, but on occasion cause bleeding.

Angiomas

While not true neoplasms, these lesions are important because they frequently cause intestinal bleeding. They may take the form of telangiectasia or hemangiomas. Multiple intestinal telangiectasias occur in a nonhereditary form confined to the gastrointestinal tract or as part of the hereditary Osler-Rendu-Weber syndrome. Vascular tumors may also take the form of isolated hemangiomas, most commonly in the jejunum. Angiography, especially during bleeding, is the best procedure for evaluating these lesions.

Malignant Tumors

While rare, small-bowel malignancies occur in patients with long-standing regional enteritis and celiac sprue as well as in individuals with AIDS. Malignant tumors of the small bowel are frequently associated with fever, weight loss, anorexia, bleeding, and a palpable abdominal mass. After ampullary carcinomas (many of which arise from biliary or pancreatic ducts), the most frequently occurring small-bowel malignancies are adenocarcinomas, lymphomas, carcinoid tumors, and leiomyosarcomas.

Adenocarcinomas

The most common primary cancers of the small bowel are adenocarcinomas, accounting for 50% of malignant tumors. These cancers occur most often in the distal duodenum and proximal jejunum, where they tend to ulcerate and cause hemorrhage or obstruction. Radiologically, they may be confused with chronic duodenal ulcer disease or with Crohn's disease if the patient has long-standing regional enteritis. The diagnosis is best made by endoscopy and biopsy under direct vision. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice.

Lymphomas

Lymphoma in the small bowel may be primary or secondary. A diagnosis of a primary intestinal lymphoma requires histologic confirmation in a clinical setting in which palpable adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are absent and no evidence of lymphoma is seen on chest radiograph, CT scan, or peripheral blood smear or on bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Symptoms referable to the small bowel are present, usually accompanied by an anatomically discernible lesion. Secondary lymphoma of the small bowel consists of involvement of the intestine by a lymphoid malignancy extending from involved retroperitoneal or mesenteric lymph nodes (Chap. 110).

Primary intestinal lymphoma accounts for 20% of malignancies of the small bowel. These neoplasms are non-Hodgkin's lymphomas; they usually have a diffuse, large-cell histology and are of T cell origin. Intestinal lymphoma involves the ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, in decreasing frequency〞a pattern that mirrors the relative amount of normal lymphoid cells in these anatomic areas. The risk of small-bowel lymphoma is increased in patients with a prior history of malabsorptive conditions (e.g., celiac sprue), regional enteritis, and depressed immune function due to congenital immunodeficiency syndromes, prior organ transplantation, autoimmune disorders, or AIDS.

The development of localized or nodular masses that narrow the lumen results in periumbilical pain (made worse by eating) as well as weight loss, vomiting, and occasional intestinal obstruction. The diagnosis of small-bowel lymphoma may be suspected from the appearance on contrast radiographs of patterns such as infiltration and thickening of mucosal folds, mucosal nodules, areas of irregular ulceration, or stasis of contrast material. The diagnosis can be confirmed by surgical exploration and resection of involved segments. Intestinal lymphoma can occasionally be diagnosed by peroral intestinal mucosal biopsy, but since the disease mainly involves the lamina propria, full-thickness surgical biopsies are usually required.

Resection of the tumor constitutes the initial treatment modality. While postoperative radiation therapy has been given to some patients following a total resection, most authorities favor short-term (three cycles) systemic treatment with combination chemotherapy. The frequent presence of widespread intraabdominal disease at the time of diagnosis and the occasional multicentricity of the tumor often make a total resection impossible. The probability of sustained remission or cure is 75% in patients with localized disease but is 25% in individuals with unresectable lymphoma. In patients whose tumors are not resected, chemotherapy may lead to bowel perforation.

A unique form of small-bowel lymphoma, diffusely involving the entire intestine, was first described in oriental Jews and Arabs and is referred to as immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID), Mediterranean lymphoma, or  heavy chain disease. This is a B cell tumor. The typical presentation includes chronic diarrhea and steatorrhea associated with vomiting and abdominal cramps; clubbing of the digits may be observed. A curious feature in many patients with IPSID is the presence in the blood and intestinal secretions of an abnormal IgA that contains a shortened  heavy chain and is devoid of light chains. It is suspected that the abnormal  chains are produced by plasma cells infiltrating the small bowel. The clinical course of patients with IPSID is generally one of exacerbations and remissions, with death frequently resulting from either progressive malnutrition and wasting or the development of an aggressive lymphoma. The use of oral antibiotics such as tetracycline appears to be beneficial in the early phases of the disorder, suggesting a possible infectious etiology. Combination chemotherapy has been administered during later stages of the disease, with variable results. Results are better when antibiotics and chemotherapy are combined.

Carcinoid Tumors

Carcinoid tumors arise from argentaffin cells of the crypts of Lieberk邦hn and are found from the distal duodenum to the ascending colon, areas embryologically derived from the midgut. More than 50% of intestinal carcinoids are found in the distal ileum, with most congregating close to the ileocecal valve. Most intestinal carcinoids are asymptomatic and of low malignant potential, but invasion and metastases may occur, leading to the carcinoid syndrome (Chap. 350).

Leiomyosarcomas

Leiomyosarcomas often are >5 cm in diameter and may be palpable on abdominal examination. Bleeding, obstruction, and perforation are common. Such tumors should be analyzed for the expression of mutant c-kit receptor (defining GIST), and in the presence of metastatic disease, justifying treatment with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) or, in imatinib-refractory patients, sunitinib (Sutent).
 
Cancers of the Anus

Cancers of the anus account for 1每2% of the malignant tumors of the large bowel. Most such lesions arise in the anal canal, the anatomic area extending from the anorectal ring to a zone approximately halfway between the pectinate (or dentate) line and the anal verge. Carcinomas arising proximal to the pectinate line (i.e., in the transitional zone between the glandular mucosa of the rectum and the squamous epithelium of the distal anus) are known as basaloid, cuboidal, or cloacogenic tumors; about one-third of anal cancers have this histologic pattern. Malignancies arising distal to the pectinate line have squamous histology, ulcerate more frequently, and constitute 55% of anal cancers. The prognosis for patients with basaloid and squamous cell cancers of the anus is identical when corrected for tumor size and the presence or absence of nodal spread.

The development of anal cancer is associated with infection by human papillomavirus, the same organism etiologically linked to cervical cancer. The virus is sexually transmitted. The infection may lead to anal warts (condyloma acuminata), which may progress to anal intraepithelial neoplasia and on to squamous cell carcinoma. The risk for anal cancer is increased among homosexual males, presumably related to anal intercourse. Anal cancer risk is increased in both men and women with AIDS, possibly because their immunosuppressed state permits more severe papillomavirus infection. Anal cancers occur most commonly in middle-aged persons and are more frequent in women than men. At diagnosis, patients may experience bleeding, pain, sensation of a perianal mass, and pruritus.

Radical surgery (abdominal-perineal resection with lymph node sampling and a permanent colostomy) was once the treatment of choice for this tumor type. The 5-year survival rate after such a procedure was 55每70% in the absence of spread to regional lymph nodes and <20% if nodal involvement was present. An alternative therapeutic approach combining external beam radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy has resulted in biopsy-proven disappearance of all tumor in >80% of patients whose initial lesion was <3 cm in size. Tumor recurrences develop in <10% of these patients, meaning that 70% of patients with anal cancers can be cured with nonoperative treatment. Surgery should be reserved for the minority of individuals who are found to have residual tumor after being managed initially with radiation therapy combined with chemotherapy.
 
Further Readings

Abbas A et al: Management of anal cancer in 2010: Parts 1 and 2. Oncology 24:364 and 417, 2010 Cunningham D et al: Colorectal cancer. Lancet 375:1030, 2010 

 
Enzinger PC, Mayer RJ: Esophageal cancer. N Engl J Med 349:2241, 2003[PMID: 14657432] 

 
Hartgrink HH et al: Gastric cancer. Lancet 374:477, 2009[PMID: 19625077] 

 
Lieberman DA: Clinical practice. Screening for colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2009 361:1179, 2009[PMID: 19759380] 

 
Lynch HT, De la Chapelle A: Hereditary colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 348:919, 2003[PMID: 12621137] 

 
Raderer M, Paul De Boer J: Role of chemotherapy in gastric MALT lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and other lymphomas. Best Pract Clin Gastroenterol 24:19, 2010[PMID: 20206105] 

 
Rostrum A et al: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors for primary prevention of colorectal cancer: A systematic review prepared for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 146:376, 2007 

 
Rothwell PM et al: Long-term effect of aspirin on colorectal cancer incidence and mortality: 20-year follow-up of five randomised trials. Lancet 376:1741, 2010[PMID: 20970847] 

 
Shaheen NJ et al: Radiofrequency ablation in Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia. N Engl J Med 360:2277, 2009[PMID: 19474425] 

 
Sharma P: Clinical practice. Barrett's esophagus. N Engl J Med 361:2548, 2009[PMID: 20032324] 

 
Spechler SJ: Barrett's esophagus. N Engl J Med 346:836, 2002[PMID: 11893796] 

 
Uemura N et al: Helicobacter pylori infection and the development of gastric cancer. N Engl J Med 345:784, 2001[PMID: 11556297] 

 
Wolpin BM et al: Adjuvant treatment of colorectal cancer. CA Cancer Clin J 57:168, 2007[PMID: 17507442] 
 
 

^^
Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Incidence

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. The annual global incidence is approximately 1 million cases, with a male to female ratio of approximately 4:1 (1:1 without cirrhosis to 9:1 in many high-incidence countries). The incidence rate equals the death rate. In the United States, approximately 22,000 new cases are diagnosed annually, with 18,000 deaths. The death rates in males in low-incidence countries such as the United States are 1.9 per 100,000 per year; in intermediate areas such as Austria and South Africa, they range from 5.1每20; and in high-incidence areas such as in the Orient (China and Korea) as high as 23.1每150 per 100,000 per year (Table 92每1). The incidence of HCC in the United States is approximately 3 per 100,000 persons, with significant gender, ethnic, and geographic variations. These numbers are rapidly increasing and may be an underestimate. Approximately 4 million chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) carriers are in the United States alone. Approximately 10% of them or 400,000 are likely to develop cirrhosis. Approximately 5% or 20,000 of these may develop HCC annually. Add to this the two other common predisposing factors〞hepatitis B virus (HBV) and chronic alcohol consumption〞and 60,000 new HCC cases annually seem possible. Future advances in HCC survival will likely depend in part on immunization strategies for HBV (and HCV) and earlier diagnosis by screening of patients at risk of HCC development.

Table 92每1 Age-Adjusted Incidence Rates for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

 
 
  Persons per 100,000 per Year 
Country Male Female 
Argentina 6.0 2.5 
Brazil, Recife 9.2 8.3 
Brazil, Sao Paulo 3.8 2.6 
Mozambique 112.9 30.8 
South Africa, Cape: Black 26.3 8.4 
South Africa, Cape: White 1.2 0.6 
Senegal 25.6 9.0 
Nigeria 15.4 3.2 
Gambia 33.1 12.6 
Burma 25.5 8.8 
Japan 7.2 2.2 
Korea 13.8 3.2 
China, Shanghai 34.4 11.6 
India, Bombay 4.9 2.5 
India, Madras 2.1 0.7 
Great Britain 1.6 0.8 
France 6.9 1.2 
Italy, Varese 7.1 2.7 
Norway 1.8 1.1 
Spain, Navarra 7.9 4.7 
 

 

Current Directions

With the U.S. HCV epidemic, HCC is increasing in most states, and obesity-associated liver disease (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis [NASH]) is increasingly recognized as a cause.

Epidemiology

There are two general types of epidemiologic studies of HCC〞those of country-based incidence rates (Table 92每1) and those of migrants. Endemic hot spots occur in areas of China and sub-Saharan Africa, which are associated both with high endemic hepatitis B carrier rates as well as mycotoxin contamination of foodstuffs (aflatoxin B1), stored grains, drinking water, and soil. Environmental factors are important, for example, Japanese in Japan have a higher incidence than those living in Hawaii, who in turn have a higher incidence than those living in California.

Etiologic Factors

Chemical Carcinogens

Causative agents for HCC have been studied along two general lines. First are agents identified as carcinogenic in experimental animals (particularly rodents) that are thought to be present in the human environment (Table 92每2). Second, is the association of HCC with various other clinical conditions. Probably the best-studied and most potent ubiquitous natural chemical carcinogen is a product of the Aspergillus fungus, called aflatoxin B1. This mold and aflatoxin product can be found in a variety of stored grains in hot, humid places, where peanuts and rice are stored in unrefrigerated conditions. Aflatoxin contamination of foodstuffs correlates well with incidence rates in Africa and to some extent in China. In endemic areas of China, even farm animals such as ducks have HCC. The most potent carcinogens appear to be natural products of plants, fungi, and bacteria, such as bush trees containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids as well as tannic acid and safrole. Pollutants such as pesticides and insecticides are known rodent carcinogens.

Table 92每2 Factors Associated with an Increased Risk of Developing HCC

 
 
Common Unusual 
Cirrhosis from any cause Primary biliary cirrhosis 
Hepatitis B or C chronic infection Hemochromatosis 
Ethanol chronic consumption 1 Antitrypsin deficiency
  
NASH/NAFL Glycogen storage diseases 
Aflatoxin B1 or other mycotoxins
  Citrullinemia 
  Porphyria cutanea tarda 
  Hereditary tyrosinemia 
  Wilson's disease 
 


Abbreviation: NAFL, nonalcoholic fatty liver; NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
 

Hepatitis

Both case-control and cohort studies have shown a strong association between chronic hepatitis B carrier rates and increased incidence of HCC. In Taiwanese male postal carriers who were hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive, a 98-fold greater risk for HCC was found compared to HBsAg-negative individuals. The incidence of HCC in Alaskan natives is markedly increased related to a high prevalence of HBV infection. HBV-based HCC may involve rounds of hepatic destruction with subsequent proliferation and not necessarily frank cirrhosis. The increase in Japanese HCC incidence rates in the last three decades is thought to be from hepatitis C. A large-scale World Health Organization (WHO)-sponsored intervention study is currently underway in Asia involving HBV vaccination of the newborn. HCC in African blacks is not associated with severe cirrhosis but is poorly differentiated and very aggressive. Despite uniform HBV carrier rates among the South African Bantu, there is a ninefold difference in HCC incidence between Mozambicans living along the coast and inland. These differences are attributed to the additional exposure to dietary aflatoxin B1 and other carcinogenic mycotoxins. A typical interval between HCV-associated transfusion and subsequent HCC is approximately 30 years. HCV-associated HCC patients tend to have more frequent and advanced cirrhosis, but in HBV-associated HCC, only half the patients have cirrhosis; the remainder having chronic active hepatitis (Chap. 306).

Other Etiologic Conditions

The 75每85% association of HCC with underlying cirrhosis has long been recognized, more typically with macronodular cirrhosis in Southeast Asia, but also with micronodular cirrhosis (alcohol) in Europe and the United States (Chap. 308). It is still not clear whether cirrhosis itself is a predisposing factor to the development of HCC or whether the underlying causes of the cirrhosis are actually the carcinogenic factors. However, 20% of U.S. patients with HCC do not have underlying cirrhosis. Several underlying conditions are associated with an increased risk for cirrhosis-associated HCC (Table 92每2), including hepatitis, alcohol, autoimmune chronic active hepatitis, cryptogenic cirrhosis, and NASH. A less common association is with primary biliary cirrhosis and several metabolic diseases including hemochromatosis, Wilson disease, 1-antitrypsin deficiency, tyrosinemia, porphyria cutanea tarda, glycogenesis types 1 and 3, citrullinemia. and orotic aciduria. The etiology of HCC in those 20% of patients who have no cirrhosis is currently unclear, and their HCC natural history is not well-defined.

Current Directions

Many patients have multiple etiologies, and the interactions of either hepatitis or alcohol and smoking, or with aflatoxins, are just beginning to be explored.
 
Clinical Features

Symptoms

These include abdominal pain, weight loss, weakness, abdominal fullness and swelling, jaundice, and nausea (Table 92每3). Presenting signs and symptoms differ somewhat between high- and low-incidence areas. In high-risk areas, especially in South African blacks, the most common symptom is abdominal pain; by contrast, only 40每50% of Chinese and Japanese patients present with abdominal pain. Abdominal swelling may occur as a consequence of ascites due to the underlying chronic liver disease or may be due to a rapidly expanding tumor. Occasionally, central necrosis or acute hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity leads to death. In countries with an active surveillance program, HCC tends to be identified at an earlier stage, when symptoms may be due only to the underlying disease. Jaundice is usually due to obstruction of the intrahepatic ducts from underlying liver disease. Hematemesis may occur due to esophageal varices from the underlying portal hypertension. Bone pain is seen in 3每12% of patients, but necropsies show pathologic bone metastases in 20% of patients. However, 25% of patients may be asymptomatic.

Table 92每3 Hepatocellular Carcinoma Clinical Presentation (N = 547)

 
 
Symptom Patient # (%) 
No symptom 129(24) 
Abdominal pain 219(40) 
Other (workup of anemia and various diseases) 64(12) 
Routine physical exam finding, elevated LFTs 129(24) 
Weight loss 112(20) 
Appetite loss 59 (11) 
Weakness/malaise 83(15) 
Jaundice 30(5) 
Routine CT scan screening of known cirrhosis 92(17) 
Cirrhosis symptoms (ankle swelling, abdominal bloating, increased girth, pruritus, GI bleed) 98(18) 
Diarrhea 7 (1) 
Tumor rupture 1 
Patient Characteristics  
Mean age (yr) 56 ㊣ 13 
Male:Female 3:1 
Ethnicity   
  White 72 % 
  Middle Eastern 10 % 
  Asian 13 % 
  African American 5 % 
Cirrhosis 81 % 
No cirrhosis 19 % 
Tumor Characteristics  
Hepatic tumor numbers   
  1 20 % 
  2 25 % 
  3 or more 65 % 
Portal vein invasion 75 % 
Unilobar 25 % 
Bilobar 75 % 
 


Abbreviation: GI, gastrointestinal; LFT, liver function test.
 

Physical Signs

Hepatomegaly is the most common physical sign, occurring in 50每90% of the patients. Abdominal bruits are noted in 6每25%, and ascites occurs in 30每60% of patients. Ascites should be examined by cytology. Splenomegaly is mainly due to portal hypertension. Weight loss and muscle wasting are common, particularly with rapidly growing or large tumors. Fever is found in 10每50% of patients, from unclear cause. The signs of chronic liver disease may often be present, including jaundice, dilated abdominal veins, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and peripheral edema. Budd-Chiari syndrome can occur due to HCC invasion of the hepatic veins, with tense ascites and a large tender liver (Chap. 308).

Paraneoplastic Syndromes

Most paraneoplastic syndromes in HCC are biochemical abnormalities without associated clinical consequences. They include hypoglycemia (also caused by end-stage liver failure), erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, hypercholesterolemia, dysfibrinogenemia, carcinoid syndrome, increased thyroxin-binding globulin, changes in secondary sex characteristics (gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and precocious puberty), and porphyria cutanea tarda. Mild hypoglycemia occurs in rapidly growing HCC as part of terminal illness, and profound hypoglycemia may occur, although the cause is unclear. Erythrocytosis occurs in 3每12% of patients and hypercholesterolemia in 10每40%. A high percent of patients have thrombocytopenia or leukopenia, resulting from portal hypertension, and not from cancer infiltration of bone marrow, as in other tumor types.

Staging

Multiple clinical staging systems for HCC have been described. A widely used one has been the American Joint Commission for Cancer (AJCC)/tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification. However, the Cancer of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP) system is now popular as it takes the cirrhosis into account, based on the Okuda system (Table 92每4). Other staging systems have been proposed, and a consensus is needed. They are all based on combining the prognostic features of liver damage with those of tumor aggressiveness and include systems from Spain (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer [BCLC]), Japan, Hong Kong, and others (Chinese University Prognostic Index [CUPI], Japan Integrated Staging [JIS], and SLiDe which stands for S, stage; Li, liver damage; De, des--carboxy prothrombin). The best prognosis is for stage I, solitary tumors of less than 2-cm diameter without vascular invasion. Adverse prognostic features include ascites, jaundice, vascular invasion, and elevated -fetoproteins (AFPs). Vascular invasion in particular has profound effects on prognosis and may be microscopic or macroscopic (visible on CT scans). Most large tumors have microscopic vascular invasion, so full staging can usually be made only after surgical resection. Stage III disease contains a mixture of lymph node〞positive and -negative tumors. Stage III patients with positive lymph node disease have a poor prognosis, and few patients survive 1 year. The prognosis of stage IV is poor after either resection or transplantation and 1-year survival is rare. A working staging system based entirely on clinical grounds that incorporates the contribution of the underlying liver disease was originally developed by Okuda et al. (Table 92每4). Patients with Okuda stage III have a dire prognosis because they usually cannot be curatively resected, and the condition of their liver typically precludes chemotherapy.

Table 92每4 Clip and Okuda Staging Systems for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

 
 
CLIP Classification        
  Points 
Variables 0 1 2 
i. Tumor number Single Multiple 每 
Hepatic replacement by tumor (%) <50 <50 >50 
ii. Child-Pugh score A B C 
iii.  Fetoprotein level (ng/mL) <400 400 每 
iv. Portal vein thrombosis (CT) No Yes 每 
CLIP stages (score = sum of points): CLIP 0, 0 points; CLIP 1, 1 point; CLIP 2, 2 points; CLIP 3, 3 points. 
 

 
Okuda Classification  
Tumor extenta    Ascites   Albumin (g/L)   Bilirubin (mg/dL)   
50% <50 + 每 3 >3 3 <3 
(+) (每) (+) (每) (+) (每) (+) (每) 
Okuda stages: stage 1, all (每); stage 2, 1 or 2 (+); stage 3, 3 or 4 (+) 
 


Abbreviation: CLIP, Cancer of the Liver Italian Program.

aExtent of liver occupied by tumor
 

New Directions

Consensus is needed on staging. These systems will soon be upended by proteomics.

Approach to the Patient: Dysphagia

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL The history is important in evaluating putative predisposing factors, including a history of hepatitis or jaundice, blood transfusion, or use of intravenous drugs. A family history of HCC or hepatitis should be sought and a detailed social history taken to include job descriptions for industrial exposure to possible carcinogenic drugs as well as contraceptive hormones. Physical examination should include assessing stigmata of underlying liver disease such as jaundice, ascites, peripheral edema, spider nevi, palmar erythema, and weight loss. Evaluation of the abdomen for hepatic size, masses or ascites, hepatic nodularity and tenderness, and splenomegaly is needed, as is assessment of overall performance status and psychosocial evaluation.

SEROLOGIC ASSAYS AFP is a serum tumor marker for HCC; however, it is only increased in approximately one-half of U.S. patients. The lens culinaris agglutinin-reactive fraction of AFP (AFP-L3) assay is thought to be more specific. The other widely used assay is that for des--carboxy prothrombin (DCP), a protein induced by vitamin K absence (PIVKA-2). This protein is increased in as many as 80% of HCC patients but may also be elevated in patients with vitamin K deficiency; it is always elevated after Coumadin use. It may predict for portal vein invasion. Both AFP-L3 and DCP are FDA-approved. Many other assays have been developed, such as glypican-3, but none have greater aggregate sensitivity and specificity. In a patient presenting with either a new hepatic mass or other indications of recent hepatic decompensation, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), vitamin B12 , AFP, ferritin, PIVKA-2, and anti-mitochondrial Ab should be measured, and standard liver function tests should be performed, including prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), albumin, transaminases, -glutamyl transpeptidase, and alkaline phosphatase. Decreases in platelet count and white blood cell count may reflect portal hypertension and associated hypersplenism. Hepatitis A, B, and C serology should be measured. If HBV or HCV serology is positive, quantitative measurements of HBV DNA or HCV RNA are needed.

New Directions Newer biomarkers are being evaluated, especially tissue- and serum-based genomics profiling.

RADIOLOGY An ultrasound examination of the liver is an excellent screening tool. The two characteristic vascular abnormalities are hypervascularity of the tumor mass (neovascularization or abnormal tumor-feeding arterial vessels) and thrombosis by tumor invasion of otherwise normal portal veins. To determine tumor size and extent and the presence of portal vein invasion accurately, a helical/triphasic CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, with fast-contrast bolus technique should be performed to detect the vascular lesions typical of HCC. Portal vein invasion is normally detected as an obstruction and expansion of the vessel. A chest CT is used to exclude metastases. MRI can also provide detailed information, especially with the newer contrast agents. Ethiodol (Lipiodol) is an ethiodized oil emulsion retained by liver tumors that can be delivered by hepatic artery injection (5每15 ml) for CT imaging 1 week later. For small tumors, Ethiodol injection is very helpful before biopsy because the histological presence of the dye constitutes proof that the needle biopsied the mass under suspicion. A prospective comparison of triphasic CT, gadolinium-enhanced MRI, ultrasound, and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed similar results for CT, MRI, and ultrasound; PET imaging was unsuccessful.

New Directions The altered tumor vascularity that is a consequence of molecularly targeted therapies is the basis for newer imaging techniques including contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) and dynamic MRI.

PATHOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS Histologic proof of the presence of HCC is obtained through a core liver biopsy of the liver mass under ultrasound guidance, as well as random biopsy of the underlying liver. Bleeding risk is increased compared to other cancers because (1) the tumors are hypervascular, and (2) patients often have thrombocytopenia and decreased liver-dependent clotting factors. Bleeding risk is further increased in the presence of ascites. Tracking of tumor has an uncommon problem. Fine-needle aspirates can provide sufficient material for diagnosis of cancer, but core biopsies are preferred. Tissue architecture allows the distinction between HCC and adenocarcinoma. Laparoscopic approaches can also be used. For patients suspected of having portal vein involvement, a core biopsy of the portal vein may be performed safely. If positive, this is regarded as an exclusion criterion for transplantation for HCC.

New Directions Immunohistochemistry has become mainstream. Prognostic subgroupings are being defined based on growth signaling pathway proteins and genotyping strategies. Furthermore, molecular profiling of the underlying liver has provided evidence for a "field-effect" of cirrhosis in generating recurrent or new HCCs after primary resection.

Screening High-Risk Populations

Screening has not been shown to save lives. Prospective studies in high-risk populations showed that ultrasound was more sensitive than AFP elevations. An Italian study in patients with cirrhosis identified a yearly HCC incidence of 3% but showed no increase in the rate of detection of potentially curable tumors with aggressive screening. Prevention strategies including universal vaccination against hepatitis are more likely to be effective than screening efforts. Despite absence of formal guidelines, most practitioners obtain 6-monthly AFP and CT (or ultrasound) when following high-risk patients (HBV carriers, HCV cirrhosis, family history of HCC).

Current Directions

Cost-benefit analysis is not yet convincing, even though screening is intuitively sound. However, studies from areas of high HBV carrier rates have shown a survival benefit for screening as a result of earlier stage at diagnosis. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase appears useful for detecting small tumors.

Treatment: Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Most HCC patients have two liver diseases, cirrhosis and HCC, each of which is an independent cause of death. The presence of cirrhosis usually places constraints on resection surgery, ablative therapies, and chemotherapy. Thus patient assessment and treatment planning has to take the severity of the nonmalignant liver disease into account. The clinical management choices for HCC can be complex (Fig. 92-1, Table 92每5, and Table 92每6). The natural history of HCC is highly variable. Patients presenting with advanced tumors (vascular invasion, symptoms, extrahepatic spread) have a median survival of 4 months, with or without treatment. Treatment results from the literature are difficult to interpret. Survival is not always a measure of the efficacy of therapy because of the adverse effects on survival of the underlying liver disease. A multidisciplinary team, including a hepatologist, interventional radiologist, surgical oncologist, transplant surgeon, and medical oncologist, is important for the comprehensive management of HCC patients.

Figure 92-1

 
 
 
Hepatocellular carcinoma treatment algorithm. Treatment approach to patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The initial clinical evaluation is aimed at assessing the extent of the tumor and the underlying functional compromise of the liver by cirrhosis. Patients are classified as having resectable disease, unresectable disease, or as transplantation candidates. LN, lymph node; OLTX, orthotopic liver transplantation; PEI, percutaneous ethanol injection; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; TACE, transarterial chemoembolization; UNOS, United Network for Organ Sharing. Child's A/B/C refers to the Child-Pugh classification of liver failure.
 
 
Table 92每5 Treatment Options for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

 
 
Surgery  
Resection 
Liver transplantation 
Local Ablative Therapies  
Cryosurgery 
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) 
Percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) 
Regional Therapies: Hepatic Artery Transcatheter Treatments  
Transarterial chemotherapy 
Transarterial embolization 
Transarterial chemoembolization 
Transarterial drug-eluting beads 
Transarterial radiotherapies: 
90Yttrium microspheres
  
131Iodine - Ethiodol
  
Conformal External-Beam Radiation  
Therapy systemic therapies 
Molecularly targeted therapies (sorafenib, etc.) 
Chemotherapy 
Immunotherapy 
Hormonal therapy + growth control 
Supportive therapies  
 

 
Table 92每6 Some Randomized Clinical Trials Involving Transhepatic Artery Chemoembolization (TACE) for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

 
 
Author Year Agents 1 Agents 2 Survival Effect 
Kawaii 1992 Doxorubicin + Embo Embo No 
Chang 1994 Cisplatin + Embo Embo No 
Hatanaka 1995 Cisplatin, Doxorubicin + Embo Same + Lipiodol No 
Uchino 1993 Cisplatin, Doxorubicin + oral FU Same + Tamoxifen No 
Lin 1988 Embo Embo + IV FU No 
Yoshikawa 1994 Epirubicin + Ethiodol Epirubicin No 
Pelletier 1990 Doxorubicin + Gelfoam None No 
Trinchet 1995 Cisplatin + Gelfoam None No 
Bruix 1998 Coils and Gelfoam None No 
Pelletier 1998 Cisplatin + Ethiodol None No 
Trinchet 1995 Cisplatin + Gelfoam None No 
Lo 2002 Cisplatin + Ethiodol None Yes 
Llovet 2002 Doxorubicin + Ethiodol None Yes 
 


Abbreviation: Embo, embolization; FU, 5-fluorouracil.
 

Stages I and II HCC

Early-stage tumors are successfully treated using various techniques, including surgical resection, local ablation (thermal or radiofrequency [RFA]), and local injection therapies (Table 92每6). Because the majority of patients with HCC suffer from a field defect in the cirrhotic liver, they are at risk for subsequent multiple primary liver tumors. Many will also have significant underlying liver disease and may not tolerate major surgical loss of hepatic parenchyma, and they may be eligible for orthotopic liver transplant (OLTX). Living related donor transplants have increased in popularity resulting in absence of waiting for a transplant. An important principle in treating early-stage HCC is to use liver-sparing treatments and to focus on treatment of both the tumor and the cirrhosis.

Surgical Excision

The risk of major hepatectomy is high (5每10% mortality rate) due to the underlying liver disease and the potential for liver failure, but acceptable in selected cases. Preoperative portal vein occlusion can sometimes be performed to cause atrophy of the HCC-involved lobe and compensatory hypertrophy of the noninvolved liver, permitting safer resection. Intraoperative ultrasound (US) is useful for planning the surgical approach. The US can image the proximity of major vascular structures that may be encountered during the dissection. In cirrhotic patients, any major liver surgery can result in liver failure. The Child-Pugh classification of liver failure is still a reliable prognosticator for tolerance of hepatic surgery and only Child A patients should be considered for surgical resection. Child B and C patients with stages I and II HCC should be referred for OLTX if appropriate, as well as patients with ascites or a recent history of variceal bleeding. Although open surgical excision is the most reliable, the patient may be better served with a laparoscopic approach to resection, using RFA or percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI). No adequate comparisons of these different techniques have been undertaken and the choice of treatment is usually based on physician skill.

Local Ablation Strategies

Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) uses heat to ablate tumors. The maximum size of the probe arrays allows for a 7-cm zone of necrosis, which would be adequate for a 3- to 4-cm tumor. The heat reliably kills cells within the zone of necrosis. Treatment of tumors close to the main portal pedicles can lead to bile duct injury and obstruction. This limits the location of tumors that are anatomically suited for this technique. RFA can be performed percutaneously with CT or ultrasound guidance, or at the time of laparoscopy with ultrasound guidance.

Local Injection Therapy

Numerous agents have been used for local injection into tumors, most commonly, ethanol (PEI). The relatively soft HCC within the hard background cirrhotic liver allows for injection of large volumes of ethanol into the tumor without diffusion into the hepatic parenchyma or leakage out of the liver. PEI causes direct destruction of cancer cells, but it is not selective for cancer and will destroy normal cells in the vicinity. However, it usually requires multiple injections (average three), in contrast to one for RFA. The maximum size of tumor reliably treated is 3 cm, even with multiple injections.

Current Directions

Resection and RFA each obtain similar results.

Liver Transplantation (Oltx)

A viable option for stages I and II tumors in the setting of cirrhosis is OLTX, with survival approaching that for noncancer cases. OLTX for patients with a single lesion 5 cm or three or fewer nodules, each 3 cm (Milan criteria), resulted in excellent tumor-free survival (70% at 5 years). For advanced HCC, OLTX has been abandoned due to high tumor recurrence rates. Priority scoring for OLTX previously led to HCC patients waiting too long for their OLTX, resulting in some tumors becoming too advanced during the patient's wait for a donated liver. A variety of therapies were used as a "bridge" to OLTX, including RFA, polyethylenimine, and transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE). It seems clear that these pretransplant treatments allow patients to remain on the waiting list longer, giving them greater opportunities to be transplanted. What remains unclear, however, is whether this translates into prolonged survival after transplant. Further, it is not known whether patients who have had their tumor(s) treated preoperatively follow the recurrence pattern predicted by their tumor status at the time of transplant (i.e., post〞local ablative therapy), or if they follow the course set by their tumor parameters present before such treatment. The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) point system for priority scoring of OLTX recipients now includes additional points for patients with HCC. The success of living related donor liver transplantation programs has also led to patients receiving transplantation earlier for HCC and often with greater than minimal tumors.

Current Directions

Expanded criteria for larger HCCs beyond the Milan criteria (one lesion <5 cm or three lesions, each less than 3 cm) are being increasingly accepted by various UNOS areas for OLTX with satisfactory longer-term survival. Furthermore, downstaging HCCs by medical therapy (TACE) is increasingly recognized as acceptable treatment before OLTX.

Adjuvant Therapy

The role of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients after resection or OLTX remains unclear. Both adjuvant and neoadjuvant approaches have been studied, but no clear advantage in disease-free or overall survival has been found. However, a meta-analysis of several trials revealed a significant improvement in disease-free and overall survival. Although analysis of postoperative adjuvant systemic chemotherapy trials demonstrated no disease-free or overall survival advantage, single studies of TACE and neoadjuvant 131I-Ethiodol showed enhanced survival post-resection.

Current Directions

A large adjuvant trial examining resection with or without sorafenib (see below) is in progress.

Stages III and IV HCC

Fewer surgical options exist for stage III tumors involving major vascular structures. In patients without cirrhosis, a major hepatectomy is feasible, although prognosis is poor. Patients with Child's A cirrhosis may be resected, but a lobectomy is associated with significant morbidity and mortality rates, and long-term prognosis is poor. Nevertheless, a small percentage of patients will achieve long-term survival, justifying an attempt at resection when feasible. Because of the advanced nature of these tumors, even successful resection can be followed by rapid recurrence. These patients are not considered candidates for transplantation because of the high tumor recurrence rates, unless their tumors can first be down-staged with neoadjuvant therapy. Decreasing the size of the primary tumor allows for less surgery, and the delay in surgery allows for extrahepatic disease to manifest on imaging studies and avoid unhelpful OLTX. The prognosis is poor for stage IV tumors, and no surgical treatment is recommended.

Systemic Chemotherapy

A large number of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies have been performed with most of the major classes of cancer chemotherapy. No single agent or combination of agents given systemically reproducibly leads to even a 25% response rate or has any effect on survival.

Regional Chemotherapy

In contrast to the dismal results of systemic chemotherapy, a variety of agents given via the hepatic artery have activity for HCC confined to the liver (Table 92每6). Two randomized controlled trials have shown a survival advantage for TACE in a selected subset of patients. One used doxorubicin and the other used cisplatin. Despite the fact that increased hepatic extraction of chemotherapy has been shown for very few drugs, some drugs such as cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, and possibly neocarzinostatin, produce substantial objective responses when administered regionally. Few data are available on continuous hepatic arterial infusion for HCC, although pilot studies with cisplatin have shown encouraging responses. Because the reports have not usually stratified responses or survival based on TNM staging, it is difficult to know long-term prognosis in relation to tumor extent. Most of the studies on regional hepatic arterial chemotherapy also use an embolizing agent such as Ethiodol, gelatin sponge particles (Gelfoam), starch (Spherex), or microspheres. Two products are composed of microspheres of defined size ranges〞Embospheres (Biospheres) and Contour SE〞using particles of 40每120, 100每300, 300每500, and 500每1000 m in size. The optimal diameter of the particles for TACE has yet to be defined. Consistently higher objective response rates are reported for arterial administration of drugs together with some form of hepatic artery occlusion compared with any form of systemic chemotherapy to date. The widespread use of some form of embolization in addition to chemotherapy has added to its toxicities. These include a frequent, but transient fever, abdominal pain, and anorexia (all in >60% of patients). In addition, >20% of patients have increased ascites or transient elevation of transaminases. Cystic artery spasm and cholecystitis are also not uncommon. However, higher responses have also been obtained. The hepatic toxicities associated with embolization may be ameliorated by the use of degradable starch microspheres, with 50每60% response rates. Two randomized studies of TACE vs. placebo showed a survival advantage for treatment (Table 92每6). In addition, it is not clear that formal oncologic CT response criteria are adequate for HCC. A loss of vascularity on CT without size change may be an index of loss of viability and thus of response to TACE. A major problem that TACE trials have had in showing a survival advantage is that many HCC patients die of their underlying cirrhosis, not the tumor. However, improving quality of life is a legitimate goal of regional therapy.

New Therapies

The major finding has been a survival advantage for oral sorafenib (Nexavar) vs. placebo controls in two randomized trials, leading to its approval by the FDA. However, tumor responses were negligible, and the survival in the treatment arm in Asians was below the placebo arm in the Western trial (Table 92每7). Furthermore, prolonged survival has been reported in phase II trials using newer agents, such as bevacizumab plus erlotinib. Several forms of radiation therapy have been used in the treatment of HCC, including external beam radiation and conformal radiation therapy. Radiation hepatitis remains a dose-limiting problem. The pure beta emitter 90Yttrium attached to either glass or resin microspheres has been assessed in phase II trials of HCC and has encouraging survival effects with minimal toxicities. Randomized trials have yet to be performed. Vitamin K has been assessed in clinical trials at high dosage for its HCC-inhibitory actions. This idea is based on the characteristic biochemical defect in HCC of elevated plasma levels of immature prothrombin (DCP or PIVKA-2), due to a defect in the activity of prothrombin carboxylase, a vitamin K-dependent enzyme. Two vitamin K randomized controlled trials from Japan show decreased tumor occurrence.

Table 92每7 Targeted Therapies in HCC: Trials

 
 
Phase III Target Survival (mo) 
Sorafenib vs placebo Raf, VEGFR, PDGFR 10.7 vs. 7.9 
Sorafenib vs placebo (Asians) Raf, WGFR, PDGFR 6.5 vs. 4.2 
Phase II  
Sorafenib   9 
Sorafenib (Asians)   5 
Sunitinib   9.8, 8 (2 trials) 
Bevacizumab VEGF 12.4 
Bevacizumab plus erlotinib VEGF plus EGFR 15.6 
Bevacizumab plus capecitabine   8 
Erlotinib EGFR 13, 10.7 (2 trials) 
Linifanib VEGFR, PDGF 9.7 
Brivanib VEGFR, FGFR 10 
 


Abbreviation: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; Raf, rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
 


Current Directions A number of new treatments are being evaluated for HCC (Table 92每8). These include the biologicals, such as Raf kinase and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors, 90Yttrium looks promising without chemotherapy toxicities, and vitamin K2 appears to prevent recurrences post-resection. The bottleneck of liver donors for OLTX is at last widening with increasing use of living donors, and criteria for OLTX for larger HCCs are slowly expanding. Patient participation in clinical trials assessing new therapies is encouraged (www.clinicaltrials.gov).

Table 92每8 Some Novel Medical Treatments for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

 
 
EGF receptor antagonists: Erlotinib, gefitinib, lapatinib, cetuximab, brivanib 
Multi-kinase antagonists: sorafenib, sunitinib 
VEGF antagonist: bevacizumab 
VEGFR antagonist: ABT-869 (linifanib) 
mTOR antagonists: sirolimus, temsirolimus, everolimus 
Proteasome inhibitors: bortezomib 
Vitamin K 
131I 每 Ethiodol (lipiodol)
  
131I 每 Ferritin
  
90Yttrium microspheres (TheraSphere, SIR-spheres)
  
166Holmium, 188Rhenium
  
Three-dimensional conformal radiation 
Proton beam high-dose radiotherapy 
Gamma knife, CyberKnife 
New targets: inhibitors of cyclin dependent kinases (Cdk) and caspases 
 


Abbreviation: EGF, epidermal growth factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
 

Summary (Table 92每5)

The Most Common Modes of Patient Presentation

1. A patient with known history of hepatitis, jaundice, or cirrhosis, with an abnormality on US or CT scan, or rising AFP or DCP (PIVKA-2)

2. A patient with an abnormal liver function test as part of a routine examination

3. Radiologic workup for liver transplant for cirrhosis 4. Symptoms of HCC including cachexia, abdominal pain, or fever

History and Physical Examination:

Clinical jaundice, asthenia, itching (scratches), tremors, or disorientation

Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, skin signs of liver failure

Clinical Evaluation:

Blood tests: full blood count (splenomegaly), liver function tests, ammonia levels, electrolytes, AFP and DCP (PIVKA-2), Ca2+ and Mg2+; hepatitis B, C, and D serology (and quantitative HBV DNA or HCV RNA, if either is positive); neurotensin (specific for fibrolamellar HCC)

Triphasic dynamic helical (spiral) CT scan of liver (if inadequate, then follow with an MRI); chest CT scan; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy (for varices, bleeding, ulcers); and brain scan (only if symptoms suggest)

Core biopsy: of the tumor and separate biopsy of the underlying liver

Therapy (Tables 92每5 and 92每6):

HCC <2 cm: RFA, PEI, or resection

HCC >2 cm, no vascular invasion: liver resection, RFA, or OLTX

Multiple unilobar tumors or tumor with vascular invasion: TACE or sorafenib

Bilobar tumors, no vascular invasion: TACE with OLTX for patients with tumor response

Extrahepatic HCC or elevated bilirubin: sorafenib or bevacizumab plus erlotinib (combination agent trials are in progress)
 
Other Primary Liver Tumors

Fibrolamellar HCC (Fl-Hcc)

This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC causative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly females. It is AFP-negative, but patients typically have elevated blood neurotensin levels, normal liver function tests, and no cirrhosis. Radiology is similar for HCC, except that characteristic adult-type portal vein invasion is less common. Although it is often multifocal in the liver, and therefore not resectable, metastases are common, especially to lungs and locoregional lymph nodes, but survival is often much better than with adult-type HCC. Resectable tumors are associated with 5-year survival >50%. Patients often present with a huge liver or unexplained weight loss, fever, or elevated liver function tests on routine evaluations. These huge masses suggest quite slow growth for many tumors. Surgical resection is the best management option, even for metastases, as these tumors respond much less well to chemotherapy than adult-type HCC. Although several series of OLTX for FL-HCC have been reported, the patients seem to die from tumor recurrences, with a 2- to 5-year lag compared with OLTX for adult-type HCC. Anecdotal responses to gemcitabine plus cisplatin-TACE are reported.

Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma (Ehe)

This rare vascular tumor of adults is also usually multifocal and can also be associated with prolonged survival, even in the presence of metastases, which are commonly in the lung. There is usually no underlying cirrhosis. Histologically, these tumors are usually of borderline malignancy and express factor VIII, confirming their endothelial origin. OLTX may produce prolonged survival.

Cholangiocarcinoma (Ccc)

CCC typically refers to mucin-producing adenocarcinomas (different from HCC) that arise from the bile ducts. They are grouped by their anatomic site of origin, as intrahepatic, hilar (central, 65% of CCCs), and peripheral (or distal, 30% of CCCs). They arise on the basis of cirrhosis less frequently than HCC, excepting primary biliary cirrhosis. Nodular tumors arising at the bifurcation of the common bile duct are called Klatskin tumors and are often associated with a collapsed gallbladder, a finding that mandates visualization of the entire biliary tree. The approach to management of central and peripheral CCC is quite different. Incidence is increasing. Although most CCCs have no obvious cause, a number of predisposing factors have been identified. Predisposing diseases include primary sclerosing cholangitis (10每20% of primary sclerosing cholangitis [PSC] patients), an autoimmune disease, and liver fluke in Asians, especially Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis. CCC seems also to be associated with any cause of chronic biliary inflammation and injury, with alcoholic liver disease, choledocholithiasis, choledochal cysts (10%), and Caroli's disease (a rare inherited form of bile duct ectasia). CCC most typically presents as painless jaundice, often with pruritus or weight loss. Diagnosis is made by biopsy, percutaneously for peripheral liver lesions, or more commonly via endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) under direct vision for central lesions. The tumors often stain positively for cytokeratins 7, 8, and 19 and negatively for cytokeratin 20. However, histology alone cannot usually distinguish CCC from metastases from colon or pancreas primary tumors. Serologic tumor markers appear to be nonspecific, but CEA, CA 19每9, and CA-125 are often elevated in CCC patients and are useful for following response to therapy. Radiologic evaluation typically starts with ultrasound, which is very useful in visualizing dilated bile ducts, and then proceeds with either MRI or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or helical CT scans. Invasive cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is then needed to define the biliary tree and obtain a biopsy or is needed therapeutically to decompress an obstructed biliary tree with internal stent placement. If that fails, then percutaneous biliary drainage will be needed, with the biliary drainage flowing into an external bag. Central tumors often invade the porta hepatis, and loco-regional lymph node involvement by tumor is frequent.

Treatment: Cholangiocarcinoma

Hilar CCC is resectable in 30% of patients and usually involves bile duct resection and lymphadenectomy. Typical survival is approximately 24 months, with recurrences being mainly in the operative bed but with 30% in the lungs and liver. Distal CCC, which involves the main ducts, is normally treated by resection of the extrahepatic bile ducts, often with pancreaticoduodenectomy. Survival is similar. Due to the high rates of locoregional recurrences or positive surgical margins, many patients receive postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy. Its effect on survival has not been assessed. Intraluminal brachyradiotherapy has also shown some promise. However, photodynamic therapy enhanced survival in one study. In this technique, sodium porfimer is injected intravenously and then subjected to intraluminal red light laser photoactivation. OLTX has been assessed for treatment of unresectable CCC. Five-year survival was 20%, so enthusiasm waned. However, neoadjuvant radiotherapy with sensitizing chemotherapy has shown better survival rates for CCC treated by OLTX and is currently used by UNOS for perihilar CCC, size <3 cm with neither intrahepatic or extrahepatic metastases. Multiple chemotherapeutic agents have been assessed for activity and survival in unresectable CCC. Most have been inactive. However, both systemic and hepatic arterial gemcitabine have shown promising results. The combination of cisplatin plus gemcitabine has produced a survival advantage compared with gemcitabine alone and is considered standard therapy for unresectable CCC.

Gallbladder Cancer (Gb Ca)

GB Ca has an even worse prognosis than CCC, and with typical survival 6 months or less. Women are affected much more commonly than men (4:1), unlike HCC or CCC, and GB Ca occurs more frequently than CCC. Most patients have a history of antecedent gallstones, but very few patients with gallstones develop GB Ca (0.2%). It presents similarly to CCC and is often diagnosed unexpectedly during gallstone or cholecystitis surgery. Presentation is typically that of chronic cholecystitis, chronic right upper quadrant pain and weight loss. Useful but nonspecific serum markers include CEA and CA 19-9. CT scans or MRCP typically reveal a gallbladder mass. The mainstay of treatment is surgical, either simple or radical cholecystectomy for stages I or II disease, respectively. Survival rates are near 100% at 5 years for stage I, and range from 60每90% at 5 years for stage II. More advanced GB Ca has worse survival, and many patients are unresectable. Adjuvant radiotherapy, used in the presence of local lymph node disease, has not been shown to enhance survival. Chemotherapy is not useful in advanced or metastatic GB Ca.

Carcinoma of the Ampulla of Vater

This tumor arises within 2 cm of the distal end of the common bile duct and is mainly (90%) an adenocarcinoma. Locoregional lymph nodes are commonly involved (50%), and the liver is the most frequent site for metastases. The most common clinical presentation is jaundice, and many patients also have pruritus, weight loss, and epigastric pain. Initial evaluation is performed with an abdominal ultrasound to assess vascular involvement, biliary dilation, and liver lesions. This is followed by a CT scan, or MRI and especially MRCP. The most effective therapy is resection by pylorus-sparing pancreaticoduodenectomy, an aggressive procedure resulting in better survival rates than with local resection. Survival rates are 25% at 5 years in operable patients with involved lymph nodes and 50% in patients without involved nodes. Unlike CCC, approximately 80% of patients are thought to be resectable at diagnosis. Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy has not been shown to enhance survival. For metastatic tumors, chemotherapy is currently experimental.

Tumors Metastatic to the Liver

These are predominantly from colon, pancreas, and breast primary tumors but can originate from any organ primary. Ocular melanomas are prone to liver metastasis. Tumor spread to the liver normally carries a poor prognosis for that tumor type. Colorectal and breast hepatic metastases were previously treated with continuous hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy. However, more effective systemic drugs for each of these two cancers, especially the addition of oxaliplatin to colorectal cancer regimens, have reduced the use of hepatic artery infusion therapy. In a large randomized study of systemic versus infusional plus systemic chemotherapy for resected colorectal metastases to the liver, the patients receiving infusional therapy had no survival advantage, mainly due to extrahepatic tumor spread. 90Yttrium resin beads are approved in the United States for treatment of colorectal hepatic metastases. The role of this modality, either alone or in combination with chemotherapy, is being evaluated in many centers. Palliation my be obtained from chemoembolization, PEI, or RFA.

Benign Liver Tumors

Three common benign tumors occur and all are found predominantly in women. They are hemangiomas, adenomas, and focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH). FNH is typically benign, and usually no treatment is needed. Hemangiomas are the most common and are entirely benign. Treatment is unnecessary unless their expansion causes symptoms. Adenomas are associated with contraceptive hormone use. They can cause pain and can bleed or rupture, causing acute problems. Their main interest for the physician is a low potential for malignant change and a 30% risk of bleeding. For this reason, considerable effort has gone into differentiating these three entities radiologically. On discovery of a liver mass, patients are usually advised to stop taking sex steroids, as adenoma regression may then occasionally occur. Adenomas can often be large masses ranging from 8每15 cm. Due to their size and definite, but low, malignant potential and potential for bleeding, adenomas are typically resected. The most useful diagnostic differentiating tool is a triphasic CT scan performed with HCC fast bolus protocol for arterial-phase imaging, together with subsequent delayed venous-phase imaging. Adenomas usually do not appear on the basis of cirrhosis, although both adenomas and HCCs are intensely vascular on the CT arterial phase and both can exhibit hemorrhage (40% of adenomas). However, adenomas have smooth, well-defined edges, and enhance homogeneously, especially in the portal venous phase on delayed images, when HCCs no longer enhance. FNHs exhibit a characteristic central scar that is hypovascular on the arterial-phase and hypervascular on the delayed-phase CT images. MRI is even more sensitive in depicting the characteristic central scar of FNH.
 
Further Readings

Carr BI et al: Therapeutic equivalence in survival for hepatic arterial chemoembolization and 90Yttrium microspheres (Y90) treatments in unresectable HCC. Cancer 116:1305, 2010 [PMID: 20066715] 

 
Hoshida Y et al: Gene expression in fixed tissues and outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 359:1995, 2008 [PMID: 18923165] 

 
Llovet JM et al: Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 359:378, 2008 [PMID: 18650514] 

 
Mazzaferro V et al: Predicting survival after liver transplantation in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma beyond the Milan criteria: A retrospective, exploratory analysis. Lancet Oncol 10:35, 2009 [PMID: 19058754] 

 
Noda I et al: Regular surveillance by imaging for early detection and better prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients infected with hepatitis C virus. J Gastroenterol 45:105, 2010 [PMID: 19866332] 

 
Pancoska P et al: Network-based analysis of survival for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Oncol 37:170, 2010 [PMID: 20494709] 

 
Sherman M: Hepatocellular carcinoma: Epidemiology, surveillance and diagnosis. Semin Liver Dis 30:3, 2010 [PMID: 20175029] 

 
Valle J et al: Cisplatin plus gemcitabine versus gemcitabine for biliary tract cancer. N Engl J Med 362:1273, 2010 [PMID: 20375404] 

 
Villaneuva A et al: Hepatocellular carcinoma: Novel molecular approaches for diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. Annu Rev Med 61:317, 2010 
 
 

^^
Pancreatic Cancer: Introduction

Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States and is associated with a poor prognosis. Endocrine tumors affecting the pancreas are discussed in Chap. 350. Infiltrating ductal adenocarcinomas, the subject of this chapter, account for the vast majority of cases and arise most frequently in the head of pancreas. At the time of diagnosis 85每90% of patients have inoperable or metastatic disease, which is reflected in the 5-year survival rate of only 5% for all stages combined. An improved 5-year survival of up to 20% may be achieved when the tumor is detected at an early stage and when complete surgical resection is accomplished.
 
Epidemiology

Pancreatic cancer represents 3% of all newly diagnosed malignancies in the United States. The most common age group at diagnosis is 60每79 years for both sexes. Pancreatic cancer will be diagnosed in approximately 43,140 patients and account for 36,800 deaths in 2010. Over the past 30 years, 5-year survival rates have not improved substantially.
 
Risk Factors

Cigarette smoking may be the cause of up to 20每25% of all pancreatic cancers and is the most common environmental risk factor for this disease. Other risk factors are not well established due to inconsistent results from epidemiological studies, but include chronic pancreatitis and diabetes. It is difficult to evaluate whether these conditions are causally related, or develop as a consequence of cancer. Alcohol does not appear to be a risk factor unless excess consumption gives rise to chronic pancreatitis.
 
Genetic Considerations

Pancreatic cancer is associated with a number of well-defined molecular hallmarks. The most frequent genetic aberrations comprise KRAS mutations, mostly affecting codon 12, which are observed in 60每75% of pancreatic cancers. The tumor-suppressor genes p16, p53, and SMAD4 are frequently inactivated; the p16 gene locus on chromosome 9p21 is deleted in up to 95% of tumors, the p53 gene is inactivated by mutation or deleted in 50每70% of tumors, and the SMAD4 gene is deleted in 55% of pancreatic tumors. Furthermore, SMAD4 gene inactivation is associated with poorer survival in patients with surgically resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma. IGF-1R and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) interact to promote cell proliferation and survival, and their simultaneous inhibition synergistically inhibits pancreatic cell growth. Overexpression and/or aberrant activation of c-Src is frequently observed, which results in cell adhesion, enhanced migration, invasion, and cell proliferation. Survivin is overexpressed in more than 80% of pancreatic tumors, which results in resistance to apoptosis, and genomic sequencing has identified PALB2 as a susceptibility gene for pancreatic cancer.

Up to 16% of pancreatic cancers are thought to be inherited. This occurs in three separate clinical settings: (1) familial multi-organ cancer syndromes, (2) genetically driven chronic diseases, and (3) familial pancreatic cancer with as yet unidentified genetic abnormalities, which comprise the largest proportion of inherited pancreatic cancer. The familial multi-organ cancer syndromes consist of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, familial atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM), familial breast-ovarian cancer associated with germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Peutz-Jeghers, associated with mutations in the STK11 gene, carries the highest lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer with a relative risk of approximately 132-fold above that of the general population. Genetically driven chronic causes of pancreatic cancer include hereditary pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis, and ataxia telangiectasia. The absolute number of affected first-degree relatives is also correlated with increased cancer risk, and patients with at least two first-degree relatives with pancreatic cancer should be considered to have familial pancreatic cancer until proven otherwise.
 
Screening and Early Detection

Screening is not routinely recommended as putative tumor markers such as Ca 19-9 and CEA have insufficient sensitivity, and computed tomography (CT) has inadequate resolution to detect pancreatic dysplasia. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a more promising screening tool, and preclinical efforts are focused on identifying biomarkers that may detect pancreatic cancer at an early stage. Consensus practice recommendations based largely on expert opinion have chosen a threshold of >tenfold increased risk for developing pancreatic cancer to select individuals who may benefit from screening. This includes family members with 3 first-degree relatives with pancreatic cancer, and patients with FAMMM, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, or hereditary pancreatitis.
 
Clinical Features

Clinical Presentation

Obstructive jaundice occurs frequently when the cancer is located in the head of pancreas. This may be accompanied by symptoms of abdominal discomfort, pruritus, lethargy, and weight loss. Less common presenting features include epigastric pain, backache, new onset diabetes mellitus, and acute pancreatitis caused by pressure effects on the pancreatic duct. Nausea and vomiting, resulting from gastroduodenal obstruction, may also be a symptom of this disease.

Physical Signs

Patients can present with jaundice and cachexia, and scratch marks may be present. Of patients with operable tumors 25% have a palpable gall bladder (Courvoisier's sign). Physical signs related to the development of distant metastases include hepatomegaly, ascites, left supraclavicular lymphadenopathy (Virchow's node), and periumbilical lymphadenopathy (Sister Mary Joseph's nodes).
 
Diagnosis

Diagnostic Imaging

Patients who present with clinical features suggestive of pancreatic cancer undergo imaging to confirm the presence of a tumor, and to establish whether the mass is likely to be inflammatory or malignant in nature. Other imaging objectives include the local and distant staging of the tumor, which will determine resectability and provide prognostic information. Dual phase, contrast-enhanced spiral CT is the imaging modality of choice (Fig. 93-1). It provides accurate visualization of surrounding viscera, vessels, and lymph nodes, thus determining tumor resectability. Intestinal infiltration, and liver and lung metastases are also reliably depicted on CT. There is no advantage of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) over CT in predicting tumor resectability, but selected cases may benefit from MRI to characterize the nature of small indeterminate liver lesions and to evaluate the cause of biliary dilatation when no obvious mass is seen on CT. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is useful for revealing small pancreatic lesions, identifying stricture or obstruction in pancreatic or common bile ducts, and facilitates stent placement (Fig. 93-2). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is a noninvasive method for accurately depicting the level and degree of bile and pancreatic duct dilatation. EUS is highly sensitive in detecting lesions less than 3 cm in size, and is useful as a local staging tool for assessing vascular invasion and lymph node involvement. Positron-emission tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) should be considered before surgery or radical chemoradiotherapy (CRT), as it is superior to conventional imaging in detecting distant metastases.

Figure 93-1

 
 
 
Coronal CT showing pancreatic cancer and dilated intrahepatic and pancreatic ducts (arrows).
 
 

Figure 93-2

 
 
 
ERCP showing contrast in dilated pancreatic duct (arrows).
 
 

Tissue Diagnosis and Cytology

Preoperative confirmation of malignancy is not always necessary in patients with radiological appearances consistent with operable pancreatic cancer. However, EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration is the technique of choice when there is any doubt, and also for use in patients who require neoadjuvant treatment. It has an accuracy of approximately 90% and has a smaller risk of intraperitoneal dissemination compared with the percutaneous route. Percutaneous biopsy of the pancreatic primary or liver metastases is only acceptable in patients with inoperable or metastatic disease. ERCP is a useful method for obtaining ductal brushings, but the diagnostic value of pancreatic juice sampling is only in the order of 25每30%.

Serum Markers

Tumor-associated carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) is elevated in approximately 70每80% of patients with pancreatic carcinoma, but is not recommended as a routine diagnostic or screening test as its sensitivity and specificity are inadequate for accurate diagnosis. Preoperative CA 19-9 levels correlate with tumor stage, and postresection CA 19-9 level has prognostic value. It is an indicator of asymptomatic recurrence in patients with completely resected tumors and is used as a biomarker of response in patients with advanced disease undergoing chemotherapy. A number of studies have established a high pretreatment CA 19-9 level as an independent prognostic factor.
 
Staging

The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging of pancreatic cancer takes into account the location and size of the tumor, the involvement of lymph nodes, and distant metastasis. This information is then combined to assign a stage (Fig. 93-3). From a practical standpoint, patients are grouped according to whether the cancer is resectable, locally advanced (unresectable, but without distant spread), or metastatic.

Figure 93-3

 
 
 
Staging of pancreatic cancer, and survival according to stage. (Illustration by Stephen Millward.)
 
 

Treatment: Pancreatic Cancer

Resectable Disease

Approximately 10% of patients present with localized nonmetastatic disease that is potentially suitable for surgical resection. Approximately 30% of patients have R1 resection (microscopic residual disease) following surgery. Those who undergo R0 resection (no microscopic or macroscopic residual tumor), and who receive adjuvant treatment have the best chance of cure, with an estimated median survival of 20每23 months and a 5-year survival of approximately 20%. Outcomes are more favorable in patients with small (< 3cm), well-differentiated tumors, and lymph node-negative disease.

Patients should have surgery in dedicated pancreatic centers that have lower postoperative morbidity and mortality rates. The standard surgical procedure for patients with tumors of the pancreatic head or uncinate process is a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (modified Whipple's procedure). The procedure of choice for tumors of the pancreatic body and tail is a distal pancreatectomy, which routinely includes splenectomy.

Postoperative treatment, either chemotherapy or CRT, improves long-term outcomes in this group of patients. Adjuvant chemotherapy, comprising six cycles of fluorouracil (5FU) and folinic acid (FA) or gemcitabine, is common practice in Europe based on data from three randomized controlled trials (Table 93每1): Results from the European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer 1 trial (ESPAC-1) revealed a median survival improvement from 14.7 months with surgery alone to 20.1 months with surgery plus adjuvant 5FU/FA, and patients did not benefit from CRT in this study. The Charit谷 Onkologie trial (CONKO 001) found that the use of gemcitabine after complete resection significantly delayed the development of recurrent disease compared with surgery alone. The ESPAC-3 trial, which investigated the benefit of adjuvant 5FU/FA versus gemcitabine, revealed no survival difference between the two drugs. However, the safety profile of adjuvant gemcitabine, with respect to the incidence of stomatitis and diarrhea, was superior to 5FU/FA.

Table 93每1 Phase III Studies of Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Resected Pancreatic Cancer

 
 
      Survival 
Study Comparator Arm Patient Number PFS/DFS (months) Median survival (months) 
ESPAC 1 Neoptolemos et al. (2004) Chemotherapy (Folinic acid + bolus 5FU) vs No chemotherapy 550 PFS 15.3 vs 9.4. (p = 0.02)  20.1 vs 14.7 (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.92, p = 0.009)  
CONKO 001 Oettle et al. (2007) Gemcitabine vs Observation 368 Median DFS 13.4 vs 6.9 (p < 0.001)  22.1 vs 20.2 (p = 0.06)  
ESPAC 3 Neoptolemos et al. (2010) 5FU/LV vs Gemcitabine 1088   23 vs 23.6 (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.08, p = 0.39)  
 


Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval; CONKO, charite ONKOlogie; DFS, disease free survival; ESPAC, European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer; 5FU, fluorouracil; HR, hazard ratio; LV, leucovorin; PFS, progression-free survival.
 

A different treatment strategy using adjuvant 5FU based CRT following gemcitabine as advocated by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 97-04 trial is preferred in the United States. This approach may be most beneficial in patients with bulky tumors involving the pancreatic head, and in patients with R1 resection.

Inoperable Locally Advanced Disease

Approximately 30% of patients present with locally advanced unresectable but nonmetastatic pancreatic carcinoma. The median survival with gemcitabine is 9 months, and patients who respond to or achieve stable disease after 3每6 months of gemcitabine may derive benefit from consolidation radiotherapy.

Metastatic Disease

Approximately 60% of patients with pancreatic cancer present with metastatic disease. Patients with poor performance status do not benefit from chemotherapy. Gemcitabine is the standard treatment with a median survival of 6 months and a 1-year survival rate of only 20%. The toxicities associated with gemcitabine need to be weighed against the potential benefits of treatment.

Adding other drugs to gemcitabine to improve outcome has been generally unsuccessful with the exception of erlotinib, an oral HER1/EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. The combination of erlotinib with gemcitabine resulted in an improved 1-year survival compared with gemcitabine alone (23% versus 17%,p = 0.023) (Table 93每2). Capecitabine, an oral fluoropyrimidine, has been combined with gemcitabine (GEM-CAP) in a phase III trial that showed an improvement in response rate and progression-free survival over single-agent gemcitabine, but no survival benefit. However, pooling of two other randomized controlled trials with this trial in a meta-analysis resulted in a survival advantage with GEM-CAP.

Table 93每2 Selected Phase III Studies Evaluating Chemotherapy Treatment in Advanced Pancreatic Cancer

 
 
      Survival 
Study Comparator Arm Patient Number PFS (months) Median survival (months) 
Moore M et al. (2007) Gemcitabine vs Gemcitabine + erlotinib 569 3.55 vs 3.75 (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.92, p = 0.004)  5.91 vs 6.24 (HR 0.82, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.99, p = 0.038)  
GEM-CAP Cunningham et al. (2009) Gemcitabine vs Gemcitabine + capecitabine (GEM-CAP) 533 3.8 vs 5.3 (HR 0.78, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.93, p = 0.004)  6.2 vs 7.1 (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.02, p = 0.08)  
GEM-CAP meta-analysis Cunningham et al. (2009) Gemcitabine vs GEM-CAP 935   Overall survival in favor of GEM-CAP (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.98, p = 0.02)  
 

 

A trial in good performance status patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer showed improved survival with the combination of 5FU/FA, irinotecan and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) compared with gemcitabine, but with increased toxicity. Nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane), an albumin bound nano-particle formulation of paclitaxel, given with gemcitabine also shows promising activity.
 
Future Directions

The early detection and future treatment of pancreatic cancer relies on an improved understanding of molecular pathways involved in the development of this disease. This will ultimately lead to the discovery of novel agents, and the identification of patient groups who are likely to benefit most from targeted therapy.
 
Further Readings

Cascinu S, Jelic S: Pancreatic cancer: ESMO clinical recommendations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 20:37, 2009[PMID: 19454458] 

 
Cunningham D et al: Phase III randomised comparison of gemcitabine versus gemcitabine plus capecitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol 27:5513, 2009[PMID: 19858379] 

 
Edge SB, Byrd DR (eds): Exocrine and Endocrine Pancreas, AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed, New York, Springer, 2010, pp 241每249 

 
Moore MJ et al: Erlotinib plus gemcitabine compared with gemcitabine alone in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer: A phase III trial of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 26:1960, 2007 

 
Neoptolemos JP et al: Adjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil plus folinic acid vs gemcitabine following pancreatic cancer resection: A randomised controlled trial. JAMA 304:1073, 2010[PMID: 20823433] 

 
Oettle H et al: Adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine vs observation in patients undergoing curative-intent resection of pancreatic cancer: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 297:267, 2007[PMID: 17227978] 

 
 

^^
Bladder Cancer

A transitional cell epithelium lines the urinary tract from the renal pelvis to the ureter, urinary bladder, and the proximal two-thirds of the urethra. Cancers can occur at any point: 90% of malignancies develop in the bladder, 8% in the renal pelvis, and the remaining 2% in the ureter or urethra. Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and the thirteenth in women, with an estimated 70,530 new cases and 14,680 deaths in the United States predicted for the year 2010. The almost 5:1 ratio of incidence to mortality reflects the higher frequency of the less lethal superficial variants compared to the more lethal invasive and metastatic variants. The incidence is three times higher in men than in women and twofold higher in whites than blacks, with a median age at diagnosis of 65 years.

Once diagnosed, urothelial tumors exhibit polychronotropism〞the tendency to recur over time and in new locations in the urothelial tract. As long as urothelium is present, continuous monitoring of the tract is required.

Epidemiology

Cigarette smoking is believed to contribute to up to 50% of the diagnosed urothelial cancers in men and up to 40% in women. The risk of developing a urothelial malignancy in male smokers is increased two- to fourfold relative to nonsmokers and continues for 10 years or longer after cessation. Other implicated agents include the aniline dyes, the drugs phenacetin and chlornaphazine, and external beam radiation. Chronic cyclophosphamide exposure may also increase risk, whereas vitamin A supplements appear to be protective. Exposure to Schistosoma haematobium, a parasite found in many developing countries, is associated with an increase in both squamous and transitional cell carcinomas of the bladder.

Pathology

Clinical subtypes are grouped into three categories: 75% are superficial, 20% invade muscle, and 5% are metastatic at presentation. Staging of the tumor within the bladder is based on the pattern of growth and depth of invasion: Ta lesions grow as exophytic lesions; carcinoma in situ (CIS) lesions start on the surface and tend to invade. The revised tumor, node, metastasis (TNM) staging system is illustrated in Fig. 94-1. About half of invasive tumors presented originally as superficial lesions that later progressed. Tumors are also rated by grade. Grade I lesions (highly differentiated tumors) rarely progress to a higher stage, whereas grade III tumors do.

Figure 94-1

 
 
 
Bladder staging. TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
 
 

More than 95% of urothelial tumors in the United States are transitional cell in origin. Pure squamous cancers with keratinization constitute 3%, adenocarcinomas 2%, and small cell tumors (with paraneoplastic syndromes) <1%. Adenocarcinomas develop primarily in the urachal remnant in the dome of the bladder or in the periurethral tissues; some assume a signet cell histology. Lymphomas and melanomas are rare. Of the transitional cell tumors, low-grade papillary lesions that grow on a central stalk are most common. These tumors are very friable, have a tendency to bleed, are at high risk for recurrence, and yet rarely progress to the more lethal invasive variety. In contrast, CIS is a high-grade tumor that is considered a precursor of the more lethal muscle-invasive disease.

Pathogenesis

The multicentric nature of the disease and high rate of recurrence has led to the hypothesis of a field defect in the urothelium that results in a predisposition to cancer. Molecular genetic analyses suggest that the superficial and invasive lesions develop along distinct molecular pathways in which primary tumorigenic aberrations precede secondary changes associated with progression to a more advanced stage. Low-grade papillary tumors that do not tend to invade or metastasize harbor constitutive activation of the receptor-tyrosine kinase-Ras signal transduction pathway and a high frequency of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) mutations. In contrast, CIS and invasive tumors have a higher frequency of TP53 and RB gene alternations. Within all clinical stages, including Tis, T1, and T2 or greater lesions, tumors with alterations in p53, p21, and/or RB have a higher probability of recurrence, metastasis, and death from disease.

Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, and Staging

Hematuria occurs in 80每90% of patients and often reflects exophytic tumors. The bladder is the most common source of gross hematuria (40%), but benign cystitis (22%) is a more common cause than bladder cancer (15%) (Chap. 44). Microscopic hematuria is more commonly of prostate origin (25%); only 2% of bladder cancers produce microscopic hematuria. Once hematuria is documented, a urinary cytology, visualization of the urothelial tract by CT or intravenous pyelogram, and cystoscopy are recommended if no other etiology is found. Screening asymptomatic individuals for hematuria increases the diagnosis of tumors at an early stage but has not been shown to prolong life. After hematuria, irritative symptoms are the next most common presentation, which may reflect in situ disease. Obstruction of the ureters may cause flank pain. Symptoms of metastatic disease are rarely the first presenting sign.

The endoscopic evaluation includes an examination under anesthesia to determine whether a palpable mass is present. A flexible endoscope is inserted into the bladder, and bladder barbotage is performed. The visual inspection includes mapping the location, size, and number of lesions, as well as a description of the growth pattern (solid vs. papillary). An intraoperative video is often recorded. All visible tumors should be resected, and a sample of the muscle underlying the tumor should be obtained to assess the depth of invasion. Normal-appearing areas are biopsied at random to ensure no field defect. A notation is made as to whether a tumor was completely or incompletely resected. Selective catheterization and visualization of the upper tracts should be performed if the cytology is positive and no disease is visible in the bladder. Ultrasonography, CT, and/or MRI may help to determine whether a tumor extends to perivesical fat (T3) and to document nodal spread. Distant metastases are assessed by CT of the chest and abdomen, MRI, or radionuclide imaging of the skeleton.

Treatment: Bladder Cancer

Management depends on whether the tumor invades muscle and whether it has spread to the regional lymph nodes and beyond. The probability of spread increases with increasing T stage.

Superficial Disease

At a minimum, the management of a superficial tumor is complete endoscopic resection with or without intravesical therapy. The decision to recommend intravesical therapy depends on the histologic subtype, number of lesions, depth of invasion, presence or absence of CIS, and antecedent history. Recurrences develop in upward of 50% of cases, of which 5每20% progress to a more advanced stage. In general, solitary papillary lesions are managed by transurethral surgery alone. CIS and recurrent disease are treated by transurethral surgery followed by intravesical therapy.

Intravesical therapies are used in two general contexts: as an adjuvant to a complete endoscopic resection to prevent recurrence or, less commonly, to eliminate disease that cannot be controlled by endoscopic resection alone. Intravesical treatments are advised for patients with recurrent disease, >40% involvement of the bladder surface by tumor, diffuse CIS, or T1 disease. The standard intravesical therapy, based on randomized comparisons, is bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) in six weekly instillations, followed by monthly maintenance administrations for 1 year. Other agents with activity include mitomycin-C, interferon (IFN), and gemcitabine. The side effects of intravesical therapies include dysuria, urinary frequency, and, depending on the drug, myelosuppression or contact dermatitis. Rarely, intravesical BCG may produce a systemic illness associated with granulomatous infections in multiple sites that requires antituberculin therapy.

Following the endoscopic resection, patients are monitored for recurrence at 3-month intervals during the first year. Recurrence may develop anywhere along the urothelial tract, including the renal pelvis, ureter, or urethra. A consequence of the "successful" treatment of tumors in the bladder is an increase in the frequency of extravesical recurrences (e.g., urethra or ureter). Those with persistent disease in the bladder or new tumors are generally considered for a second course of BCG or for intravesical chemotherapy with valrubicin or gemcitabine. In some cases, cystectomy is recommended, although the specific indications vary. Tumors in the ureter or renal pelvis are typically managed by resection during retrograde examination or, in some cases, by instillation through the renal pelvis. Tumors of the prostatic urethra may require cystectomy if the tumor cannot be resected completely.

Invasive Disease

The treatment of a tumor that has invaded muscle can be separated into control of the primary tumor and, depending on the pathologic findings at surgery, systemic chemotherapy to treat micrometastatic disease. Radical cystectomy is the standard, although in selected cases a bladder-sparing approach is used; this approach includes complete endoscopic resection; partial cystectomy; or a combination of resection, systemic chemotherapy, and external beam radiation therapy. In some countries, external beam radiation therapy is considered standard. In the United States, its role is limited to those patients deemed unfit for cystectomy, those with unresectable local disease, or as part of an experimental bladder-sparing approach.

Indications for cystectomy include muscle-invading tumors not suitable for segmental resection; low-stage tumors unsuitable for conservative management (e.g., due to multicentric and frequent recurrences resistant to intravesical instillations); high-grade tumors (T1G3) associated with CIS; and bladder symptoms, such as frequency or hemorrhage, that impair quality of life.

Radical cystectomy is major surgery that requires appropriate preoperative evaluation and management. The procedure involves removal of the bladder and pelvic lymph nodes and creation of a conduit or reservoir for urinary flow. Grossly abnormal lymph nodes are evaluated by frozen section. If metastases are confirmed, the procedure is often aborted. In males, radical cystectomy includes the removal of the prostate, seminal vesicles, and proximal urethra. Impotence is universal unless the nerves responsible for erectile function are preserved. In females, the procedure includes removal of the bladder, urethra, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, anterior vaginal wall, and surrounding fascia.

Previously, urine flow was managed by directing the ureters to the abdominal wall, where it was collected in an external appliance. Currently, most patients receive either a continent cutaneous reservoir constructed from detubularized bowel or an orthotopic neobladder. Some 70% of men receive a neobladder. With a continent reservoir, 65每85% of men will be continent at night and 85每90% during the day. Cutaneous reservoirs are drained by intermittent catheterization; orthotopic neobladders are drained more naturally. Contraindications to a neobladder include renal insufficiency, an inability to self-catheterize, or an exophytic tumor or CIS in the urethra. Diffuse CIS in the bladder is a relative contraindication based on the risk of a urethral recurrence. Concurrent ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease may hinder the use of resected bowel.

A partial cystectomy may be considered when the disease is limited to the dome of the bladder, a margin of at least 2 cm can be achieved, there is no CIS in other sites, and the bladder capacity is adequate after the tumor has been removed. This occurs in 5每10% of cases. Carcinomas in the ureter or in the renal pelvis are treated with nephroureterectomy with a bladder cuff to remove the tumor.

The probability of recurrence following surgery is predicted on the basis of pathologic stage, presence, or absence of lymphatic or vascular invasion, and nodal spread. Among those whose cancers recur, the recurrence develops in a median of 1 year (range 0.04每11.1 years). Long-term outcomes vary by pathologic stage and histology (Table 94每1). The number of lymph nodes removed is also prognostic, whether or not the nodes contained tumor.

Table 94每1 Survival Following Surgery for Bladder Cancer

 
 
Pathologic Stage 5-Year Survival, % 10-Year Survival, % 
T2,N0 89 87 
T3a,N0 78 76 
T3b,N0 62 61 
T4,N0 50 45 
Any T,N1 35 34 
 

 

Chemotherapy (described below) has been shown to prolong the survival of patients with invasive disease, but only when combined with definitive treatment of the bladder by radical cystectomy or radiation therapy. Thus, for the majority of patients, chemotherapy alone is inadequate to clear the bladder of disease. Experimental studies are evaluating bladder preservation strategies by combining chemotherapy and radiation therapy in patients whose tumors were endoscopically removed.

Metastatic Disease

The primary goal of treatment for metastatic disease is to achieve complete remission with chemotherapy alone or with a combined-modality approach of chemotherapy followed by surgical resection of residual disease, as is done routinely for the treatment of germ cell tumors. One can define a goal in terms of cure or palliation on the basis of the probability of achieving a complete response to chemotherapy using prognostic factors, such as Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) (<80%), and whether the pattern of spread is nodal or visceral (liver, lung, or bone). For those with zero, one, or two risk factors, the probability of complete remission is 38, 25, and 5%, respectively, and median survival is 33, 13.4, and 9.3 months, respectively. Patients who are functionally compromised or who have visceral disease or bone metastases rarely achieve long-term survival. The toxicities also vary as a function of risk, and treatment-related mortality rates are as high as 3每4% using some combinations in these poor-risk patient groups.

Chemotherapy

A number of chemotherapeutic drugs have shown activity as single agents; cisplatin, paclitaxel, and gemcitabine are considered most active. Standard therapy consists of two-, three-, or four-drug combinations. Overall response rates of >50% have been reported using combinations such as methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (M-VAC); cisplatin and paclitaxel (PT); gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC); or gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and cisplatin (GTC). M-VAC was considered standard, but the toxicities of neutropenia and fever, mucositis, diminished renal and auditory function, and peripheral neuropathy led to the development of alternative regimens. At present, GC is used more commonly than M-VAC, based on the results of a comparative trial of M-VAC versus GC that showed less neutropenia and fever, and less mucositis for the GC regimen. Anemia and thrombocytopenia were more common with GC. GTC is not more effective than GC.

Chemotherapy has also been evaluated in the neoadjuvant and adjuvant settings. In a randomized trial, patients receiving three cycles of neoadjuvant M-VAC followed by cystectomy had a significantly better median (6.2 years) and 5-year survival (57%) compared to cystectomy alone (median survival 3.8 years; 5-year survival 42%). Similar results were obtained in an international study of three cycles of cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine (CMV) followed by either radical cystectomy or radiation therapy. The decision to administer adjuvant therapy is based on the risk of recurrence after cystectomy. Indications for adjuvant chemotherapy include the presence of nodal disease, extravesical tumor extension, or vascular invasion in the resected specimen. Another study of adjuvant therapy found that four cycles of CMV delayed recurrence, although an effect on survival was less clear. Additional trials are studying taxane- and gemcitabine-based combinations.

The management of bladder cancer is summarized in Table 94每2.

Table 94每2 Management of Bladder Cancer

 
 
Nature of Lesion Management Approach 
Superficial Endoscopic removal, usually with intravesical therapy 
Invasive disease Cystectomy ㊣ systemic chemotherapy (before or after surgery) 
Metastatic disease Curative or palliative chemotherapy (based on prognostic factors) ㊣ surgery 
 

 
Table 94每3 Classification of Epithelial Neoplasms Arising from the Kidney

 
 
Carcinoma Type Growth Pattern Cell of Origin Cytogenetics 
Clear cell Acinar or sarcomatoid Proximal tubule 3p每 
Papillary Papillary or sarcomatoid Proximal tubule +7, +17, 每Y 
Chromophobic Solid, tubular, or sarcomatoid Cortical collecting duct Hypodiploid 
Oncocytic Tumor nests Cortical collecting duct Undetermined 
Collecting duct Papillary or sarcomatoid Medullary collecting duct Undetermined 
 

 
 
Carcinoma of the Renal Pelvis and Ureter

About 2500 cases of renal pelvis and ureter cancer occur each year; nearly all are transitional cell carcinomas similar to bladder cancer in biology and appearance. This tumor is also associated with chronic phenacetin abuse and with Balkan nephropathy, a chronic interstitial nephritis endemic in Bulgaria, Greece, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Romania.

The most common symptom is painless gross hematuria, and the disease is usually detected on intravenous pyelogram during the workup for hematuria. Patterns of spread are like those in bladder cancer. For low-grade disease localized to the renal pelvis and ureter, nephroureterectomy (including excision of the distal ureter with a portion of the bladder) is associated with 5-year survival of 80每90%. More invasive or histologically poorly differentiated tumors are more likely to recur locally and to metastasize. Metastatic disease is treated with the chemotherapy used in bladder cancer, and the outcome is similar to that of metastatic transitional-cell cancer of bladder origin.
 
Renal Cell Carcinoma

Renal cell carcinomas account for 90每95% of malignantneoplasms arising from the kidney. Notable features include resistance to cytotoxic agents, infrequent responses to biologic response modifiers such as interleukin (IL) 2, robust activity to antiangiogenesis targeted agents, and a variable clinical course for patients with metastatic disease, including anecdotal reports of spontaneous regression.

Epidemiology

The incidence of renal cell carcinoma continues to rise and is now nearly 58,000 cases annually in the United States, resulting in 13,000 deaths. The male to female ratio is 2:1. Incidence peaks between the ages of 50 and 70 years, although this malignancy may be diagnosed at any age. Many environmental factors have been investigated as possible contributing causes; the strongest association is with cigarette smoking. Risk is also increased for patients who have acquired cystic disease of the kidney associated with end-stage renal disease, and for those with tuberous sclerosis. Most cases are sporadic, although familial forms have been reported. One is associated with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome. VHL syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder. Genetic studies identified the VHL gene on the short arm of chromosome 3. Approximately 35% of individuals with VHL disease develop clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Other associated neoplasms include retinal hemangioma, hemangioblastoma of the spinal cord and cerebellum, pheochromocytoma, neuroendocrine tumors and cysts, and cysts in the epididymis of the testis in men and the broad ligament in women. Subtypes vary according to low risk (type 1) or high risk (type 2) of developing pheochromocytoma.

Pathology and Genetics

Renal cell neoplasia represents a heterogeneous group of tumors with distinct histopathologic, genetic, and clinical features ranging from benign to high-grade malignant (Table 94每3). They are classified on the basis of morphology and histology. Categories include clear cell carcinoma (60% of cases), papillary tumors (5每15%), chromophobic tumors (5每10%), oncocytomas (5每10%), and collecting or Bellini duct tumors (<1%). Papillary tumors tend to be bilateral and multifocal. Chromophobic tumors have a more indolent clinical course, and oncocytomas are considered benign neoplasms. In contrast, Bellini duct carcinomas, which are thought to arise from the collecting ducts within the renal medulla, are very rare but very aggressive. Clear cell tumors, the predominant histology, are found in >80% of patients who develop metastases. Clear cell tumors arise from the epithelial cells of the proximal tubules and usually show chromosome 3p deletions. Deletions of 3p21每26 (where the VHL gene maps) are identified in patients with familial as well as sporadic tumors. VHL encodes a tumor-suppressor protein that is involved in regulating the transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and a number of other hypoxia-inducible proteins. Inactivation of VHL leads to overexpression of these agonists of the VEGF and PDGF receptors, which promote tumor angiogenesis and tumor growth. Agents that inhibit proangiogenic growth factor activity show antitumor effects.

Clinical Presentation

The presenting signs and symptoms include hematuria, abdominal pain, and a flank or abdominal mass. This classic triad occurs in 10每20% of patients. Other symptoms are fever, weight loss, anemia, and a varicocele. The tumor is most commonly detected as an incidental finding on a radiograph. Widespread use of radiologic cross-sectional imaging procedures (CT, ultrasound, MRI) contributes to earlier detection, including incidental renal masses detected during evaluation for other medical conditions. The increasing number of incidentally discovered low-stage tumors has contributed to an improved 5-year survival for patients with renal cell carcinoma and increased use of nephron-sparing surgery (partial nephrectomy). A spectrum of paraneoplastic syndromes has been associated with these malignancies, including erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, nonmetastatic hepatic dysfunction (Stauffer syndrome), and acquired dysfibrinogenemia. Erythrocytosis is noted at presentation in only about 3% of patients. Anemia, a sign of advanced disease, is more common.

The standard evaluation of patients with suspected renal cell tumors includes a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, chest radiograph, urine analysis, and urine cytology. If metastatic disease is suspected from the chest radiograph, a CT of the chest is warranted. MRI is useful in evaluating the inferior vena cava in cases of suspected tumor involvement or invasion by thrombus. In clinical practice, any solid renal masses should be considered malignant until proven otherwise; a definitive diagnosis is required. If no metastases are demonstrated, surgery is indicated, even if the renal vein is invaded. The differential diagnosis of a renal mass includes cysts, benign neoplasms (adenoma, angiomyolipoma, oncocytoma), inflammatory lesions (pyelonephritis or abscesses), and other primary or metastatic cancers. Other malignancies that may involve the kidney include transitional cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis, sarcoma, lymphoma, and Wilms' tumor. All of these are less common causes of renal masses than is renal cell cancer.

Staging and Prognosis

Staging is based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system (Fig. 94-2). Stage I tumors are <7 cm in greatest diameter and confined to the kidney, stage II tumors are 7 cm and confined to the kidney, stage III tumors extend through the renal capsule but are confined to Gerota's fascia (IIIa) or involve a single hilar lymph node (N1), and stage IV disease includes tumors that have invaded adjacent organs (excluding the adrenal gland) or involve multiple lymph nodes or distant metastases. The rate of 5-year survival varies by stage: >90% for stage I, 85% for stage II, 60% for stage III, and 10% for stage IV.

Figure 94-2

 
 
 
Renal cell carcinoma staging. TNM, tumor, node, metastasis
 
 

Treatment: Renal Cell Carcinoma

Localized Tumors

The standard management for stage I or II tumors and selected cases of stage III disease is radical nephrectomy. This procedure involves en bloc removal of Gerota's fascia and its contents, including the kidney, the ipsilateral adrenal gland, and adjacent hilar lymph nodes. The role of a regional lymphadenectomy is controversial. Extension into the renal vein or inferior vena cava (stage III disease) does not preclude resection even if cardiopulmonary bypass is required. If the tumor is resected, half of these patients have prolonged survival.

Nephron-sparing approaches via open or laparoscopic surgery may be appropriate for patients who have only one kidney, depending on the size and location of the lesion. A nephron-sparing approach can also be used for patients with bilateral tumors, accompanied by a radical nephrectomy on the opposite side. Partial nephrectomy techniques are applied electively to resect small masses for patients with a normal contralateral kidney. Adjuvant therapy following this surgery does not improve outcome, even in cases with a poor prognosis.

Advanced Disease

Surgery has a limited role for patients with metastatic disease. However, long-term survival may occur in patients who relapse after nephrectomy in a solitary site that can be removed. One indication for nephrectomy with metastases at initial presentation is to alleviate pain or hemorrhage of a primary tumor. Also, a cytoreductive nephrectomy before systemic treatment improves survival for carefully selected patients with stage IV tumors.

Metastatic renal cell carcinoma is highly refractory to chemotherapy. Cytokine therapy with IL-2 or IFN- produces regressions in 10每20% of patients. IL-2 produces durable complete remission in a small proportion of cases. In general, cytokine therapy is considered unsatisfactory for most patients.

The situation changed dramatically when two large-scale randomized trials established a role for antiangiogenic therapy in this disease, as predicted by the genetic studies. These trials separately evaluated two orally administered antiangiogenic agents, sorafenib and sunitinib, that inhibited receptor tyrosine kinase signaling through the VEGF and PDGF receptors. Both showed efficacy as second-line treatment following progression during cytokine treatment, resulting in approval by regulatory authorities for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. A randomized phase 3 trial comparing sunitinib to IFN- showed superior efficacy for sunitinib with an acceptable safety profile. The trial resulted in a change in the standard first-line treatment from IFN to sunitinib. Sunitinib is usually given orally at a dose of 50 mg/d for 4 weeks out of 6. Diarrhea is the main toxicity. Sorafenib is usually given orally at a dose of 400 mg bid. In addition to diarrhea, toxicities include rash, fatigue, and hand-foot syndrome. Temsirolimus and everolimus, inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), show activity in patients with untreated poor-prognosis tumors and in sunitinib/sorafenib refractory tumors.

The prognosis of metastatic renal cell carcinoma is variable. In one analysis, no prior nephrectomy, a KPS <80, low hemoglobin, high corrected calcium, and abnormal lactate dehydrogenase were poor prognostic factors. Patients with zero, one or two, and three or more factors had a median survival of 24, 12, and 5 months, respectively. These tumors may follow an unpredictable and protracted clinical course. It may be best to document progression before considering systemic treatment.
 
Further Readings

Bladder Cancer: NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, version 1.2011 www.nccn.org 

 
Cheng L et al: Bladder cancer: Translating molecular genetic insights into clinical practice. Hum Pathol 42:455, 2011[PMID: 21106220] 

 
Hutson TE et al: Targeted therapies for metastatic renal cell carcinoma: An overview of toxicity and dosing strategies. Oncologist 13:1084, 2008[PMID: 18838439] 

 
Iyer G et al: Novel strategies for treating relapsed/refractory urothelial carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 10:1917, 2010[PMID: 21110758] 

 
Linehan WM et al: Molecular diagnosis and therapy of kidney cancer. Annu Rev Med 61:329, 2010[PMID: 20059341] 

 
Motzer RJ et al: Efficacy of everolimus in advanced renal cell carcinoma: A double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase III trial. Lancet 372:449, 2008[PMID: 18653228] 

 
Mulders P: Vascular endothelial growth factor and mTOR pathways in renal cell carcinoma: Differences and synergies of two targeted mechanisms. BJU Int 104:158, 2009 

 
Pal SK et al: Breaking through a plateau in renal cell carcinoma therapeutics: Development and incorporation of biomarkers. Mol Cancer Ther 9:3115, 2010[PMID: 21078774] 

 
Roupr那t M et al: European guidelines for the diagnosis and management of upper urinary tract urothelial cell carcinomas: 2011 update. Eur Urol 59:584, 2011 

 
Solsona E et al: Feasibility of radical transurethral resection as monotherapy for selected patients with muscle invasive bladder cancer. J Urol 184:475, 2010[PMID: 20620402] 

 
Zlotta AR et al: BCAN Think Tank session 1: Overview of risks for and causes of bladder cancer. Urol Oncol 28:329, 2010[PMID: 20439032] 
 

^^
Anatomy and Pathology

The prostate is located in the pelvis and is surrounded by the rectum, the bladder, the periprostatic and dorsal vein complexes and neurovascular bundles that are responsible for erectile function, and the urinary sphincter that is responsible for passive urinary control. The prostate is composed of branching tubuloalveolar glands arranged in lobules surrounded by fibromuscular stroma. The acinar unit includes an epithelial compartment made up of epithelial, basal, and neuroendocrine cells and separated by a basement membrane, a stromal compartment that includes fibroblasts and smooth-muscle cells. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) are produced in the epithelial cells. Both prostate epithelial cells and stromal cells express androgen receptors (ARs) and depend on androgens for growth. Testosterone, the major circulating androgen, is converted by the enzyme5-reductase to dihydrotestosterone in the gland.

The periurethral portion of the gland increases in size during puberty and after the age of 55 years due to the growth of nonmalignant cells in the transition zone of the prostate that surrounds the urethra. Most cancers develop in the peripheral zone, and cancers in this location can often be palpated during a digital rectal examination (DRE).
 
Prostate Cancer

In 2010 approximately 217,730 prostate cancer cases were diagnosed, and 32,050 men died from prostate cancer in the United States. The absolute number of prostate cancer deaths has decreased in the past 5 years, which has been attributed by some to the widespread use of PSA-based detection strategies. However, the benefit of screening on survival is unclear. The paradox of management is that although 1 in 6 men will eventually be diagnosed with the disease, and the disease remains the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men, only 1 man in 30 with prostate cancer will die of his disease.

Epidemiology

Epidemiologic studies show that the risk of being diagnosed with prostate cancer increases by a factor of two if one first-degree relative is affected and by four if two or more are affected. Current estimates are that 40% of early-onset and 5每10% of all prostate cancers are hereditary. Prostate cancer affects ethnic groups differently. Matched for age, African-American males compared to white males have both a greater number of typically multifocal and highly unstable prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) lesions, which are precursors to cancer, and larger tumors, possibly related to the higher levels of testosterone seen in African American males. Polymorphic variants of the AR, the cytochrome P450 C17, and the steroid 5-reductase type II (SRD5A2) genes have also been implicated in the variations in incidence.

The prevalence of autopsy-detected cancers is similar around the world, while the incidence of clinical disease varies. Thus, environmental factors may play a role. High consumption of dietary fats, such as -linoleic acid, or the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons that form when red meats are cooked is believed to increase risk. Similar to breast cancer in Asian women, the risk of prostate cancer in Asian men increases when they move to Western environments. Protective factors include consumption of the isoflavonoid genistein (which inhibits 5-reductase) found in many legumes, cruciferous vegetables that contain the isothiocyanate sulforaphane, retinoids such as lycopene found in tomatoes, and inhibitors of cholesterol biosynthesis (e.g., statin drugs). The development of prostate cancer is a multistep process. One early change is hypermethylation of the GSTP1 gene promoter, which leads to loss of function of a gene that detoxifies carcinogens. The finding that many prostate cancers develop adjacent to a lesion termed PIA (proliferative inflammatory atrophy) suggests a role for inflammation.

Diagnosis and Treatment by Clinical State

The prostate cancer continuum〞from the appearance of a preneoplastic and invasive lesion localized to the prostate, to a metastatic lesion that results in symptoms and, ultimately, mortality〞can span decades. To facilitate disease management, competing risks are considered in the context of a series of clinical states (Fig. 95-1). The states are defined operationally on the basis of whether or not a cancer diagnosis has been established and, for those with a diagnosis, whether or not metastases are detectable on imaging studies and the measured level of testosterone in the blood. With this approach, an individual resides in only one state and remains in that state until he has progressed. At each assessment, the decision to offer treatment and the specific form of treatment is based on the risk posed by the cancer relative to competing causes of mortality that may be present in that individual. It follows that the more advanced the disease, the greater the need for treatment.

For those without a cancer diagnosis, the decision to undergo testing to detect a cancer is based on the individual's estimated life expectancy and, separately, the probability that a clinically significant cancer may be present. For those with a prostate cancer diagnosis, the states model considers the probability of developing symptoms or dying from disease. Thus, a patient with localized prostate cancer who has had all cancer removed surgically remains in the state of localized disease as long as the PSA remains undetectable. The time within a state becomes a measure of the efficacy of an intervention, though the effect may not be assessable for years. As many men with active cancer are not at risk for developing metastases, symptoms, or death, the states model allows a distinction between cure〞the elimination of all cancer cells, the primary therapeutic objective when treating most cancers〞and cancer control, in which the tempo of the illness is altered and symptoms controlled until the patient dies of other causes. These can be equivalent therapeutically from a patient standpoint if the patient has not experienced symptoms of the disease or the treatment needed to control it. Even when a recurrence is documented, immediate therapy is not always necessary. Rather, as at the time of diagnosis, the need for intervention is based on the tempo of the illness as it unfolds in the individual, relative to the risk-to-benefit ratio of the therapy being considered.

No Cancer Diagnosis

Prevention

The results from several large double-blind, randomized chemoprevention trials have established 5-reductase inhibitors (5ARI) as the predominant therapy to reduce the future risk of a prostate cancer diagnosis. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT), in which men older than age 55 years received the 5-reductase inhibitor finasteride, which inhibits the type 1 isoform, or a placebo, showed a 25% (95% confidence interval 19每31%) reduction in the period prevalence of prostate cancer across all age groups in favor of finasteride (18.4%) over placebo (24.4%). In REDUCE (Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events Trial), a similar 23% reduction in the 4-year period prevalence was observed in favor of dutasteride (p = 0.001). Dutasteride inhibits both the type 1 and type 2 5ARI isoforms. These results contrast with those of the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) in which African American men aged 50 years and others aged 55 years were enrolled, which showed no difference in cancer incidence in patients receiving vitamin E (4.6%) or selenium (4.9%) alone or in combination (4.6%) relative to placebo (4.4%). A similar lack of benefit for vitamin E, vitamin C, and selenium was seen in the Physicians Health Study II.

Physical Examination

The need to pursue a diagnosis of prostate cancer is based on symptoms, an abnormal DRE, or, more typically, a change in or an elevated serum PSA. The urologic history should focus on symptoms of outlet obstruction, continence, potency, or change in ejaculatory pattern.

The DRE focuses on prostate size and consistency and abnormalities within or beyond the gland. Many cancers occur in the peripheral zone and can be palpated on DRE. Carcinomas are characteristically hard, nodular, and irregular, while induration may also be due to benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) or calculi. Overall, 20每25% of men with an abnormal DRE have cancer.

Prostate-Specific Antigen

PSA (kallikrein-related peptidase 3; KLK3) is a kallikrein-related serine protease that causes liquefaction of seminal coagulum. It is produced by both nonmalignant and malignantepithelial cells and, as such, is prostate-specific, not prostate cancer每specific, and serum levels may also increase from prostatitis and BPH. Serum levels are not affected by DRE but the performance of a prostate biopsy can increase PSA levels up to tenfold for 8每10 weeks. PSA circulating in the blood is inactive and mainly occurs as a complex with the protease inhibitor 1-antichymotrypsin SERPIN A3 and as free unbound PSA forms. The formation of complexes between PSA, 2-macroglobulin, or other protease inhibitors is less significant. Free PSA is rapidly eliminated from the blood by glomerular filtration with an estimated half-life of 12-18 hours. Elimination of PSA bound to 1-antichymotrypsin is slow (estimated half-life of 1-2 weeks) as it is too large to be cleared by the kidneys. Levels should be undetectable after about six weeks if the prostate has been removed. Immunohistochemical staining for PSA can be used to establish a prostate cancer diagnosis.

PSA testing was approved by the U.S. FDA in 1994 for early detection of prostate cancer, and the widespread use of the test has played a significant role in the proportion of men diagnosed with early-stage cancers: more than 70每80% of newly diagnosed cancers are organ confined. The level of PSA in blood is strongly associated with the risk and outcome of prostate cancer. A single PSA measured at age 60 is associated (AUC of 0.90) with lifetime risk of death from prostate cancer. Most (90%) prostate cancer deaths occur among men with PSA levels in top quartile (>2 ng/mL), although only a minority of men with PSA >2 ng/mL will develop lethal prostate cancer. Despite this and mortality rate reductions reported from large randomized prostate cancer screening trials, routine use of the test remains controversial. The American Cancer Society (ACS) recommends that physicians offer PSA testing and a DRE on an annual basis for men older than age 50 years with an anticipated survival of >10 years; this includes men up to age 76 years. For African Americans and men with a family history of prostate cancer, testing is advised to begin at age 45 years. The American Urologic Association recommendations are similar, with the proviso that the risks and benefits of the performance of these tests are not defined. The American College of Physicians recommends that physicians "describe the potential benefits and known harms of screening" and to "individualize the decision to screen." The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines mirror those of the ACS, with the proviso that "physicians and potential participants must thoroughly discuss the pros and cons of screening." The NCCN also advises that men who opt to participate obtain a baseline PSA and DRE in their values and use the value to stratify future risk. As PSA values may fluctuate for no apparent reason, it is advised that isolated abnormal values should be confirmed before proceeding with further testing.

The PSA criteria used to recommend a diagnostic prostate biopsy have evolved over time. However, based on the commonly used outpoint for prostate biopsy CPSA4 mg/mL, most men with a PSA elevation do not have histologic widence of prostate cancer at biopsy, and commenly, many men with PSA levels below this cut point harbor cancer cells in their prostate. The goal is to increase the sensitivity of the test for younger men more likely to die of the disease and to reduce the frequency of detecting cancers of low malignant potential in elderly men more likely to die of other causes. Previously, the threshold for performance of a biopsy was 4.0 ng/mL, which has been reduced to 3 mg/mL or 2.6 ng/mL for men aged <60 years by many groups based on the finding that nearly half of the men with PSAs who reached this level increased to 4 ng/mL within a relatively short (4-year) time frame and that, once diagnosed, in nearly one-third it had spread beyond the confines of the gland.

Most PSA is complexed to 1-antichymotrypsin (ACT); only a small percentage is "free," and lower in men with cancer. Free and complexed PSA measurements are used when levels are between 4 and 10 ng/mL to decide whether a biopsy is needed. The risk of cancer is under 10% if the free PSA is >25% but as high as 56% for those with a free PSA <10%. PSA density (PSAD) measurements were developed to correct for the contribution of BPH to the total PSA level. PSAD is calculated by dividing the serum PSA by the prostate weight estimated from transrectal ultrasound (TRUS). Values <0.10 ng/mL per cm3 are consistent with BPH, while those >0.15 ng/mL per cm3 suggest cancer. PSA dynamics is the rate of change in PSA levels over time and is expressed most commonly as the PSA velocity or PSA doubling time. It is particularly useful for men with seemingly normal values that are rising. For men with a PSA level higher than 4 ng/mL, rates of rise >0.75 ng/mL per year suggest cancer, while for those with lower PSA levels, rates >0.5 ng/mL per year should be used to advise a biopsy. As an example, an increase from 2.5 to 3.2 ng/mL in a 1-year period would warrant further testing.

PSA-based detection strategies have changed the clinical spectrum of the disease. Now, 95每99% of newly diagnosed cancers are clinically localized, 40% are not palpable, and of these, 70% are pathologically organ-confined. However, the benefits of PSA screening remain controversial due to the overdetection of cancers with low malignant potential that may lead to overtreatment and unnecessary morbidity. To this end, the U.S. Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening trial found no mortality benefit from combined PSA screening and DRE in 76,693 randomized men (annual exam vs. standard care) with a median follow-up of 11 years. However, important caveats about the PLCO study include (1) many screening participants had already undergone PSA screening before the trial; (2) contamination from PSA testing among controls increased from 40% in year one to 52% in year six and; (3) and the biopsycompliance was low. These factors make interpretation difficult. A subgroup analysis of this trial showed a reduction in cancer mortality among screened men with little or no comorbidity. The European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) trial followed 182,000 men a median of 9 years randomized either to PSA screening every 4 years or to a group not receiving regular PSA screening. In this study, PSA screening without DRE corresponded to a 20% relative reduction of the rate of death from prostate cancer. A report from the Swedish subgroup of this study based on 14 years follow-up suggested that PSA screening may reduce cancer-specific mortality by nearly half with less overdiagnosis and treatment than was noted in the European Study as a whole. Men remain advised to make an informed decision on an individual basis about whether to undergo testing.

A diagnostic algorithm based on the DRE and PSA findings is illustrated in Fig. 95-2. In general, a biopsy is recommended if the DRE or PSA is abnormal. Twenty-five percent of men with a PSA >4 ng/mL and an abnormal DRE have cancer, as do 17% of men with a PSA of 2.5每4 ng/mL and normal DRE.

Figure 95-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for diagnostic evaluation of men based on digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels; TRUS, transrectal ultrasound.
 
 

Prostate Biopsy

A diagnosis of cancer is established by a TRUS-guided needle biopsy. Direct visualization by ultrasound or MRI assures that all areas of the gland are sampled. A minimum of six separate cores, three from the right and three from the left, is advised, as is a separate biopsy of the transition zone if clinically indicated. Contemporary schemas advise an extended-pattern 12- to 14-core biopsy that includes the sextant sampling above plus 6 cores from the lateral peripheral zones as well as a lesion-directed palpable nodule or suspicious image-guided sampling. Patients with prostatitis should have a course of antibiotics before biopsy. Men with an abnormal PSA and negative biopsy are advised to undergo a repeat biopsy.

Each core of the biopsy is examined for the presence of cancer, and the amount of cancer is quantified based on the length of the tumor within the core and the percentage of the core involved.

Pathology

The noninvasive proliferation of epithelial cells within ducts is termed prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. PIN is a precursor of cancer, but not all PIN lesions develop into invasive cancers. Of the cancers identified, >95% are adenocarcinomas; the rest are squamous or transitional cell tumors or, rarely, carcinosarcomas. Metastases to the prostate are rare, but in some cases colon cancers or transitional cell tumors of the bladder invade the gland by direct extension.

When prostate cancer is diagnosed, a measure of histologic aggressiveness is assigned using the Gleason grading system, in which the dominant and secondary glandular histologic patterns are scored from 1 (well-differentiated) to 5 (undifferentiated) and summed to give a total score of 2每10 for each tumor. The most poorly differentiated area of tumor (i.e., the area with the highest histologic grade) often determines biologic behavior. The presence or absence of perineural invasion and extracapsular spread are also recorded.

Prostate Cancer Staging

The TNM staging system includes categories for cancers that are palpable on DRE, those identified solely on the basis of an abnormal PSA (T1c), those that are palpable but clinically confined to the gland (T2), and those that have extended outside the gland (T3 and T4) (Table 95每1, Fig. 95-3). DRE alone is inaccurate in determining the extent of disease within the gland, the presence or absence of capsular invasion, involvement of seminal vesicles, and extension of disease to lymph nodes. Because of the inadequacy of DRE for staging, the TNM staging system was modified to include the results of imaging. Unfortunately, no single test has proven to accurately indicate the stage or the presence of organ-confined disease, seminal vesicle involvement, or lymph node spread.

Table 95-1 TNM Classification

 
 
TNM Staging System for Prostate Cancera  
Tx Primary tumor cannot be assessed 
T0 No evidence of primary tumor 
Localized Disease  
T1 Clinically inapparent tumor, neither palpable nor visible by imaging 
T1a Tumor incidental histologic finding in 5% of resected tissue; not palpable 
T1b Tumor incidental histologic finding in >5% of resected tissue 
T1c Tumor identified by needle biopsy (e.g., because of elevated PSA) 
T2 Tumor confined within prostateb  
T2a Tumor involves half of one lobe or less 
T2b Tumor involves more than one half of one lobe, not both lobes 
T2c Tumor involves both lobes 
Local Extension  
T3 Tumor extends through the prostate capsulec  
T3a Extracapsular extension (unilateral or bilateral) 
T3b Tumor invades seminal vesicles(s) 
T4 Tumor is fixed or invades adjacent structures other than seminal vesicles such as external sphincter, rectum, bladder, levator muscles, and/or pelvic wall. 
Metastatic Disease  
N1 Positive regional lymph nodes 
M1 Distant metastases 
 


aRevised from SB Edge et al (eds): AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 7th ed. New York, Springer, 2010.

bTumor found in one or both lobes by needle biopsy, but not palpable or reliably visible by imaging, is classified as T1c.

cInvasion into the prostatic apex or into (but not beyond) the prostatic capsule is classified not as T3 but as T2.

Abbreviation: PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
 
Figure 95-3

 
 
 
 
 
 
T stages of prostate cancer.(A) T1〞Clinically inapparent tumor, neither palpable nor visible by imaging; (B) T2〞Tumor confined within prostate; (C) T3〞Tumor extends through prostate capsule and may invade the seminal vesicles; (D) T4〞Tumor is fixed or invades adjacent structures. Eighty percent of patients present with local disease (T1 and T2), which is associated with a 5-year survival rate of 100%. An additional 12% of patients present with regional disease (T3 and T4 without metastases), which is also associated with a 100% survival rate after 5 years. Four percent of patients present with distant disease (T4 with metastases), which is associated with a 30% 5-year survival rate. (Three percent of patients are ungraded.) (Data from AJCC, http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/prost.html. Figure ? Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center Medical Graphics; used with permission.)
 
 

TRUS is the imaging technique most frequently used to assess the primary tumor, but its chief use is directing prostate biopsies, not staging. No TRUS finding consistently indicates cancer with certainty. CT lacks sensitivity and specificity to detect extraprostatic extension and is inferior to MRI in visualization of lymph nodes. In general, MRI performed with an endorectal coil is superior to CT to detect cancer in the prostate and to assess local disease extent. T1-weighted images pr
 

^^
Testicular Cancer: Introduction

Primary germ cell tumors (GCTs) of the testis arising by the malignant transformation of primordial germ cells constitute 95% of all testicular neoplasms. Infrequently, GCTs arise from an extragonadal site, including the mediastinum, retroperitoneum, and, very rarely, the pineal gland. This disease is notable for the young age of the afflicted patients, the totipotent capacity for differentiation of the tumor cells, and its curability; approximately 95% of newly diagnosed patients are cured. Experience in the management of GCTs leads to improved outcome.
 
Incidence and Epidemiology

In 2010, 8480 new cases of testicular GCT were diagnosed in the United States and 350 men died. The tumor occurs most frequently in men between the ages of 20 and 40 years. A testicular mass in a male 50 years should be regarded as a lymphoma until proved otherwise. GCT is at least four to five times more common in white than in African-American males, and a higher incidence has been observed in Scandinavia and New Zealand than in the United States.
 
Etiology and Genetics

Cryptorchidism is associated with a several-fold higher risk of GCT. Abdominal cryptorchid testes are at a higher risk than inguinal cryptorchid testes. Orchiopexy should be performed before puberty, if possible. Early orchiopexy reduces the risk of GCT and improves the ability to save the testis. An abdominal cryptorchid testis that cannot be brought into the scrotum should be removed. Approximately 2% of men with GCTs of one testis will develop a primary tumor in the other testis. Testicular feminization syndromes increase the risk of testicular GCT, and Klinefelter's syndrome is associated with mediastinal GCT.

An isochromosome of the short arm of chromosome 12 [i(12p)] is pathognomonic for GCT of all histologic types. Excess 12p copy number, either in the form of i(12p) or as increased 12p on aberrantly banded marker chromosomes, occurs in nearly all GCTs, but the gene(s) on 12p involved in the pathogenesis are not yet defined.
 
Clinical Presentation

A painless testicular mass is pathognomonic for a testicular malignancy. More commonly, patients present with testicular discomfort or swelling suggestive of epididymitis and/or orchitis. In this circumstance, a trial of antibiotics is reasonable. However, if symptoms persist or a residual abnormality remains, then testicular ultrasound examination is indicated.

Ultrasound of the testis is indicated whenever a testicular malignancy is considered and for persistent or painful testicular swelling. If a testicular mass is detected, a radical inguinal orchiectomy should be performed. Because the testis develops from the gonadal ridge, its blood supply and lymphatic drainage originate in the abdomen and descend with the testis into the scrotum. An inguinal approach is taken to avoid breaching anatomic barriers and permitting additional pathways of spread.

Back pain from retroperitoneal metastases is common and must be distinguished from musculoskeletal pain. Dyspnea from pulmonary metastases occurs infrequently. Patients with increased serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) may present with gynecomastia. A delay in diagnosis is associated with a more advanced stage and possibly worse survival.

The staging evaluation for GCT includes a determination of serum levels of  fetoprotein (AFP), hCG, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). After orchiectomy, a chest radiograph and a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis should be performed. A chest CT scan is required if pulmonary nodules or mediastinal or hilar disease is suspected. Stage I disease is limited to the testis, epididymis, or spermatic cord. Stage II disease is limited to retroperitoneal (regional) lymph nodes. Stage III disease is disease outside the retroperitoneum, involving supradiaphragmatic nodal sites or viscera. The staging may be "clinical"〞defined solely by physical examination, blood marker evaluation, and radiographs〞or "pathologic"〞defined by an operative procedure.

The regional draining lymph nodes for the testis are in the retroperitoneum, and the vascular supply originates from the great vessels (for the right testis) or the renal vessels (for the left testis). As a result, the lymph nodes that are involved first by a right testicular tumor are the interaortocaval lymph nodes just below the renal vessels. For a left testicular tumor, the first involved lymph nodes are lateral to the aorta (para-aortic) and below the left renal vessels. In both cases, further nodal spread is inferior, contralateral, and, less commonly, above the renal hilum. Lymphatic involvement can extend cephalad to the retrocrural, posterior mediastinal, and supraclavicular lymph nodes. Treatment is determined by tumor histology (seminoma versus nonseminoma) and clinical stage (Fig. 96每1).

Figure 96-1

 
 
 
Germ cell tumor staging and treatment.
 
 
 
Pathology

GCTs are divided into nonseminoma and seminoma subtypes. Nonseminomatous GCTs are most frequent in the third decade of life and can display the full spectrum of embryonic and adult cellular differentiation. This entity comprises four histologies: embryonal carcinoma, teratoma, choriocarcinoma, and endodermal sinus (yolk sac) tumor. Choriocarcinoma, consisting of both cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, represents malignant trophoblastic differentiation and is invariably associated with secretion of hCG. Endodermal sinus tumor is the malignant counterpart of the fetal yolk sac and is associated with secretion of AFP. Pure embryonal carcinoma may secrete AFP or hCG, or both; this pattern is biochemical evidence of differentiation. Teratoma is composed of somatic cell types derived from two or more germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, or endoderm). Each of these histologies may be present alone or in combination with others. Nonseminomatous GCTs tend to metastasize early to sites such as the retroperitoneal lymph nodes and lung parenchyma. One-third of patients present with disease limited to the testis (stage I), one-third with retroperitoneal metastases (stage II), and one-third with more extensive supradiaphragmatic nodal or visceral metastases (stage III).

Seminoma represents approximately 50% of all GCTs, has a median age in the fourth decade, and generally follows a more indolent clinical course. Most patients (70%) present with stage I disease, approximately 20% with stage II disease, and 10% with stage III disease; lung or other visceral metastases are rare. When a tumor contains both seminoma and nonseminoma components, patient management is directed by the more aggressive nonseminoma component.
 
Tumor Markers

Careful monitoring of the serum tumor markers AFP and hCG is essential in the management of patients with GCT, as these markers are important for diagnosis, as prognostic indicators, in monitoring treatment response, and in the detection of early relapse. Approximately 70% of patients presenting with disseminated nonseminomatous GCT have increased serum concentrations of AFP and/or hCG. Although hCG concentrations may be increased in patients with either nonseminoma or seminoma histology, the AFP concentration is increased only in patients with nonseminoma. The presence of an increased AFP level in a patient whose tumor shows only seminoma indicates that an occult nonseminomatous component exists, and the patient should be treated for nonseminomatous GCT. LDH levels are not as specific as AFP or hCG but are increased in 50每60% patients with metastatic nonseminoma and in up to 80% of patients with advanced seminoma.

AFP, hCG, and LDH levels should be determined before and after orchiectomy. Increased serum AFP and hCG concentrations decay according to first-order kinetics; the half-life is 24每36 h for hCG and 5每7 days for AFP. AFP and hCG should be assayed serially during and after treatment. The reappearance of hCG and/or AFP or the failure of these markers to decline according to the predicted half-life is an indicator of persistent or recurrent tumor.

Treatment: Testicular Cancer

Stage I Nonseminoma

If, after an orchiectomy (for clinical stage I disease), radiographs and physical examination show no evidence of disease and serum AFP and hCG concentrations are either normal or declining to normal according to the known half-life, patients may be managed by either a nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) or surveillance. The retroperitoneal lymph nodes are involved by GCT (pathologic stage II) in 20每50% of these patients. The choice of surveillance or RPLND is based on the pathology of the primary tumor. If the primary tumor shows no evidence for lymphatic or vascular invasion and is limited to the testis (T1), then either option is reasonable. If lymphatic or vascular invasion is present or the tumor extends into the tunica, spermatic cord, or scrotum (T2 through T4), then surveillance should not be offered. Either approach should cure >95% of patients.

RPLND is the standard operation for removal of the regional lymph nodes of the testis (retroperitoneal nodes). The operation removes the lymph nodes draining the primary site and the nodal groups adjacent to the primary landing zone. The standard (modified bilateral) RPLND removes all node-bearing tissue down to the bifurcation of the great vessels, including the ipsilateral iliac nodes. The major long-term effect of this operation is retrograde ejaculation and infertility. Nerve-sparing RPLND, usually accomplished by identification and dissection of individual nerve fibers, may avoid injury to the sympathetic nerves responsible for ejaculation. Normal ejaculation is preserved in 90% of patients. Patients with pathologic stage I disease are observed, and only the <10% who relapse require additional therapy. If retroperitoneal nodes are found to be involved at RPLND, then a decision regarding adjuvant chemotherapy is made on the basis of the extent of retroperitoneal disease (see below).

Surveillance is an option in the management of clinical stage I disease when no vascular/lymphatic invasion is found (T1). Only 20每30% of patients have pathologic stage II disease, implying that most RPLNDs in this situation are not therapeutic. Surveillance and RPLND lead to equivalent long-term survival rates. Patient compliance is essential if surveillance is to be successful. Patients must be carefully followed with periodic chest radiography, physical examination, CT scan of the abdomen, and serum tumor marker determinations. The median time to relapse is approximately 7 months, and late relapses (>2 years) are rare. The 70每80% of patients who do not relapse require no intervention after orchiectomy; treatment is reserved for those who do relapse. When the primary tumor is classified as T2 through T4 (extension beyond testis and epididymis or lymphatic/vascular invasion is identified), nerve-sparing RPLND is preferred. Approximately 50% of these patients have pathologic stage II disease and are destined to relapse without the RPLND.

Stage II Nonseminoma

Patients with limited, ipsilateral retroperitoneal adenopathy (nodes usually 3 cm in largest diameter) and normal levels of AFP and hCG generally undergo a modified bilateral RPLND as primary management. Increased levels of either AFP or hCG or both imply metastatic disease outside the retroperitoneum; chemotherapy is used in this setting. The local recurrence rate after a properly performed RPLND is very low. Depending on the extent of disease, the postoperative management options include either surveillance or two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. Surveillance is the preferred approach for patients with resected "low-volume" metastases (tumor nodes 2 cm in diameter and <6 nodes involved) because the probability of relapse is one-third or less. For those who relapse, risk-directed chemotherapy is indicated (see below). Because relapse occurs in 50% of patients with "high-volume" metastases (>6 nodes involved, or any involved node >2 cm in largest diameter, or extranodal tumor extension), two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered, as it results in a cure in 98% of patients. Regimens consisting of etoposide (100 mg/m2 daily on days 1每5) plus cisplatin (20 mg/m2 daily on days 1每5) with or without bleomycin (30 units per day on days 2, 9, and 16) given at 3-week intervals are effective and well tolerated.

Stages I and II Seminoma

Inguinal orchiectomy followed by retroperitoneal radiation therapy or surveillance cures nearly 100% of patients with stage I seminoma. Historically, radiation was the mainstay of treatment, But the reported association between radiation and secondary malignancies and the absence of a survival advantage of radiation over surveillance has led many to favor surveillance for patients committed to long-term follow-up. Studies have shown that approximately 15% of patients relapse, and rete testis involvement and size >4 cm have been associated with a higher relapse rate. The relapse is usually treated with chemotherapy. Long-term followup is essential, because approximately 30% of relapses occur after 2 years and 5% after 5 years. A single dose of carboplatin has also been investigated as an alternative to radiation therapy; the outcome was similar, but long-term safety data are lacking, and the retroperitoneum remained the most frequent site of relapse.

Nonbulky retroperitoneal disease (stage IIA and most IIB) is treated with retroperitoneal radiation therapy. Approximately 90% of patients achieve relapse-free survival with retroperitoneal masses <5 cm in diameter. Because at least one-third of patients with bulkier disease relapse, initial chemotherapy is preferred for all stage IIC and some stage IIB with bulkier or multifocal disease.

Chemotherapy for Advanced Gct

Regardless of histology, patients with stage IIC and stage III GCT are treated with chemotherapy. Combination chemotherapy programs based on cisplatin at doses of 100 mg/m2 plus etoposide at doses of 500 mg/m2 per cycle cure 70每80% of such patients, with or without bleomycin, depending on risk stratification (see below). A complete response (the complete disappearance of all clinical evidence of tumor on physical examination and radiography plus normal serum levels of AFP and hCG for 1 month) occurs after chemotherapy alone in 60% of patients, and another 10每20% become disease-free with surgical resection of residual masses containing viable GCT. Lower doses of cisplatin result in inferior survival rates.

The toxicity of four cycles of the bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) regimen is substantial. Nausea, vomiting, and hair loss occur in most patients, although nausea and vomiting have been markedly ameliorated by modern antiemetic regimens. Myelosuppression is frequent, and symptomatic bleomycin pulmonary toxicity occurs in 5% of patients. Treatment-induced mortality due to neutropenia with septicemia or bleomycin-induced pulmonary failure occurs in 1每3% of patients. Dose reductions for myelosuppression are rarely indicated. Long-term permanent toxicities include nephrotoxicity (reduced glomerular filtration and persistent magnesium wasting), ototoxicity, and peripheral neuropathy. When bleomycin is administered by weekly bolus injection, Raynaud's phenomenon appears in 5每10% of patients. Other evidence of small blood vessel damage is seen less often, including transient ischemic attacks and myocardial infarction.

Risk-Directed Chemotherapy

Because not all patients are cured and treatment may cause significant toxicities, patients are stratified into "good-risk" and "poor-risk" groups according to pretreatment clinical features. For good-risk patients, the goal is to achieve maximum efficacy with minimal toxicity. For poor-risk patients, the goal is to identify more effective therapy with tolerable toxicity.

The International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group developed criteria to assign patients to three risk groups (good, intermediate, poor) (Table 96每1). The marker cut offs have been incorporated into the revised TNM (primary tumor, regional nodes, metastasis) staging of GCT. Hence, TNM stage groupings are now based on both anatomy (site and extent of disease) and biology (marker status and histology). Seminoma is either good or intermediate risk, based on the absence or presence of nonpulmonary visceral metastases. No poor-risk category exists for seminoma. Marker levels play no role in defining risk for seminoma. Nonseminomas have good-, intermediate-, and poor-risk categories based on the site of the primary tumor, the presence or absence of nonpulmonary visceral metastases, and marker levels.

Table 96每1 IGCCCG Risk Classification for Advanced Germ Cell Tumors

 
 
Risk Nonseminoma Seminoma 
Good Gonadal or retroperitoneal primary site Any primary site 
  Absent nonpulmonary visceral metastases

AFP <1000 ng/mL

Beta-hCG <5000 mIU/mL

LDH <1.5 x upper limit or normal (ULN)
 Absent nonpulmonary visceral metastases

Any LDH, hCG
 
Intermediate Gonadal or retroperitoneal primary site Any primary site 
  Absent nonpulmonary visceral metastases

AFP 1000每10,000 ng/mL

Beta-hCG 5000每50,000 mIU/mL

LDH 1.5每10 x ULN
 Presence of nonpulmonary visceral metastases

Any LDH, hCG
 
Poor Mediastinal primary site

Presence of nonpulmonary visceral metastases

AFP 10,000 ng/mL

Beta-hCG

>50,000 mIU/mL

LDH > 10 x ULN
 No patients classified as poor prognosis 
 


Abbreviations: AFP,  fetoprotein; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; IGCCCG, International Germ Cell Consensus Classification Group; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase. Source: From International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group.
 

For 90% of patients with good-risk GCTs, four cycles of etoposide plus cisplatin (EP) or three cycles of BEP produce durable complete responses, with minimal acute and chronic toxicity. Pulmonary toxicity is absent when bleomycin is not used and is rare when therapy is limited to 9 weeks; myelosuppression with neutropenic fever is less frequent; and the treatment mortality rate is negligible. Approximately 75% of intermediate-risk patients and 45% of poor-risk patients achieve durable complete remission with four cycles of BEP, and no regimen has proved superior. More effective therapy is needed.

Postchemotherapy Surgery

Resection of residual metastases after the completion of chemotherapy is an integral part of therapy. If the initial histology is nonseminoma and the marker values have normalized, all sites of residual disease should be resected. In general, residual retroperitoneal disease requires a modified bilateral RPLND. Thoracotomy (unilateral or bilateral) and neck dissection are less frequently required to remove residual mediastinal, pulmonary parenchymal, or cervical nodal disease. Viable tumor (seminoma, embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor, or choriocarcinoma) will be present in 15%, mature teratoma in 40%, and necrotic debris and fibrosis in 45% of resected specimens. The frequency of teratoma or viable disease is highest in residual mediastinal tumors. If necrotic debris or mature teratoma is present, no further chemotherapy is necessary. If viable tumor is present but is completely excised, two additional cycles of chemotherapy are given.

If the initial histology is pure seminoma, mature teratoma is rarely present, and the most frequent finding is necrotic debris. For residual retroperitoneal disease, a complete RPLND is technically difficult owing to extensive postchemotherapy fibrosis. Observation is recommended when no radiographic abnormality exists on CT scan. Positive findings on a positron emission tomography (PET) scan correlate with viable seminoma in residua, and mandate surgical excision or biopsy.

Salvage Chemotherapy

Of patients with advanced GCT, 20每30% fail to achieve a durable complete response to first-line chemotherapy. A combination of vinblastine, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (VeIP) will cure approximately 25% of patients as a second-line therapy. Substitution of paclitaxel for vinblastine may be more effective in this setting. Patients are more likely to achieve a durable complete response if they had a testicular primary tumor and relapsed from a prior complete remission to first-line cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. In contrast, if the patient failed to achieve a complete response or has a primary mediastinal nonseminoma, then standard-dose salvage therapy is rarely beneficial. Treatment options for such patients include dose-intensive treatment, experimental therapies, and surgical resection.

Chemotherapy consisting of dose-intensive, high-dose carboplatin (1500 mg/m2) plus etoposide (1200 mg/m2), with or without cyclophosphamide, with peripheral blood stem cell support, induces a complete response in 25每40% of patients who have progressed after ifosfamide-containing salvage chemotherapy. Approximately one-half of the complete responses will be durable. High-dose therapy is standard of care for this patient population and has been suggested as treatment of choice for all patients with relapsed or refractory disease. Paclitaxel is also active in previously treated patients and shows promise in high-dose combination programs. Cure is still possible in some relapsed patients.
 
Extragonadal Gct and Midline Carcinoma of Uncertain Histogenesis

The prognosis and management of patients with extragonadal GCT depends on the tumor histology and site of origin. All patients with a diagnosis of extragonadal GCT should have a testicular ultrasound examination. Nearly all patients with retroperitoneal or mediastinal seminoma achieve a durable complete response to BEP or EP. The clinical features of patients with primary retroperitoneal nonseminoma GCT are similar to those of patients with a primary of testis origin, and careful evaluation will find evidence of a primary testicular GCT in about two-thirds of cases. In contrast, a primary mediastinal nonseminomatous GCT is associated with a poor prognosis; one-third of patients are cured with standard therapy (four cycles of BEP). Patients with newly diagnosed mediastinal nonseminoma are considered to have poor-risk disease and should be considered for clinical trials testing regimens of possibly greater efficacy. In addition, mediastinal nonseminoma is associated with hematologic disorders, including acute myelogenous leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, and essential thrombocytosis unrelated to previous chemotherapy. These hematologic disorders are very refractory to treatment. Nonseminoma of any primary site may change into other malignant histologies such as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma or adenocarcinoma. This is called malignant transformation. i(12p) has been identified in the transformed cell type, indicating GCT clonal origin.

A group of patients with poorly differentiated tumors of unknown histogenesis, midline in distribution, and not associated with secretion of AFP or hCG has been described; a few (10每20%) are cured by standard cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. i(12p) is present in 25% of such tumors (the fraction that are cisplatin-responsive), confirming their origin from primitive germ cells. This finding is also predictive of the response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy and resulting long-term survival. These tumors are heterogeneous; neuroepithelial tumors and lymphoma may also present in this fashion.
 
Fertility

Infertility is an important consequence of the treatment of GCTs. Preexisting infertility or impaired fertility is often present. Azoospermia and/or oligospermia are present at diagnosis in at least 50% of patients with testicular GCTs. Ejaculatory dysfunction is associated with RPLND, and germ cell damage may result from cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. Nerve-sparing techniques to preserve the retroperitoneal sympathetic nerves have made retrograde ejaculation less likely in the subgroups of patients who are candidates for this operation. Spermatogenesis does recur in some patients after chemotherapy. However, because of the significant risk of impaired reproductive capacity, semen analysis and cryopreservation of sperm in a sperm bank should be recommended to all patients before treatment.
 
Further Readings

Bosl Gj et al: Cancer of the testis, in Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology, 7th ed, VT DeVita et al (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008, pp 1463每1485 

 
Ehrlich Y et al: Serum tumor markers in testicular cancer. Urol Oncol 3 Sep 2010 [Epub ahead of print] 

 
Einhorn et al: High-dose chemotherapy and stem-cell rescue for metastatic germ-cell tumors. N Engl J Med 357:340, 2007[PMID: 17652649] 

 
Feldman Dr et al: Medical treatment of advanced testicular cancer. JAMA 299:672, 2008[PMID: 18270356] 

 
International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group: International Germ Cell Consensus Classification: A prognostic factor-based staging system for metastatic germ cell cancers. J Clin Oncol 15:594, 1997 

 
Sonpaude G et al: Management of recurrent testicular germ cell tumors. Oncologist 12:51, 2007 

 
Travis LB et al: Testicular cancer survivorship: Research strategies and recommendations. J Natl Cancer Inst 102:1114, 2010[PMID: 20585105] 
 
 

^^
Ovarian Cancer

Incidence and Pathology

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal malignancy of gynecologic origin in the United States and other countries that have organized and effective cervical cancer screening programs. In 2010, 21,880 cases of ovarian cancer with 13,850 deaths are expected in the United States. The ovary is a complex and dynamic organ and, between the ages of approximately 11 and 50 years, is responsible for follicle maturation associated with egg maturation, ovulation, and cyclical sex steroid hormone production. These complex and linked biologic functions are coordinated through a variety of cells within the ovary, each of which possesses neoplastic potential. By far the most common and most lethal of the ovarian neoplasms arise from the ovarian epithelium found both on the surface of the ovary and in subsurface locations, known as cortical inclusion cysts, believed to be entrapped epithelium from the healing associated with prior follicle rupture during ovulation. The ovarian epithelium in good health appears as a simple epithelium, but with neoplastic transformation, it undergoes metaplastic changes into what is termed m邦llerian epithelium. The m邦llerian epithelium has a variety of subtypes each of which provide a specific phenotype of the tumor and in some cases different clinical presentations. Epithelial tumors are the most common ovarian neoplasm; they may be benign (50%), malignant (33%), or of borderline malignancy (16%). Age influences risk of malignancy; tumors in younger women are more likely benign. The most common of the ovarian epithelial malignancies are serous tumors (50%); tumors of mucinous (25%), endometrioid (15%), clear cell (5%), and transitional cell histology or Brenner tumor (1%) represent smaller proportions of epithelial ovarian tumors. In contrast, stromal tumors arise from the steroid hormone-producing cells and likewise have different phenotypes and clinical presentations largely dependent on the type and quantity of hormone production. Tumors arising in the germ cell are most similar in biology and behavior to testicular tumors in males (Chap. 96).

Tumors may also metastasize to the ovary from breast, colon, gastric, and pancreatic primaries. Bilateral ovarian masses from metastatic mucin-secreting gastrointestinal cancers are termed Krukenberg tumors.

Ovarian Cancer of Epithelial Origin

Epidemiology

A female has approximately a 1 in 72 lifetime risk (1.6%) of developing ovarian cancer, with the majority of affected women developing epithelial tumors. Epithelial tumors of the ovary have a peak incidence in women in their sixties, although age at presentation can range across the extremes of adult life, with cases being reported in women in their twenties to nineties. Known risk factors that increase the chance of subsequent ovarian cancer include epidemiologic, environmental, and genetic factors such as nulliparity, use of talc agents applied to the perineum, obesity, and probably hormone replacement therapy. Protective factors include the use of oral contraceptives, multiparity, and breast-feeding. These protective factors are thought to work through suppression of ovulation and perhaps reduction of ovarian inflammation and damage associated with the repair of the ovarian cortex associated with ovulation, and perhaps suppression of gonadotropins. Other protective factors, such as fallopian tube ligation are thought to protect the ovarian epithelium (or perhaps the distal fallopian tube fimbriae) from carcinogens that migrate from the vagina to the tubes and ovarian surface epithelium (see below).

Genetic Risk Factors

A variety of genetic syndromes substantially increases a woman's risk of developing ovarian cancer. Approximately 10% of women with ovarian cancer have a somatic mutation in one of two DNA repair genes: BRCA1 (chromosome 17q12-21) or BRCA2 (chromosome 13q12-13). Individuals inheriting a single copy of a mutant allele have a very high incidence of breast and ovarian cancer. Most of these women have a family history that is notable for multiple cases of breast and/or ovarian cancer, although inheritance through male members of the family can camouflage this genotype through several generations. The most common malignancy in these women is breast carcinoma, although women harboring germ-line BRCA1 mutations have a marked increased risk of developing ovarian malignancies in their forties and fifties with a 30每50% lifetime risk of developing ovarian cancer. Women harboring a mutation in BRCA2 have a lower penetrance of ovarian cancer with perhaps a 20每40% chance of developing this malignancy, with onset typically in their fifties or sixties. Women with a BRCA2 mutation also are at slightly increased risk of pancreatic cancer. Screening studies in this select population suggest that current screening techniques, including serial evaluation of the CA-125 tumor marker and ultrasound, are insufficient at detecting early-stage and curable disease, so women with these germ-line mutations are advised to undergo prophylactic removal of ovaries and fallopian tubes typically after completing childbearing and ideally before ages 35每40. Early prophylactic oophorectomy also protects these women from subsequent breast cancer with a reduction of breast cancer risk of approximately 50%.

Ovarian cancer is also one form of cancer (along with colorectal and endometrial cancer) that may develop in women with Lynch syndrome, type II, caused by mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes (MSH2, MLH1, MLH6, PMS1, PMS2). Ovarian cancer may appear in women younger than 50 years of age in this syndrome.

Presentation

Neoplasms of the ovary tend to be painless unless they undergo torsion. Symptoms are therefore typically related to compression of local organs or due to symptoms from metastatic disease. Women with tumors localized to the ovary do have an increased incidence of symptoms including pelvic discomfort, bloating, and perhaps changes in a woman's typical urinary or bowel pattern. Unfortunately, these symptoms are frequently dismissed by either the woman or her health care team. It is believed that high-grade tumors metastasize early in the neoplastic process. Unlike other epithelial malignancies, these tumors tend to exfoliate throughout the peritoneal cavity and thus present with symptoms associated with disseminated intraperitoneal tumors. The most common symptoms at presentation include a multimonth period of progressive complaints that typically include some combination of heartburn, nausea, early satiety, indigestion, constipation, and abdominal pain. Signs include the rapid increase in abdominal girth due to the accumulation of ascites that typically alerts the patient and her physician that the concurrent gastrointestinal symptoms are likely associated with serious pathology. Radiologic evaluation typically demonstrates a complex adnexal mass and ascites. Laboratory evaluation demonstrates a markedly elevated CA-125, a shed mucin (Muc 16) associated with, but not specific for, ovarian cancer. Hematogenous and lymphatic spread are seen but are not the typical presentation. Ovarian cancers are divided into four stages, with stage I tumors confined to the ovary, stage II malignancies confined to the pelvis, and stage III confined to the peritoneal cavity (Table 97每1). These three stages are subdivided, with the most common presentation, stage IIIc, defined as tumors with bulky intraperitoneal disease. About 70% of women present with stage IIIc disease. Stage IV disease includes women with parenchymal metastases (liver, lung, spleen) or, alternatively, abdominal wall or pleural disease. The 30% not presenting with stage IIIc disease are roughly evenly distributed among the other stages.

Table 97每1 Staging and Survival in Gynecologic Malignancies

 
 
Stage Ovarian 5-Year Survival, % Endometrial 5-Year Survival, % Cervix 5-Year Survival, % 
0 〞   〞   Carcinoma in situ 100 
I Confined to ovary 90每95 Confined to corpus 89 Confined to uterus 85 
II Confined to pelvis 70每80 Involves corpus and cervix 73 Invades beyond uterus but not to pelvic wall 65 
III Intraabdominal spread 20每50 Extends outside the uterus but not outside the true pelvis 52 Extends to pelvic wall and/or lower third of vagina, or hydronephrosis 35 
IV Spread outside abdomen 1每5 Extends outside the true pelvis or involves the bladder or rectum 17 Invades mucosa of bladder or rectum or extends beyond the true pelvis 7 
 

 

Screening

Ovarian cancer is the fifth most lethal malignancy in women in the United States, curable in early stages, and seldom curable in advanced stages; hence, screening is of considerable interest. Furthermore the ovary is well visualized with a variety of imaging techniques, most notably transvaginal ultrasound. Early-stage tumors often produce proteins that can be measured in the blood such as CA-125 and HE-4. Nevertheless, the incidence of ovarian cancer in the middle-aged female population is low, with only approximately 1 in 2000 women between the ages of 50 and 60 carrying an asymptomatic and undetected tumor. Thus effective screening techniques must be sensitive but, more importantly, highly specific so to minimize the number of false positives. Even a screening test with 98% specificity and 50% sensitivity would have a positive predictive value of only about 1%. Despite these formidable barriers, ongoing studies are evaluating the utility of various screening strategies. However, screening for ovarian cancer is currently not recommended outside of a clinical trial.

Treatment: Ovarian Cancer

In women presenting with a localized ovarian mass, the principal diagnostic and therapeutic maneuver is to determine if the tumor is benign or malignant and, in the event that the tumor is malignant, whether the tumor arises in the ovary or is a site of metastatic disease. Metastatic disease to the ovary can be seen from primary tumors of the colon, appendix, stomach (Krukenberg tumors), and breast. Typically women undergo a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and if pathology reveals a primary ovarian malignancy, then the procedure is followed by a hysterectomy, removal of the remaining tube and ovary, omentectomy, and pelvic node sampling along with some random biopsies of the peritoneal cavity. This extensive surgical procedure is performed because approximately 30% of tumors that by visual inspection appear to be confined to the ovary have already disseminated to the peritoneal cavity and/or surrounding lymph nodes.

If there is evidence of bulky intraabdominal disease, a comprehensive attempt at maximal tumor cytoreduction is attempted even if it involves partial bowel resection, splenectomy, and in certain cases more extensive upper abdominal surgery. The ability to debulk metastatic ovarian cancer to minimal visible disease is associated with an improved prognosis as compared to women left with visible disease. Patients without gross residual disease after resection have a median survival of 39 months, compared to 17 months for those left with macroscopic tumor. Once tumors have been surgically debulked, women receive therapy with a platinum agent typically with a taxane. Debate continues as to whether this therapy should be delivered intravenously or alternatively whether some of the therapy should be delivered directly into the peritoneal cavity via a catheter. Three randomized studies have demonstrated improved survival with intraperitoneal therapy, but this approach is still not widely accepted due to technical challenges associated with this delivery route and increased toxicity. In women who present with bulky disease, an alternative approach is to treat with platinum plus a taxane for several cycles (neoadjuvant therapy). Subsequent surgical procedures are more effective at leaving the patient without gross residual tumor, and survival is comparable to surgery followed by chemotherapy.

With optimal debulking surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy [usually carboplatin dosed to an area under the curve (AUC) of 7.5 plus paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 by 3-h infusion in monthly cycles], 70% of women who present with advanced-stage tumors respond, and 40每50% experience a complete remission with normalization of their CA-125, CT scans, and physical examination. Unfortunately, only half the complete responders remain in remission. Disease recurs within 1 to 4 years from the completion of their primary therapy in half the complete responders. CA-125 levels often increase as a first sign of relapse; however, data are not clear that early intervention influences survival. Recurrent disease is effectively managed, but not cured, with a variety of chemotherapeutic agents. Eventually all of these women develop chemotherapy-refractory disease at which point refractory ascites, poor bowel motility, and obstruction or pseudoobstruction due to a tumor-infiltrated aperistaltic bowel are common. Limited surgery to relieve intestinal obstruction, localized radiation therapy to relieve pressure or pain from masses, or palliative chemotherapy may be helpful. Agents with >15% response rates include gemcitabine, topotecan, liposomal doxorubicin, and bevacizumab. Approximately 20% of ovarian cancers are HER2/neu positive, and trastuzumab may induce responses in this subset.

Five-year survival correlates with the stage of disease: stage I, 90每95%; stage II, 70每80%; stage III, 20每50%; stage IV, 1每5% (Table 97每1). Prognosis is also influenced by histologic grade: 5-year survival is 88% for well-differentiated tumors, 58% for moderately differentiated tumors, and 27% for poorly differentiated tumors. Histologic type has less influence on outcome. Patients with tumors of low malignant potential are managed by surgery; chemotherapy and radiation therapy do not improve survival.

Ovarian Sex Cord and Stromal Tumors

Epidemiology, Presentation, and Predisposing Syndromes

Approximately 7% of ovarian neoplasms are stromal or sex cord tumors, with approximately 1800 cases expected each year in the United States. Ovarian stromal tumors or sex cord tumors are most common in women in their fifties or sixties, but tumors can present in the extremes of age, including the pediatric population. These tumors arise from the mesenchymal components of the ovary, including steroid-producing cells as well as fibroblasts. Essentially all of these tumors are of low malignant potential and present as unilateral solid masses. Three clinical presentations are common: the detection of an abdominal mass abdominal pain due to ovarian torsion, intratumoral hemorrhage, or rupture or signs and symptoms due to hormonal production by these tumors.

The most common hormone-producing tumors include thecomas, granulosa cell tumor, or juvenile granulosa tumors in children. These estrogen-producing tumors often present with breast tenderness as well as isosexual precocious pseudopuberty in children, menometrorrhagia, oligomenorrhea, or amenorrhea in premenopausal women, or alternatively as postmenopausal bleeding in older women. In some women, estrogen-associated secondary malignancies, such as endometrial or breast cancer may present as synchronous malignancies. Alternatively, endometrial cancer may serve as the presenting malignancy with evaluation subsequently identifying a unilateral solid ovarian neoplasm that proves to be an occult granulosa cell tumor. Sertoli-Leydig tumors often present with hirsutism, virilization, and occasionally Cushing's syndrome due to increased production of testosterone, androstenedione, or other 17-ketosteroids. Hormonally inert tumors include fibroma that presents as a solitary mass often in association with ascites and occasionally hydrothorax also known as Meigs' syndrome. A subset of these tumors present in individuals with a variety of inherited disorders that predispose them to mesenchymal neoplasia. Associations include juvenile granulosa cell tumors and perhaps Sertoli-Leydig tumors with Ollier's disease (multiple enchondromatosis) or Maffucci's syndrome, ovarian sex cord tumors with annular tubules with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and fibromas with Gorlin disease.

Treatment: Sex Cord Tumors

The mainstay of treatment for sex cord tumors is surgical resection. Most women present with tumors confined to the ovary. For the small subset of women who present with metastatic disease or develop evidence of tumor recurrence after primary resection, survival is still typically long, often in excess of a decade. Because these tumors are slow growing and relatively refractory to chemotherapy, women with metastatic disease are often debulked as disease is usually peritoneal-based (as with epithelial ovarian cancer). Definitive data that surgical debulking of metastatic or recurrent disease prolongs survival are lacking, but ample data document women who have survived years or in some cases decades after resection of recurrent disease. In addition, large peritoneal-based metastases also have a proclivity for hemorrhage, sometimes with catastrophic complications. Chemotherapy is occasionally effective, and women tend to receive regimens designed to treat epithelial or germ cell tumors. These tumors often produce high levels of m邦llerian inhibiting substance (MIS), inhibin, and in the case of Sertoli-Leydig tumors  fetoprotein (AFP). These proteins are detectable in serum and can be used as tumor markers to monitor women for recurrent disease as the increase and decrease of these proteins in the serum tend to reflect the changing bulk of systemic tumor.

Germ Cell Tumors of the Ovary

Germ cell tumors, like their counterparts in the testis, are cancers of germ cells. These totipotent cells contain the programming for differentiation to essentially all tissue types, and hence the germ cell tumors include a histologic menagerie of bizarre tumors, including benign teratomas and a variety of malignant tumors, such as immature teratomas, dysgerminomas, yolk sac malignancies, and choriocarcinomas. Benign teratoma (or dermoid cyst) is the most common germ cell neoplasm of the ovary and often presents in young woman. These tumors include a complex mixture of differentiated tissue including tissues from all three germ layers. In older women these differentiated tumors can develop malignant transformation, most commonly squamous cell carcinomas. Malignant germ cell tumors include dysgerminomas, yolk sac tumors, immature teratomas, as well as embryonal and choriocarcinomas. There are no known genetic abnormalities that unify these tumors. A subset of dysgerminomas harbor mutations in c-Kit oncogenes [as seen in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST)], whereas a subset of germ cell tumors have isochromosome 12 abnormalities as seen in testicular malignancies. In addition, a subset of dysgerminomas is associated with dysgenetic ovaries. Identification of a dysgerminoma arising in genotypic XY gonads is important in that it highlights the need to identify and remove the contralateral gonad due to risk of gonadoblastoma.

Presentation

Germ cell tumors can present at all ages, but the peak age of presentation tends to be in females in their late teens or early twenties. Typically these tumors will become large ovarian masses, which eventually present as palpable low abdominal or pelvic masses. Like sex cord tumors, torsion or hemorrhage may present urgently or emergently as acute abdominal pain. Some of these tumors produce elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) that can lead to isosexual precocious puberty when tumors present in younger girls. Unlike epithelial ovarian cancer, these tumors have a higher proclivity for nodal or hematogenous metastases. As with testicular tumors some of these tumors tend to produce AFP (yolk sac tumors) or hCG (embryonal and choriocarcinomas as well as some dysgerminomas) that are reliable tumor markers.

Treatment: Germ Cell Tumors

Germ cell tumors typically present in women who are still of childbearing age, and because bilateral tumors are uncommon (except in dysgerminoma, 10每15%), the typical treatment is unilateral oophorectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy. Because nodal metastases to pelvic and para-aortic nodes are common and may affect treatment choices, these nodes should be carefully inspected, and if enlarged, should be resected if possible. Women with malignant germ cell tumors typically receive bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin (BEP) chemotherapy. In the majority of women, even those with advanced-stage disease, cure is expected. Close follow-up without adjuvant therapy of women with stage I tumors is reasonable if there is high confidence that the patient and health care team are committed to compulsive and careful follow-up, as chemotherapy at the time of tumor recurrence is likely to be curative.

Dysgerminoma is the ovarian counterpart of testicular seminoma. The 5-year disease-free survival is 100% in early-stage patients and 61% in stage III disease. Although the tumor is highly radiation-sensitive, radiation produces infertility in many patients. BEP chemotherapy is as effective or more so without causing infertility. The use of BEP following incomplete resection is associated with 95%, 2-year disease-free survival. This chemotherapy is now the treatment of choice for dysgerminoma.
 
Fallopian Tube Cancer

Transport of the egg to the uterus occurs via transit through the fallopian tube, with the distal ends of these tubes composed of fimbriae that drape about the ovarian surface and capture the egg as it erupts from the ovarian cortex. Fallopian tube malignancies typically have the same histologic pattern as ovarian malignancies, with the most common epithelial malignancy being of serous histology. Previous teaching was that these malignancies were rare, but more careful histologic examination suggests that many "ovarian malignancies" might actually arise in the distal fimbria of the fallopian tube. Data supporting this theory are strongest in the population of women who carry BRCA1 or BRCA2 somatic mutations. These women often present with adnexal masses, and like ovarian cancer, these tumors spread relatively early throughout the peritoneal cavity and respond to platinum and taxane therapy and have a natural history that is essentially identical to ovarian cancer (Table 97每1).
 
Cervical Cancer

Global Considerations

Cervical cancer is the second most common and most lethal malignancy in women worldwide likely due to the widespread infection with high-risk strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) and limited utilization or access to Pap smear screening in many nations throughout the world. Nearly 500,000 cases of cervical cancer are expected worldwide with approximately 240,000 deaths annually. Cancer incidence is particularly high in women residing in central and South America, the Caribbean, and southern and eastern Africa. Mortality rate is disproportionately high in Africa. In the United States, 12,200 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer and 4210 women died. Whereas efforts in developed countries have looked at high-technology screening techniques for HPV involving polymerase chain reaction and other molecular technologies, there is an urgent need for high-throughput low-technology strategies to identify and treat women bearing high-risk but treatable cervical dysplasia. The development of effective vaccines for high-risk HPV types makes it imperative to determine economical, socially acceptable, and logistically feasible strategies to deliver and distribute this vaccine to girls and perhaps boys before their engagement in sexual activity.

HPV Infection and Preventive Vaccination

HPV is the primary neoplastic-initiating event in the vast majority of women with invasive cervical cancer. This double-strand DNA virus infects epithelium near the transformation zone of the cervix. More than 60 types of HPV are known, with approximately 20 types having the ability to generate high-grade dysplasia and malignancy. HPV16 and 18 are the types most frequently associated with high-grade dysplasia and targeted by both FDA-approved vaccines. The large majority of sexually active adults are exposed to HPV, and most women clear the infection without specific intervention. The 8-kilobase HPV genome encodes seven early genes, most notably E6 and E7, which can bind to RB and p53, respectively. High-risk types of HPV encode E6 and E7 molecules that are particularly effective at inhibiting the normal cell cycle checkpoint functions of these regulatory proteins, leading to immortalization but not full transformation of cervical epithelium. A minority of woman will fail to clear the infection with subsequent HPV integration into the host genome. Over the course of as short as months but more typically years, some of these women develop high-grade dysplasia. The time from dysplasia to carcinoma is likely years to more than a decade and almost certainly requires the acquisition of other poorly defined genetic mutations within the infected and immortalized epithelium.

Risk factors include a high number of sexual partners, age of first intercourse, and history of venereal disease. Smoking is a cofactor; heavy smokers have a higher risk of dysplasia with HPV infection. HIV infection, especially when associated with low CD4+ T cell counts, is associated with a higher rate of high-grade dysplasia and likely a shorter latency period between infection and invasive disease.

Currently approved vaccines include the recombinant proteins to the late proteins, L1 and L2 of HPV-16 and -18. Vaccination of women before the initiation of sexual activity dramatically reduces the rate of HPV-16 and -18 infection and subsequent dysplasia. There is also partial protection against other HPV types, although vaccinated women are still at risk for HPV infection and still require standard Pap smear screening. Although no randomized trial data demonstrate the utility of Pap smears, the dramatic drop in cervical cancer incidence and death in developed countries employing wide-scale screening provides strong evidence for its effectiveness. The incorporation of HPV testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or other molecular techniques increases the sensitivity of detecting cervical pathology but at the cost of lower sensitivity in that it identifies many women with transient infections who require no specific medical intervention.

Clinical Presentations

The majority of cervical malignancies are squamous cell carcinomas associated with HPV. Adenocarcinomas are also HPV-related and arise deep in the endocervical canal; they are typically not seen by visual inspection of the cervix and thus often missed by Pap smear screening. A variety of rarer malignancies including atypical epithelial tumors, carcinoids, small cell carcinomas, sarcomas, and lymphomas have also been reported.

The principal role of Pap smear testing is the detection of asymptomatic preinvasive cervical dysplasia of squamous epithelial lining. Invasive carcinomas often have symptoms or signs including postcoital spotting or intermenstrual cycle bleeding or menometrorrhagia. Foul-smelling or persistent yellow discharge may also be seen. Presentations that include pelvic or sacral pain suggest lateral extension of the tumor into pelvic nerve plexus by either the primary tumor or a pelvic node and are signs of advanced-stage disease. Likewise, flank pain from hydronephrosis from ureteral compression or deep venous thrombosis from iliac vessel compression suggests either extensive nodal disease or direct extension of the primary tumor to the pelvic sidewall. The most common finding of physical exam is a visible tumor on the cervix.

Treatment: Cervical Cancer

Scans are not part of the formal clinical staging of cervical cancer yet are very useful in planning appropriate therapy. CT can detect hydronephrosis indicative of pelvic sidewall disease but is not accurate at evaluating other pelvic structures. MRI is more accurate at estimating uterine extension and paracervical extension of disease into soft tissues typically bordered by broad and cardinal ligaments that support the uterus in the central pelvis. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan may be the most accurate technique for evaluating the pelvis and more importantly nodal (pelvic, para-aortic, and scalene) sites for disease. This technique seems more prognostic (and probably accurate) than CT, MRI, or lymphangiogram, especially in the para-aortic region.

Stage I cervical tumors are confined to the cervix, whereas stage II tumors extend into the upper vagina or paracervical soft tissue (Fig. 97-1). Stage III tumors extend to the lower vagina or the pelvic sidewalls, whereas stage IV tumors invade the bladder or rectum or have spread to distant sites. Very small stage I cervical tumors can be treated with a variety of surgical procedures. In young women desiring to maintain fertility, radical trachelectomy removes the cervix with subsequent anastomosis of the upper vagina to the uterine corpus. Larger cervical tumors confined to the cervix can be treated with either surgical resection or radiation therapy in combination with cisplatin-based chemotherapy with a high chance of cure. Larger tumors that extend down the vagina or into the paracervical soft tissues or the pelvic sidewalls are treated with combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The treatment of recurrent or metastatic disease is unsatisfactory due to the relative resistance of these tumors to chemotherapy and currently available biological agents.

Figure 97-1

 
 
 
Anatomic display of the stages of cervix cancer defined by location, extent of tumor, frequency of presentation, and 5-year survival.
 
 
 
Uterine Cancer

Epidemiology

Several different tumor types arise in uterine corpus. Most tumors arise in the glandular lining and are endometrial adenocarcinomas. Tumors can also arise in the smooth muscle; most are benign (uterine leiomyoma), with a small minority of tumors being sarcomas. The endometrioid histologic subtype of endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy in the United States. In 2010, it was diagnosed in 43,470 women and 7950 women died from the disease. Development of these tumors is a multistep process with estrogen playing an important early role in driving endometrial gland proliferation. Relative overexposure to this class of hormones is a risk factor for the subsequent development of endometrioid tumors. In contrast progestins drive glandular maturation and are protective. Hence, women with high endogenous or pharmacologic exposure to estrogens, especially if unopposed by progesterone are at high risk for endometrial cancer. Obese women, women treated with unopposed estrogens, or women with estrogen-producing tumors (such as granulosa cell tumors of the ovary) are at higher risk for endometrial cancer. In addition, treatment with tamoxifen, which has antiestrogenic effects in breast tissue but estrogenic effects in uterine epithelium, is associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer. Secondary events such as the loss of the PTEN or Cables tumor suppressor genes likely serve as secondary events in carcinogenesis. The molecular events that underlie less common endometrial cancers such as clear cell and papillary serous tumors of the uterine corpus are unknown.

Women with mutation in one of a series of DNA mismatch repair genes associated with the Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) syndrome, are at increased risk for endometrioid endometrial carcinoma. These individuals have germ-line mutations in MSH2, MLH1, and in rare cases PMS1, and PMS2. Individuals who carry these mutations typically have a family history of cancer and are at markedly increased risk for colon cancer and modestly increased risk for ovarian cancer and a variety of other tumors. Middle-aged women with HNPCC carry a 4% annual risk of endometrial cancer and a relative overall risk of approximately 200-fold as compared to age-matched women without HNPCC.

Pathology

Approximately 75每80% of endometrial cancers are adenocarcinomas. Prognosis depends on stage, histologic grade, and depth of myometrial invasion. Approximately 10% of patients have tumors with areas of squamous cell differentiation. When the tumor is well differentiated, it is called adenoacanthoma; when poorly differentiated, adenosquamous carcinoma. Less common histologies include mucinous carcinoma (5%) and a papillary serous tumor (<10%) that behaves like ovarian cancer.

Presentations

The majority of women with tumors of the uterine corpus present with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding due to shedding of the malignant endometrial lining. Premenopausal women often will present with atypical bleeding between typical menstrual cycles. These signs typically bring a woman to the attention of a health care professional, and hence the majority of women present with early-stage disease in which the tumor is confined to the uterine corpus. Diagnosis is typically established by endometrial biopsy. Epithelial tumors may spread to pelvic or para-aortic lymph nodes. Pulmonary metastases can appear later in the natural history of this disease but are very uncommon at initial presentation. Serous tumors tend to have patterns of spread much more reminiscent of ovarian cancer with many patients presenting with omental disease and sometimes ascites. Some women presenting with uterine sarcomas will present with pelvic pain. Nodal metastases are uncommon with sarcomas, which are more likely to present with either intraabdominal disease or pulmonary metastases.

Treatment: Uterine Cancer

Most women with endometrial cancer have disease that is localized to the uterus (75% are stage I, Table 97每1), and definitive treatment typically involves a hysterectomy with removal of the ovaries and fallopian tubes. The resection of lymph nodes does not improve outcome but does provide prognostic information. Node involvement defines stage III disease, present in 13% of patients. Tumor grade and depth of invasion are the two key prognostic variables in early-stage tumors, and women with low-grade and/or minimally invasive tumors are typically observed after definitive surgical therapy. Patients with high-grade tumors or tumors that are deeply invasive (stage IB, 13%) are at higher risk for pelvic recurrence or recurrence at the vaginal cuff, which is typically prevented by vaginal vault brachytherapy.

Women with regional metastases or metastatic disease (3% of patients) with low-grade tumors can be treated with progesterone. Poorly differentiated tumors are typically resistant to hormonal manipulation and thus are treated with chemotherapy. The role of chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting is currently under investigation. Chemotherapy for metastatic disease is delivered with palliative intent.

Five-year survival is 89% for stage I, 73% for stage II, 52% for stage III, and 17% for stage IV disease (Table 97每1).
 
Gestational Trophoblastic Tumors

Global Considerations

Gestational trophoblastic diseases represent a spectrum of neoplasia from benign hydatidiform mole to choriocarcinoma due to persistent trophoblastic disease associated most commonly with molar pregnancy but occasionally seen after normal gestation. The most common presentations of trophoblastic tumors are partial and complete molar pregnancies. These represent approximately 1 in 1500 conceptions in developed Western countries. The incidence widely varies globally, with areas in Southeast Asia having a much higher incidence of molar pregnancy. Regions with high molar pregnancy rates are often associated with diets low in carotene and animal fats.

Risk Factors

Trophoblastic tumors result from the outgrowth or persistence of placental tissue. They arise most commonly in the uterus but can also arise in other sites such as the fallopian tubes due to ectopic pregnancy. Risk factors include poorly defined dietary and environmental factors as well as conceptions at the extremes of reproductive age, with the incidence particularly high in females conceiving younger than age 16 or older than age 50. In older women, the incidence of molar pregnancy might be as high as one in three, likely due to increased risk of abnormal fertilization of the aged ova. Most trophoblastic neoplasms are associated with complete moles, diploid tumors with all genetic material from the paternal donor (known as parental disomy). This is thought to occur when a single sperm fertilizes an enucleate egg that subsequently duplicates the paternal DNA. Trophoblastic proliferation occurs with exuberant villous stroma. If pseudopregnancy extends out past the 12th week, fluid progressively accumulates within the stroma leading to "hydropic changes." There is no fetal development in complete moles.

Partial moles arise from the fertilization of an egg with two sperm, hence two-thirds of genetic material is paternal in these triploid tumors. Hydropic changes are less dramatic, and fetal development can often occur through late first trimester or early second trimester at which point spontaneous abortion is common. Laboratory findings will include excessively high hCG and high AFP. The risk of persistent gestational trophoblastic disease after partial mole is approximately 5%.

Complete and partial moles can be noninvasive or invasive. Myometrial invasion occurs in no more than one in six complete moles and a lower portion of partial moles.

Presentation of Invasive Trophoblastic Disease

The clinical presentation of molar pregnancy is changing in developed countries due to the early detection of pregnancy with home pregnancy kits and the very early use of Doppler and ultrasound to evaluate the early fetus and uterine cavity for evidence of a viable fetus. Thus, in these countries, the majority of women presenting with trophoblastic disease have their moles detected early and have typical symptoms of early pregnancy including nausea, amenorrhea, and breast tenderness. With uterine evacuation of early complete and partial moles, most women experience spontaneous remission of their disease as monitored by serial hCG levels. These women require no chemotherapy. Patients with persistent elevation of hCG or rising hCG postevacuation have persistent or actively growing gestational trophoblastic disease and require therapy. Most series suggest that between 15 and 25% of women will have evidence of persistent gestational trophoblastic disease after molar evacuation.

In women who lack access to prenatal care, presenting symptoms can be life threatening including the development of preeclampsia or even eclampsia. Hyperthyroidism can also be seen. Evacuation of large moles can be associated with life-threatening complications including uterine perforation, volume loss, high-output cardiac failure, and adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

For women with evidence of rising hCG or radiologic confirmation of metastatic or persistent regional disease, prognosis can be estimated through a variety of scoring algorithms that identify those women at low, intermediate, and high risk for requiring multi-agent chemotherapy. In general, women with widely metastatic nonpulmonary disease, very elevated hCG, and prior normal antecedent term pregnancy are considered at high risk and typically require multi-agent chemotherapy for cure.

Treatment: Invasive Trophoblastic Disease

The management for a persistent and rising hCG postevacuation of a molar conception is typically chemotherapy, although surgery can play an important role for disease that is persistently isolated in the uterus (especially if childbearing is complete) or to control hemorrhage. For women wishing to maintain fertility or with metastatic disease, the preferred treatment is chemotherapy. Chemotherapy is guided by the hCG level, which typically drops to undetectable levels with effective therapy. Single-agent treatment with methotrexate, or actinomycin D 90% cures of women with low-risk disease. Patients with high-risk disease (high hCG levels, presentation 4 or more months after pregnancy, brain or liver metastases, failure of methotrexate therapy) are typically treated with multi-agent chemotherapy [e.g., etoposide, methotrexate, and actinomycin D alternating with cyclophosphamide and vincristine (EMA-CO)], which is typically curative even in those women with extensive metastatic disease. Cisplatin, bleomycin, and either etoposide or vinblastine are also active combinations. Survival in high-risk disease exceeds 80%. Cured women may get pregnant again without evidence of increased fetal or maternal complications.
 
Further Readings

Berkowitz Rs, Goldstein Dp: Clinical practice. Molar pregnancy. N Engl J Med 360:1639, 2009[PMID: 19369669] 

 
Clarke-Pearson DL: Clinical practice. Screening for ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 361:170, 2009[PMID: 19587342] 

 
Jatoi I, Anderson WF: Management of women who have a genetic predisposition for breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am 88:845, 2008[PMID: 18672143] 

 
Kahn JA: HPV vaccination for the prevention of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. N Engl J Med 361:271, 2009[PMID: 19605832] 

 
Ledermann JA, Kristeleit RS: Optimal treatment for relapsing ovarian cancer. Ann Oncol 21 Suppl 7:vii218, 2010 

 
Moxley KM, McMeekin DS: Endometrial carcinoma: A review of chemotherapy, drug resistance, and the search for new agents. Oncologist 15:1026, 2010[PMID: 20930101] 

 
 

^^
Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcomas and Bone Metastases: Introduction

Sarcomas are rare (<1% of all malignancies) mesenchymal neoplasms that arise in bone and soft tissues. These tumors are usually of mesodermal origin, although a few are derived from neuroectoderm, and they are biologically distinct from the more common epithelial malignancies. Sarcomas affect all age groups; 15% are found in children <15 years of age, and 40% occur after age 55 years. Sarcomas are one of the most common solid tumors of childhood and are the fifth most common cause of cancer deaths in children. Sarcomas may be divided into two groups, those derived from bone and those derived from soft tissues.
 
Soft Tissue Sarcomas

Soft tissues include muscles, tendons, fat, fibrous tissue, synovial tissue, vessels, and nerves. Approximately 60% of soft tissue sarcomas arise in the extremities, with the lower extremities involved three times as often as the upper extremities. Thirty percent arise in the trunk, the retroperitoneum accounting for 40% of all trunk lesions. The remaining 10% arise in the head and neck.

Incidence

Approximately 11,000 new cases of soft tissue sarcomas occurred in the United States in 2010. The annual age-adjusted incidence is 3 per 100,000 population, but the incidence varies with age. Soft tissue sarcomas constitute 0.7% of all cancers in the general population and 6.5% of all cancers in children.

Epidemiology

Malignant transformation of a benign soft tissue tumor is extremely rare, with the exception that malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (neurofibrosarcoma, malignant schwannoma) can arise from neurofibromas in patients with neurofibromatosis. Several etiologic factors have been implicated in soft tissue sarcomas.

Environmental Factors

Trauma or previous injury is rarely involved, but sarcomas can arise in scar tissue resulting from a prior operation, burn, fracture, or foreign body implantation. Chemical carcinogens such as polycyclic hydrocarbons, asbestos, and dioxin may be involved in the pathogenesis.

Iatrogenic Factors

Sarcomas in bone or soft tissues occur in patients who are treated with radiation therapy. The tumor nearly always arises in the irradiated field. The risk increases with time.

Viruses

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) in patients with HIV type 1, classic KS, and KS in HIV-negative homosexual men is caused by human herpesvirus (HHV) 8 (Chap. 182). No other sarcomas are associated with viruses.

Immunologic Factors

Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency, including therapeutic immunosuppression, increases the risk of sarcoma.

Genetic Considerations

Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a familial cancer syndrome in which affected individuals have germ-line abnormalities of the tumor-suppressor gene p53 and an increased incidence of soft tissue sarcomas and other malignancies, including breast cancer, osteosarcoma, brain tumor, leukemia, and adrenal carcinoma (Chap. 83). Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF-1, peripheral form, von Recklinghausen's disease) is characterized by multiple neurofibromas and caf谷 au lait spots. Neurofibromas occasionally undergo malignant degeneration to become malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. The gene for NF-1 is located in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17 and encodes neurofibromin, a tumor-suppressor protein with guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP)ase-activating activity that inhibits Ras function (Chap. 379). Germ-line mutation of the Rb-1 locus (chromosome 13q14) in patients with inherited retinoblastoma is associated with the development of osteosarcoma in those who survive the retinoblastoma and of soft tissue sarcomas unrelated to radiation therapy. Other soft tissue tumors, including desmoid tumors, lipomas, leiomyomas, neuroblastomas, and paragangliomas, occasionally show a familial predisposition.

Ninety percent of synovial sarcomas contain a characteristic chromosomal translocation t(X;18)(p11;q11) involving a nuclear transcription factor on chromosome 18 called SYT and two breakpoints on X. Patients with translocations to the second X breakpoint (SSX2) may have longer survival than those with translocations involving SSX1.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) type II is produced by some sarcomas and may act as an autocrine growth factor and as a motility factor that promotes metastatic spread. IGF-II stimulates growth through IGF-I receptors, but its effects on motility are through different receptors. If secreted in large amounts, IGF-2 may produce hypoglycemia (Chaps. 100, 345).

Classification

Approximately 20 different groups of sarcomas are recognized on the basis of the pattern of differentiation toward normal tissue. For example, rhabdomyosarcoma shows evidence of skeletal muscle fibers with cross-striations; leiomyosarcomas contain interlacing fascicles of spindle cells resembling smooth muscle; and liposarcomas contain adipocytes. When precise characterization of the group is not possible, the tumors are called unclassified sarcomas. All of the primary bone sarcomas can also arise from soft tissues (e.g., extraskeletal osteosarcoma). The entity malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) includes many tumors previously classified as fibrosarcomas or as pleomorphic variants of other sarcomas and is characterized by a mixture of spindle (fibrous) cells and round (histiocytic) cells arranged in a storiform pattern with frequent giant cells and areas of pleomorphism. As immunohistochemical suggestion of differentiation, particularly myogenic differentiation, may be found in a significant fraction of these patients, many are now characterized as poorly differentiated leiomyosarcomas, and the terms undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and myxofibrosarcoma are replacing MFH and myxoid MFH.

For purposes of treatment, most soft tissue sarcomas can be considered together. However, some specific tumors have distinct features. For example, liposarcoma can have a spectrum of behaviors. Pleomorphic liposarcomas and dedifferentiated liposarcomas behave like other high-grade sarcomas; in contrast, well-differentiated liposarcomas (better termed atypical lipomatous tumors) lack metastatic potential, and myxoid liposarcomas metastasize infrequently, but, when they do, they have a predilection for unusual metastatic sites containing fat, such as the retroperitoneum, mediastinum, and subcutaneous tissue. Rhabdomyosarcomas, Ewing's sarcoma, and other small-cell sarcomas tend to be more aggressive and are more responsive to chemotherapy than other soft tissue sarcomas.

Gastrointestinal stromal cell tumors (GISTs), previously classified as gastrointestinal leiomyosarcomas, are now recognized as a distinct entity within soft tissue sarcomas. Its cell of origin resembles the interstitial cell of Cajal, which controls peristalsis. The majority of malignant GISTs have activating mutations of the c-kit gene that result in ligand-independent phosphorylation and activation of the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase, leading to tumorigenesis.

Diagnosis

The most common presentation is an asymptomatic mass. Mechanical symptoms referable to pressure, traction, or entrapment of nerves or muscles may be present. All new and persistent or growing masses should be biopsied, either by a cutting needle (core-needle biopsy) or by a small incision, placed so that it can be encompassed in the subsequent excision without compromising a definitive resection. Lymph node metastases occur in 5%, except in synovial and epithelioid sarcomas, clear-cell sarcoma (melanoma of the soft parts), angiosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma, where nodal spread may be seen in 17%. The pulmonary parenchyma is the most common site of metastases. Exceptions are GISTs, which metastasize to the liver; myxoid liposarcomas, which seek fatty tissue; and clear-cell sarcomas, which may metastasize to bones. Central nervous system metastases are rare, except in alveolar soft part sarcoma.

Radiographic Evaluation

Imaging of the primary tumor is best with plain radiographs and MRI for tumors of the extremities or head and neck and by CT for tumors of the chest, abdomen, or retroperitoneal cavity. A radiograph and CT scan of the chest are important for the detection of lung metastases. Other imaging studies may be indicated, depending on the symptoms, signs, or histology.

Staging and Prognosis

The histologic grade, relationship to fascial planes, and size of the primary tumor are the most important prognostic factors. The current American Joint Commission on Cancer (AJCC) staging system is shown in Table 98每1. Prognosis is related to the stage. Cure is common in the absence of metastatic disease, but a small number of patients with metastases can also be cured. Most patients with stage IV disease die within 12 months, but some patients may live with slowly progressive disease for many years.

Table 98每1 AJCC Staging System for Sarcomas

 
 
Histologic Grade (G) Tumor Size (T) Node Status (N) Metastases (M) 
Well differentiated (G1) 5 cm (T1) Not involved (N0) Absent (M0) 
Moderately differentiated (G2) >5 cm (T2) Involved (N1) Present (M1) 
Poorly differentiated (G3) Superficial fascial involvement (Ta)     
Undifferentiated (G4) Deep fascial involvement (Tb)     
Disease Stage    5-Year Survival, %    
Stage I   98.8   
A: G1,2; T1a,b; N0; M0       
B: G1,2; T2a; N0; M0       
Stage II   81.8   
A: G1,2; T2b; N0; M0       
B: G3,4; T1; N0; M0       
C: G3,4; T2a; N0; M0       
Stage III G3,4; T2b; N0; M0   51.7   
Stage IV   <20   
A: any G; any T; N1; M0       
B: any G; any T; any N; M1       
 

 

Treatment: Soft Tissue Sarcomas

AJCC stage I patients are adequately treated with surgery alone. Stage II patients are considered for adjuvant radiation therapy. Stage III patients may benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. Stage IV patients are managed primarily with chemotherapy, with or without other modalities.

Surgery

Soft tissue sarcomas tend to grow along fascial planes, with the surrounding soft tissues compressed to form a pseudocapsule that gives the sarcoma the appearance of a well-encapsulated lesion. This is invariably deceptive because "shelling out," or marginal excision, of such lesions results in a 50每90% probability of local recurrence. Wide excision with a negative margin, incorporating the biopsy site, is the standard surgical procedure for local disease. The adjuvant use of radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy improves the local control rate and permits the use of limb-sparing surgery with a local control rate (85每90%) comparable to that achieved by radical excisions and amputations. Limb-sparing approaches are indicated except when negative margins are not obtainable, when the risks of radiation are prohibitive, or when neurovascular structures are involved so that resection will result in serious functional consequences to the limb.

Radiation Therapy

External beam radiation therapy is an adjuvant to limb-sparing surgery for improved local control. Preoperative radiation therapy allows the use of smaller fields and smaller doses but results in a higher rate of wound complications. Postoperative radiation therapy must be given to larger fields, as the entire surgical bed must be encompassed, and in higher doses to compensate for hypoxia in the operated field. This results in a higher rate of late complications. Brachytherapy or interstitial therapy, in which the radiation source is inserted into the tumor bed, is comparable in efficacy (except in low-grade lesions), less time-consuming, and less expensive.

Adjuvant Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment for Ewing's primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) and rhabdomyosarcomas. Meta-analysis of 14 randomized trials revealed a significant improvement in local control and disease-free survival in favor of doxorubicin-based chemotherapy. Overall survival improvement was 4% for all sites and 7% for the extremity site. An updated meta-analysis including four additional trials with doxorubicin and ifosfamide combination has reported a statistically significant 6% survival advantage in favor of chemotherapy. A chemotherapy regimen including an anthracycline and ifosfamide with growth factor support improved overall survival by 19% for high-risk (high-grade, 5 cm primary, or locally recurrent) extremity soft tissue sarcomas.

Advanced Disease

Metastatic soft tissue sarcomas are largely incurable, but up to 20% of patients who achieve a complete response become long-term survivors. The therapeutic intent, therefore, is to produce a complete remission with chemotherapy (<10%) and/or surgery (30每40%). Surgical resection of metastases, whenever possible, is an integral part of the management. Some patients benefit from repeated surgical excision of metastases. The two most active chemotherapeutic agents are doxorubicin and ifosfamide. These drugs show a steep dose-response relationship in sarcomas. Gemcitabine with or without docetaxel has become an established second-line regimen and is particularly active in patients with leiomyosarcomas. Dacarbazine also has some modest activity. Taxanes have selective activity in angiosarcomas, and vincristine, etoposide, and irinotecan are effective in rhabdomyosarcomas and Ewing's sarcomas. Imatinib targets the KIT and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) tyrosine kinase activity and is standard therapy for advanced/metastatic GISTs and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Imatinib is now also indicated as adjuvant therapy for completely resected primary GISTs.
 
Bone Sarcomas

Incidence and Epidemiology

Bone sarcomas are rarer than soft tissue sarcomas; they accounted for only 0.2% of all new malignancies and 2600 new cases in the United States in 2010. Several benign bone lesions have the potential for malignant transformation. Enchondromas and osteochondromas can transform into chondrosarcoma; fibrous dysplasia, bone infarcts, and Paget's disease of bone can transform into either malignant fibrous histiocytoma or osteosarcoma.

Classification

Benign Tumors

The common benign bone tumors include enchondroma, osteochondroma, chondroblastoma, and chondromyxoid fibroma, of cartilage origin; osteoid osteoma and osteoblastoma, of bone origin; fibroma and desmoplastic fibroma, of fibrous tissue origin; hemangioma, of vascular origin; and giant cell tumor, of unknown origin.

Malignant Tumors

The most common malignant tumors of bone are plasma cell tumors (Chap. 111). The four most common malignant nonhematopoietic bone tumors are osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Rare malignant tumors include chordoma (of notochordal origin), malignant giant cell tumor and adamantinoma (of unknown origin), and hemangioendothelioma (of vascular origin).

Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Staging System

Sarcomas of bone are staged according to the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society staging system based on grade and compartmental localization. A Roman numeral reflects the tumor grade: stage I is low grade, stage II is high grade, and stage III includes tumors of any grade that have lymph node or distant metastases. In addition, the tumor is given a letter reflecting its compartmental localization. Tumors designated A are intracompartmental (i.e., confined to the same soft tissue compartment as the initial tumor), and tumors designated B are extracompartmental (i.e., extending into the adjacent soft tissue compartment or into bone). The tumor node metastasis (TNM) staging system is shown in Table 98每2.

Table 98每2 Staging System for Bone Sarcomas

 
 
Primary tumor (T) TX Primary tumor cannot be assessed 
  T0 No evidence of primary tumor 
  T1 Tumor 8 cm in greatest dimension 
  T2 Tumor >8 cm in greatest dimension 
  T3 Discontinuous tumors in the primary bone site 
Regional lymph nodes (N) NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed 
  N0 No regional lymph node metastasis 
  N1 Regional lymph node metastasis 
Distant metastasis (M) MX Distant metastasis cannot be assessed 
  M0 No distant metastasis 
  M1 Distant metastasis 
  M1a Lung 
  M1b Other distant sites 
Histologic grade (G) GX Grade cannot be assessed 
  G1 Well differentiated〞low grade 
  G2 Moderately differentiated〞low grade 
  G3 Poorly differentiated〞high grade 
  G4 Undifferentiated〞high grade (Ewing's is always classed G4) 
 

 
Stage Grouping  
Stage IA T1 N0 M0 G1,2 low grade 
Stage IB T2 N0 M0 G1,2 low grade 
Stage IIA T1 N0 M0 G3,4 high grade 
Stage IIB T2 N0 M0 G3,4 high grade 
Stage III T3 N0 M0 Any G 
Stage IVA Any T N0 M1a Any G 
Stage IVB Any T N1 Any M Any G 
  Any T Any N M1b Any G 
 

 

Osteosarcoma

Osteosarcoma, accounting for almost 45% of all bone sarcomas, is a spindle cell neoplasm that produces osteoid (unmineralized bone) or bone. Approximately 60% of all osteosarcomas occur in children and adolescents in the second decade of life, and approximately 10% occur in the third decade of life. Osteosarcomas in the fifth and sixth decades of life are frequently secondary to either radiation therapy or transformation in a preexisting benign condition, such as Paget's disease. Males are affected 1.5每2 times as often as females. Osteosarcoma has a predilection for metaphyses of long bones; the most common sites of involvement are the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus. The classification of osteosarcoma is complex, but 75% of osteosarcomas fall into the "classic" category, which include osteoblastic, chondroblastic, and fibroblastic osteosarcomas. The remaining 25% are classified as "variants" on the basis of (1) clinical characteristics, as in the case of osteosarcoma of the jaw, postradiation osteosarcoma, or Paget's osteosarcoma; (2) morphologic characteristics, as in the case of telangiectatic osteosarcoma, small cell osteosarcoma, or epithelioid osteosarcoma; or (3) location, as in parosteal or periosteal osteosarcoma. Diagnosis usually requires a synthesis of clinical, radiologic, and pathologic features. Patients typically present with pain and swelling of the affected area. A plain radiograph reveals a destructive lesion with a moth-eaten appearance, a spiculated periosteal reaction (sunburst appearance), and a cuff of periosteal new bone formation at the margin of the soft tissue mass (Codman's triangle). A CT scan of the primary tumor is best for defining bone destruction and the pattern of calcification, whereas MRI is better for defining intramedullary and soft tissue extension. A chest radiograph and CT scan are used to detect lung metastases. Metastases to the bony skeleton should be imaged by a bone scan, or by fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). Almost all osteosarcomas are hypervascular. Angiography is not helpful for diagnosis, but it is the most sensitive test for assessing the response to preoperative chemotherapy. Pathologic diagnosis is established either with a core-needle biopsy, where feasible, or with an open biopsy with an appropriately placed incision that does not compromise future limb-sparing resection. Most osteosarcomas are high-grade. The most important prognostic factor for long-term survival is response to chemotherapy. Preoperative chemotherapy followed by limb-sparing surgery (which can be accomplished in >80% of patients) followed by postoperative chemotherapy is standard management. The effective drugs are doxorubicin, ifosfamide, cisplatin, and high-dose methotrexate with leucovorin rescue. The various combinations of these agents that have been used have all been about equally successful. Long-term survival rates in extremity osteosarcoma range from 60 to 80%. Osteosarcoma is radioresistant; radiation therapy has no role in the routine management. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma is considered a part of the spectrum of osteosarcoma and is managed similarly.

Chondrosarcoma

Chondrosarcoma, which constitutes 20每25% of all bone sarcomas, is a tumor of adulthood and old age with a peak incidence in the fourth to sixth decades of life. It has a predilection for the flat bones, especially the shoulder and pelvic girdles, but can also affect the diaphyseal portions of long bones. Chondrosarcomas can arise de novo or as a malignant transformation of an enchondroma or, rarely, of the cartilaginous cap of an osteochondroma. Chondrosarcomas have an indolent natural history and typically present as pain and swelling. Radiographically, the lesion may have a lobular appearance with mottled or punctate or annular calcification of the cartilaginous matrix. It is difficult to distinguish low-grade chondrosarcoma from benign lesions by x-ray or histologic examination. The diagnosis is therefore influenced by clinical history and physical examination. A new onset of pain, signs of inflammation, and progressive increase in the size of the mass suggest malignancy. The histologic classification is complex, but most tumors fall within the classic category. Like other bone sarcomas, high-grade chondrosarcomas spread to the lungs. Most chondrosarcomas are resistant to chemotherapy, and surgical resection of primary or recurrent tumors, including pulmonary metastases, is the mainstay of therapy. This rule does not hold for two histologic variants. Dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma has a high-grade osteosarcoma or a malignant fibrous histiocytoma component that responds to chemotherapy. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, a rare variant composed of a small cell element, also is responsive to systemic chemotherapy and is treated like Ewing's sarcoma.

Ewing's Sarcoma

Ewing's sarcoma, which constitutes 10每15% of all bone sarcomas, is common in adolescence and has a peak incidence in the second decade of life. It typically involves the diaphyseal region of long bones and also has an affinity for flat bones. The plain radiograph may show a characteristic "onion peel" periosteal reaction with a generous soft tissue mass, which is better demonstrated by CT or MRI. This mass is composed of sheets of monotonous, small, round, blue cells and can be confused with lymphoma, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, and small-cell carcinoma. The presence of p30/32, the product of the mic-2 gene (which maps to the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes) is a cell-surface marker for Ewing's sarcoma (and other members of the Ewing's family of tumors, sometimes called PNETs). Most PNETs arise in soft tissues; they include peripheral neuroepithelioma, Askin's tumor (chest wall), and esthesioneuroblastoma. Glycogen-filled cytoplasm detected by staining with periodic acid每Schiff is also characteristic of Ewing's sarcoma cells. The classic cytogenetic abnormality associated with this disease (and other PNETs) is a reciprocal translocation of the long arms of chromosomes 11 and 22, t(11;22), which creates a chimeric gene product of unknown function with components from the fli-1 gene on chromosome 11 and ews on 22. This disease is very aggressive, and it is therefore considered a systemic disease. Common sites of metastases are lung, bones, and bone marrow. Systemic chemotherapy is the mainstay of therapy, often being used before surgery. Doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, etoposide, vincristine, and dactinomycin are active drugs. Topotecan or irinotecan in combination with an alkylating agent are often used in relapsed patients. Targeted therapy with an anti IGF1r antibody appears to have promising activity in refractory cases. Local treatment for the primary tumor includes surgical resection, usually with limb salvage or radiation therapy. Patients with lesions below the elbow and below the mid-calf have a 5-year survival rate of 80% with effective treatment. Ewing's sarcoma at first presentation is a curable tumor, even in the presence of obvious metastatic disease, especially in children <11 years old.
 
Tumors Metastatic to Bone

Bone is a common site of metastasis for carcinomas of the prostate, breast, lung, kidney, bladder, and thyroid and for lymphomas and sarcomas. Prostate, breast, and lung primaries account for 80% of all bone metastases. Metastatic tumors of bone are more common than primary bone tumors. Tumors usually spread to bone hematogenously, but local invasion from soft tissue masses also occurs. In descending order of frequency, the sites most often involved are the vertebrae, proximal femur, pelvis, ribs, sternum, proximal humerus, and skull. Bone metastases may be asymptomatic or may produce pain, swelling, nerve root or spinal cord compression, pathologic fracture, or myelophthisis (replacement of the marrow). Symptoms of hypercalcemia may be noted in cases of bony destruction.

Pain is the most frequent symptom. It usually develops gradually over weeks, is usually localized, and often is more severe at night. When patients with back pain develop neurologic signs or symptoms, emergency evaluation for spinal cord compression is indicated (Chap. 276). Bone metastases exert a major adverse effect on quality of life in cancer patients.

Cancer in the bone may produce osteolysis, osteogenesis, or both. Osteolytic lesions result when the tumor produces substances that can directly elicit bone resorption (vitamin D每like steroids, prostaglandins, or parathyroid hormone每related peptide) or cytokines that can induce the formation of osteoclasts (interleukin 1 and tumor necrosis factor). Osteoblastic lesions result when the tumor produces cytokines that activate osteoblasts. In general, purely osteolytic lesions are best detected by plain radiography, but they may not be apparent until they are >1 cm. These lesions are more commonly associated with hypercalcemia and with the excretion of hydroxyproline-containing peptides indicative of matrix destruction. When osteoblastic activity is prominent, the lesions may be readily detected using radionuclide bone scanning (which is sensitive to new bone formation), and the radiographic appearance may show increased bone density or sclerosis. Osteoblastic lesions are associated with higher serum levels of alkaline phosphatase and, if extensive, may produce hypocalcemia. Although some tumors may produce mainly osteolytic lesions (e.g., kidney cancer) and others mainly osteoblastic lesions (e.g., prostate cancer), most metastatic lesions produce both types of lesion and may go through stages where one or the other predominates.

In older patients, particularly women, it may be necessary to distinguish metastatic disease of the spine from osteoporosis. In osteoporosis, the cortical bone may be preserved, whereas cortical bone destruction is usually noted with metastatic cancer.

Treatment: Metastatic Bone Disease

Treatment of metastatic bone disease depends on the underlying malignancy and the symptoms. Some metastatic bone tumors are curable (lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease), and others are treated with palliative intent. Pain may be relieved by local radiation therapy. Hormonally responsive tumors are responsive to hormone inhibition (antiandrogens for prostate cancer, antiestrogens for breast cancer). Strontium 89 and samarium 153 are bone-seeking radionuclides that can exert antitumor effects and relieve symptoms. Bisphosphonates such as pamidronate may relieve pain and inhibit bone resorption, thereby maintaining bone mineral density and reducing risk of fractures in patients with osteolytic metastases from breast cancer and multiple myeloma. Careful monitoring of serum electrolytes and creatinine is recommended. Monthly administration prevents bone-related clinical events and may reduce the incidence of bone metastases in women with breast cancer. When the integrity of a weight-bearing bone is threatened by an expanding metastatic lesion that is refractory to radiation therapy, prophylactic internal fixation is indicated. Overall survival is related to the prognosis of the underlying tumor. Bone pain at the end of life is particularly common; an adequate pain relief regimen including sufficient amounts of narcotic analgesics is required. The management of hypercalcemia is discussed in Chap. 353.
 
Further Readings

Borden EC et al: Soft tissue sarcomas of adults: State of the translational science. Clin Canc Res 9:1941, 2003[PMID: 12796356] 

 
Dematteo R et al: Adjuvant imatinib mesylate after resection of localized primary GIST: A 

 
randomized double blind placebo controlled trial. Lancet 373:1097, 2009 

 
Helman Lj, Meltzer P: Mechanisms of sarcoma development. Nat Rev Canc 3:685, 2003[PMID: 12951587] 

 
Mocellin S et al: Adult soft tissue sarcomas: Conventional therapies and molecularly targeted approaches. Canc Treat Rev 32:9, 2006[PMID: 16338075] 

 
Patel SR, Zalcberg J. Optimization of dose of Imatinib for the treatment of GIST〞Lessons learned from the phase 3 trials. Eur J Cancer 44:501, 2008[PMID: 18234488] 

 
Pisters PW et al: Evidence-based recommendations for local therapy for soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol 25:1003, 2007[PMID: 17350950] 

 
Scurr M, Judson I: How to treat the Ewing's family of sarcomas in adult patients. Oncologist 11:65, 2006[PMID: 16401715] 
 
 

^^
Carcinoma of Unknown Primary

Carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP) is a biopsy-proven (mainly epithelial) malignancy for which the anatomic site of origin remains unidentified after an intensive search. CUP is one of the 10 most frequently diagnosed cancers worldwide, accounting for approximately 3每5% of all cancers. Most investigators do not include lymphomas, metastatic melanomas, and metastatic sarcomas that present without a known primary tumor as CUP because these cancers have specific stage- and histology-based treatments that guide management.

With the increasing availability of additional sophisticated imaging, invasive diagnostic techniques, and the emergence of effective targeted therapies in several cancers, an individualized management algorithm with an impact on quality of life and survival is critical. The reasons cancers present as CUP remain unclear. One hypothesis is that the primary tumor either regresses after seeding the metastasis or remains so small that it is not detected. It is possible that CUP falls on the continuum of cancer presentation where the primary has been contained or eliminated by the natural body defenses. Alternatively, CUP may represent a specific malignant event that results in an increase in metastatic spread or survival relative to the primary. Whether the CUP metastases truly define a clone that is genetically and phenotypically unique to this diagnosis remains to be determined.
 
Cup Biology

No characteristics that are unique to CUP relative to metastases from known primaries have been identified. Abnormalities in chromosomes 1 and 12 and other complex cytogenetic abnormalities have been reported. Aneuploidy has been described in 70% of CUP patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma or undifferentiated carcinoma. The overexpression of various genes, including Ras, bcl-2 (40%), her-2 (11%), and p53 (26每53%), has been studied in CUP samples, but they have no effect on response to therapy or survival. The extent of angiogenesis in CUP relative to that in metastases from known primaries has also been evaluated, but no consistent findings have emerged.

Clinical Evaluation

Obtaining a thorough medical history from CUP patients is essential, paying particular attention to previous surgeries, removed lesions, and family medical history to assess potential hereditary cancers. Physical examination, including a digital rectal examination in men and breast and pelvic examinations in women, should be performed. Determining the patient's performance status, nutritional status, comorbid illnesses, and cancer-induced complications is essential since these may affect treatment planning.

Role of Serum Tumor Markers and Cytogenetics

Most tumor markers, including CEA, CA-125, CA 19-9, and CA 15-3, when elevated, are nonspecific and not helpful in determining the primary tumor site. Men who present with adenocarcinoma and osteoblastic metastasis should undergo a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test. In patients with undifferentiated or poorly differentiated carcinoma (especially with a midline tumor), elevated 汕-human chorionic gonadotropin (汕hCG) and 汐 fetoprotein (AFP) levels suggest the possibility of an extragonadal germ cell (testicular) tumor. Cytogenetic studies had a larger role in the past, although interpretation of these older studies can be challenging. In our opinion, with the availability of immunohistochemical stains, cytogenetic analyses are indicated only occasionally. We reserve them for undifferentiated neoplasms with inconclusive immunohistochemical stains and those for which a high suspicion of lymphoma exists.

Role of Imaging Studies

Chest x-rays are always obtained in CUP workups but are often negative, especially with low-volume disease. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is indicated in the search for the primary, evaluate the extent of disease, and select the most favorable biopsy site. Older studies suggested that the primary tumor site is detected in 20每35% of patients who undergo a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, although by current definition these patients would not be considered as having CUP. Older studies also suggest a latent primary tumor prevalence of 20%; with more sophisticated imaging, this prevalence is <5% today.

Mammography should be performed in all women who present with metastatic adenocarcinoma, especially in those with adenocarcinoma and isolated axillary lymphadenopathy. MRI of the breast is a recognized follow-up modality in patients with suspected occult primary breast carcinoma following a negative mammography and sonography. The results of these imaging modalities can influence surgical management; a negative breast MRI result predicts a low tumor yield at mastectomy.

A conventional workup for a squamous cell carcinoma and cervical CUP (neck lymphadenopathy with no known primary tumor) includes a CT scan or MRI and invasive studies, including indirect and direct laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and upper endoscopy. Ipsilateral (or bilateral) tonsillectomy (with histopathology) has been recommended for these patients. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scans are useful in this patient population and may help guide the biopsy; determine the extent of disease; facilitate the appropriate treatment, including planning radiation fields; and help with disease surveillance. A smaller radiation field encompassing the primary (when found) and metastatic adenopathy decreases the risk of chronic xerostomia. Several studies have evaluated the utility of PET in patients with cervical CUP. These trials have included a small number of patients; primary tumors were identified in 21每30%.

The diagnostic contribution of PET to the evaluation of other CUP (outside of the neck adenopathy indication) is controversial. PET-CT can be helpful for patients who are candidates for surgical intervention for solitary metastatic disease because the presence of disease outside the primary site may affect surgical planning.

Invasive studies, including upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, and bronchoscopy, should be limited to symptomatic patients or those with laboratory, imaging or pathologic abnormalities that suggest that these techniques will result in a high yield in search for a primary cancer.

Pathologic Diagnosis of Cup

A detailed pathologic examination of the most accessible biopsied tissue specimen is mandatory in CUP patients. Pathologic evaluation typically consists of hematoxylin-and-eosin stains and immunohistochemical tests. Electron microscopy and cytogenetics are rarely useful.

Light Microscopy Evaluation

Adequate tissue obtained by fine-needle aspiration or core-needle biopsy should first be stained with hematoxylin and eosin and subjected to light microscopic examination. On light microscopy, 60每65% of CUP are adenocarcinoma, and 5% are squamous cell carcinoma. The remaining 30每35% are poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated carcinoma, poorly differentiated neoplasm. A small percentage of lesions are diagnosed as neuroendocrine cancers (2%), mixed tumors (adenosquamous, or sarcomatoid carcinomas), or undifferentiated neoplasms (Table 99每1).

Table 99每1 Major Histologies in Cup

 
 
Histology Proportion, % 
Well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma 60 
Squamous cell cancer 5 
Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated carcinoma 30 
Neuroendocrine 2 
Undifferentiated malignancy 3 
 

 

Role of Immunohistochemical Analysis

Immunohistochemical stains are peroxidase-labeled antibodies against specific tumor antigens that are used to define tumor lineage. The number of available immunohistochemical stains is ever-increasing. However, in CUP cases, more is not necessarily better, and immunohistochemical stains should be used in conjunction with the patient's clinical presentation and imaging studies to select the best therapy. Communication between the clinician and pathologist is essential. No stain is 100% specific, and overinterpretation should be avoided. PSA and thyroglobulin tissue markers, which are positive in prostate and thyroid cancer, respectively, are the most specific of the current marker panel. However, these cancers rarely present as CUP, so the yield of these tests may be low. Fig. 99-1 delineates a simple algorithm for immunohistochemical staining in CUP cases. Table 99每2 lists additional tests that may be useful to further define the tumor lineage. A more comprehensive algorithm may improve the diagnostic accuracy but can make the process complex. With the use of immunohistochemical markers, electron microscopic analysis, which is time-consuming and expensive, is rarely needed.

Figure 99-1

 
 
 
Approach to cytokeratin (CK7 and CK20) markers used in CUP.
 
 

Figure 99-2

 
 
 
Treatment algorithm for adenocarcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma CUP. C, chemotherapy; CRT, chemoradiation; GI, gastrointestinal; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; RT, radiation.
 
 

Figure 99-3

 
 
 
Treatment algorithm for squamous cell CUP. C, chemotherapy; CT, computed tomography; PET, positron emission tomography; RT, radiation.
 
 
Table 99每2 Additional Immunohistochemical Stains Useful in the Diagnosis of Cup

 
 
Tissue Marker Diagnosis 
Estrogen and progesterone receptors Breast cancer 
BRST-1 Breast cancer 
Gross cystic disease fibrous protein-15 Breast cancer 
Thyroid transcription factor 1 Lung and thyroid cancer 
Thyroglobulin Thyroid cancer 
Chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56 Neuroendocrine cancer 
CDX-2 Gastrointestinal cancer 
Calretinin, mesothelin Mesothelioma 
Leukocyte common antigen Lymphoma 
HMB-45, tyrosinase, Melan-A Melanoma 
URO-III, thrombomodulin Bladder cancer 
 Fetoprotein Hepatocellular cancer, germ cell cancer 
-Human chronic gonadotropin Germ cell cancer 
Prostate specific antigen Prostate cancer 
WT-1, estrogen receptor (ER) M邦llerian/ovarian cancer 
RCC, CD 10 Renal cell carcinoma 
 

 

There are >20 subtypes of cytokeratin (CK) intermediate filaments with different molecular weights and differential expression in various cell types and cancers. Monoclonal antibodies to specific CK subtypes have been used to help classify tumors according to their site of origin; commonly used CK stains in CUP are CK7 and CK20. CK7 is found in tumors of the lung, ovary, endometrium, and breast and not in those of the lower gastrointestinal tract, whereas CK20 is normally expressed in the gastrointestinal epithelium, urothelium, and Merkel cells. CK20+/CK7每 strongly suggests a primary tumor of the colon; 75每95% of colon tumors show this pattern of staining. CK20每/CK7+ suggests cancer of the lung, breast, ovary, endometrium, and pancreaticobiliary tract; some of these can also be CK20+. The nuclear CDX-2 transcription factor, which is the product of a homeobox gene necessary for intestinal organogenesis, is often used to aid in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a 38-kDa homeodomain-containing nuclear protein that plays a role in transcriptional activation during embryogenesis in the thyroid, diencephalon, and respiratory epithelium. TTF-1 nuclear staining is typically positive in lung and thyroid cancers. Approximately 68% of adenocarcinomas and 25% of squamous cell lung cancers stain positive for TTF-1, which helps differentiate a lung primary tumor from metastatic adenocarcinoma in a pleural effusion, the mediastinum, or the lung parenchyma.

Distinguishing pleural mesothelioma from lung adenocarcinoma can be challenging. Calretinin, Wilms' tumor gene-1 (WT-1), and mesothelin have been suggested as useful markers for mesothelioma. Gross cystic disease fibrous protein-15, a 15-kDa monomer protein, is a marker of apocrine differentiation that is detected in 62每72% of breast carcinomas. UROIII, high-molecular-weight cytokeratin, thrombomodulin, and CK20 are the markers used to diagnose lesions of urothelial origin.

Role of DNA Microarray and Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction (Rt-PCR) in Cup

In the absence of a known primary, developing therapeutic strategies for CUP is challenging. The current diagnostic yield with imaging and immunochemistry is 20每30% for CUP patients. The use of gene expression studies holds the promise of substantially increasing this yield. Gene expression profiles are most commonly generated using quantitative RT-PCR or DNA microarray.

Neural network programs have been used to develop predictive algorithms from the gene expression profiles. Typically, a training set of gene profiles from known cancers (preferably from metastatic sites) are used to train the software. The program can then be used to predict the putative origin of a test tumor, and presumably of true CUP. Comprehensive gene expression databases that have become available for common malignancies may also be useful in CUP. Investigators have used expression data from normal differentiated tissues to identify conserved expression profiles found in malignant tissue as a basis for predicting the tissue of origin (ToO). These approaches have been effective in blind testing against known primary cancers and their metastasis. However, because, by definition, the primary tumor site is not identifiable in CUP, validation of site prediction in this setting can be challenging, and any predictions currently must be supported by clinical and pathologic correlation. Prospective validation trials are currently evaluating the role of molecular studies identifying ToO in CUP and its impact on management. Early trials suggest that the profiling approach is feasible from archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) core-needle biopsies. Quantitative RT-PCR on fine-needle aspiration samples is very useful in clinical practice. Data from some studies suggest that a putative primary profile can be applied to 80每85% of cases. At present, the best confirmation of molecular profiling studies in CUP is an indirect validation based on the patient's presentation and clinical course. Current studies are geared to understanding profiling tools' accuracy, clinical effectiveness, and how these assays complement immunohistochemistry and help guide therapy.

Treatment: Carcinoma of Unknown Primary

General Considerations The treatment of CUP continues to evolve, albeit slowly. The median survival duration of most patients with disseminated CUP is 6每10 months. Systemic chemotherapy is the primary treatment modality in most cases, but the careful integration of surgery, radiation therapy, and even periods of observation are important in the overall management of this condition (Figs. 99-2 and 99-3). Prognostic factors include performance status, site and number of metastases, response to chemotherapy, and serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. Culine and colleagues developed a prognostic model using performance status and serum LDH levels, which allowed the assignment of patients into two subgroups with divergent outcomes. Future prospective trials using this prognostic model are warranted. Clinically, several CUP diagnoses fall into a favorable prognostic subset. Others, including those with disseminated CUP that do not fit a subset, have a more unfavorable prognosis.

Treatment of Favorable Subsets of Cup

Women with isolated axillary adenopathy Women with isolated axillary adenopathy with adenocarcinoma or carcinoma are usually treated for stage II or III breast cancer based on pathologic findings. These patients should undergo a breast MRI if mammogram and ultrasound are negative. Radiation therapy to the ipsilateral breast is indicated if the breast MRI is positive. Chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy is indicated based on patient's age (premenopausal or postmenopausal), nodal disease bulk, and hormone receptor status (Chap. 90). It is important to verify that the pathology does represent a breast cancer profile (morphology, immunohistochemical markers including HER-2, gene expression) before embarking on a breast cancer therapeutic program.

Women with peritoneal carcinomatosis The term primary peritoneal papillary serous carcinoma (PPSC) has been used to describe CUP with carcinomatosis with the pathologic and laboratory (elevated CA-125 antigen) characteristics of ovarian cancer but no ovarian primary tumor identified on transvaginal sonography or laparotomy. Studies suggest that ovarian cancer and PPSC, which are both of m邦llerian origin, have similar gene expression profiles. Similar to patients with ovarian cancer, patients with PPSC are candidates for cytoreductive surgery, followed by adjuvant taxane and platinum-based chemotherapy. In one retrospective study of 258 women with peritoneal carcinomatosis who had undergone cytoreductive surgery and chemotherapy, 22% of patients had a complete response to chemotherapy; the median survival duration was 18 months (range 11每24 months). However, not all peritoneal carcinomatosis in women is PPSC. Careful pathologic evaluation can help diagnose a colon cancer profile (CDX-2+, CK-20+, CK7每) or a pancreaticobiliary cancer.

Poorly differentiated carcinoma with midline adenopathy Men with poorly differentiated or undifferentiated carcinoma that presents as a midline adenopathy should be evaluated for extragonadal germ cell malignancy. If diagnosed and treated as such, they often experience a good response to treatment with platinum-based combination chemotherapy. Response rates of >50% have been noted, and 10每15% long-term survivors have been reported. Older patients (especially smokers) who present with mediastinal adenopathy are more likely to have a lung or head〞and-neck cancer profile.

Neuroendocrine carcinoma Low-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma often has an indolent course, and treatment decisions are based on symptoms and tumor bulk. Urine 5-HIAA and serum chromogranin may be elevated and can be followed as markers. Often the patient is treated with somatostatin analogues alone for hormone-related symptoms (diarrhea, flushing, nausea). Specific local therapies or systemic therapy would only be indicated if the patient is symptomatic with local pain secondary to significant growth of the metastasis or the hormone-related symptoms are not controlled with endocrine therapy. Patients with high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma are treated as having small cell lung cancer and are responsive to chemotherapy; 20每25% show a complete response, and up to 10% patients survive more than 5 years.

Squamous cell carcinoma presenting as neck adenopathy Patients with early-stage squamous cell carcinoma involving the cervical lymph nodes are candidates for node dissection and radiation therapy, which can result in long-term survival. The role of chemotherapy in these patients is undefined, although chemoradiation therapy or induction chemotherapy is often used and is beneficial in bulky N2/N3 lymph node disease.

Solitary metastatic site Patients with solitary metastases can also experience good treatment outcomes. Some patients who present with locoregional disease are candidates for aggressive trimodality management; both prolonged disease-free interval and occasionally cure are possible.

Men with blastic skeletal metastases and elevated PSA Blastic bone-only metastasis is a rare presentation, and elevated serum PSA or tumor staining with PSA may provide confirmatory evidence of prostate cancer in these patients. Those with elevated levels are candidates for hormonal therapy for prostate cancer, although it is important to rule out other primary tumors (lung most common).

Management of Disseminated CUP Patients who present with liver, brain, and adrenal metastatic disease usually have a poor prognosis. Beside primary peritoneal carcinoma, carcinomatosis presenting as CUP in other settings is not uncommon. Gastric, appendicular, colon, pancreas, and cholangiocarcinoma are all possible primaries, and imaging, endoscopy, and pathologic data help in the evaluation.

Traditionally, platinum-based combination chemotherapy regimens have been used to treat patients with CUP. In a phase II study by Hainsworth and colleagues, 55 mostly chemotherapy-naive patients were treated with paclitaxel, carboplatin, and oral etoposide every 3 weeks. The overall response rate was 47%, with median overall survival duration of 13.4 months. Briasoulis and colleagues reported similar response rates and survival durations in 77 patients with CUP, who had been treated with paclitaxel and carboplatin. In this study, patients with nodal or pleural disease and women with peritoneal carcinomatosis had higher response rates and overall survival durations of 13 and 15 months, respectively. Studies incorporating newer agents, including gemcitabine, irinotecan, and targeted agents, are showing higher response rates. In a phase II randomized trial by Culine and colleagues, 80 patients were randomly assigned to receive gemcitabine with cisplatin or irinotecan with cisplatin; 78 patients were assessable for efficacy and toxicity. Objective responses were observed in 21 patients (55%) in the gemcitabine and cisplatin arm and in 15 patients (38%) in the irinotecan and cisplatin arm. The median survival was 8 months for gemcitabine and cisplatin and 6 months for irinotecan and cisplatin.

The role of second-line chemotherapy in CUP is poorly defined. Gemcitabine as a single agent has shown a partial response rate of 8%, and 25% of patients had minor responses or stable disease, with improved symptoms. Combination chemotherapy as a second- and third-line treatment may result in a slightly improved response and therapy options should be guided by pathology and the patient's performance status.

Hainsworth and colleagues studied the combination of bevacizumab and erlotinib in 51 patients; 25% were chemotherapy-naive and had advanced bone or liver metastases, while the rest had been treated with 1 or 2 chemotherapy regimens. Responses were noted in 4 patients (8%), and 30 patients (59%) experienced stable disease or a minor response. The median overall survival was 8.9 months, with 42% of patients alive at 1 year.

Historically, patients with CUP have been treated with broad spectrum regimens that work for a variety of primary cancers; a "one treatment fits all" approach. With incremental improved responses over the past decade in known cancer types, we anticipate overall better response rates with newer regimens for selected CUP patients. With a more robust immunohistochemical panel (directed approach) and new molecular profiling tools, one may hope to create a more tailored treatment algorithm for CUP patients.
 
Summary

Patients with CUP should undergo a directed diagnostic search for the primary tumor on the basis of clinical and pathologic data. Subsets of patients have prognostically favorable disease, as defined by clinical or histologic criteria, and may substantially benefit from aggressive treatment and expect prolonged survival. However, for most patients who present with advanced CUP, the prognosis remains poor, with early resistance to available cytotoxic therapy. The current focus has shifted away from empirical chemotherapeutic trials to understanding the metastatic phenotype, ToO profiling, and evaluating molecular targets in CUP patients. Our understanding of this challenging disease is growing steadily in the era of sophisticated diagnostics and therapeutics. A strategy that integrates information from a patient's clinical presentation including imaging and pathology with directed immunohistochemistry and molecular profiling in selected cases, will help us select the best treatment for our patients.
 
Further Readings

Abbruzzese JL et al: The biology of unknown primary tumors. Semin Oncol 20:238, 1993[PMID: 8503019] 

 
Bugat R et al: Summary of the standards, options and recommendations for the management of patients with carcinoma of unknown primary site. Br J Cancer 89:S59, 2003 

 
Culine S et al: Cisplatin in combination with either gemcitabine or irinotecan in carcinomas of unknown primary site: Results of a randomized phase II study〞trial for the French Study Group on Carcinomas of Unknown Primary (GEFCAPI 01). J Clin Oncol 21:3479, 2003[PMID: 12972523] 

 
Dennis JL, Oien KA: Hunting the primary: Novel strategies for defining the origin of tumours. J Pathol 205:236, 2005[PMID: 15641019] 

 
Greco FA. Therapy of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary: Are we making progress? J Natl Compr Cancer Netw 2008 10:1061, 2008. 

 
Hainsworth JD et al: Carcinoma of unknown primary site: Treatment with 1-hour paclitaxel, carboplatin, and extended-schedule etoposide. J Clin Oncol 15:2385, 1997[PMID: 9196154] 

 
Kende AI et al: Expression of cytokeratins 7 and 20 in carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract. Histopathology 42:137, 2003[PMID: 12558745] 

 
Monzon FA et al: Multicenter validation of a 1,550-gene expression profile for identification of tumor tissue of origin. J Clin Oncol 27:2503, 2009[PMID: 19332734] 

 
Olson JA Jr et al: Magnetic resonance imaging facilitates breast conservation for occult breast cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 7:411, 2000[PMID: 10894136] 

 
Roh MS, Hong SH: Utility of thyroid transcription factor-1 and cytokeratin 20 in identifying the origin of metastatic carcinomas of cervical lymph nodes. J Korean Med Sci 17:512, 2002[PMID: 12172048] 

 
Rusthoven KE et al: The role of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in cervical lymph node metastases from an unknown primary tumor. Cancer 101:2641, 2004[PMID: 15517576] 

 
Tothill RW et al: An expression-based site of origin diagnostic method designed for clinical application to cancer of unknown origin. Cancer Res 65:4031, 2005[PMID: 15899792] 

 
Varadhachary GR et al: Molecular profiling of carcinoma of unknown primary and correlation with clinical evaluation. J Clin Oncol 26:4442, 2008[PMID: 18802157] 
 
 

^^
Paraneoplastic Syndromes: Endocrinologic/Hematologic: Introduction

In addition to local tissue invasion and metastasis, neoplastic cells can produce a variety of products that can stimulate hormonal, hematologic, dermatologic, and neurologic responses. Paraneoplastic syndromes is the term used to refer to the disorders that accompany benign or malignant tumors but are not directly related to mass effects or invasion. Tumors of neuroendocrine origin, such as small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and carcinoids, produce a wide array of peptide hormones and are common causes of paraneoplastic syndromes. However, almost every type of tumor has the potential to produce hormones or cytokines or to induce immunologic responses. Careful studies of the prevalence of paraneoplastic syndromes indicate that they are more common than is generally appreciated. The signs, symptoms, and metabolic alterations associated with paraneoplastic disorders may be overlooked in the context of a malignancy and its treatment. Consequently, atypical clinical manifestations in a patient with cancer should prompt consideration of a paraneoplastic syndrome. The most common endocrinologic and hematologic syndromes associated with underlying neoplasia will be discussed here.
 
Endocrine Paraneoplastic Syndromes

Etiology

Hormones can be produced from eutopic or ectopic sources. Eutopic refers to the expression of a hormone from its normal tissue of origin, whereas ectopic refers to hormone production from an atypical tissue source. For example, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is expressed eutopically by the corticotrope cells of the anterior pituitary, but it can be expressed ectopically in SCLC. Many hormones are produced at low levels from a wide array of tissues in addition to the classic endocrine source. Thus, ectopic expression is often a quantitative change rather than an absolute change in tissue expression. Nevertheless, the term ectopic expression is firmly entrenched and conveys the abnormal physiology associated with hormone production by neoplastic cells. In addition to high levels of hormones, ectopic expression typically is characterized by abnormal regulation of hormone production (e.g., defective feedback control) and peptide processing (resulting in large, unprocessed precursors).

A diverse array of molecular mechanisms has been suggested to cause ectopic hormone production. In rare instances, genetic rearrangements explain aberrant hormone expression. For example, translocation of the parathyroid hormone (PTH) gene can result in high levels of PTH expression in tissues other than the parathyroid gland, apparently because the genetic rearrangement brings the PTH gene under the control of atypical regulatory elements. A related phenomenon is well documented in many forms of leukemia and lymphoma, in which somatic genetic rearrangements confer a growth advantage and alter cellular differentiation and function (Chap. 110). Although genetic rearrangements may cause selected cases of ectopic hormone production, this mechanism is probably rare, as many tumors are associated with excessive production of numerous peptides. Cellular dedifferentiation probably underlies most cases of ectopic hormone production. Many cancers are poorly differentiated, and certain tumor products, such as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), parathyroid hormone每related protein (PTHrP), and  fetoprotein, are characteristic of gene expression at earlier developmental stages. In contrast, the propensity of certain cancers to produce particular hormones (e.g., squamous cell carcinomas produce PTHrP) suggests that dedifferentiation is partial or that selective pathways are derepressed. These expression profiles probably reflect alterations in transcriptional repression, changes in DNA methylation, or other factors that govern cell differentiation.

In SCLC, the pathway of differentiation has been relatively well defined. The neuroendocrine phenotype is dictated in part by the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor human achaete-scute homologue 1 (hASH-1), which is expressed at abnormally high levels in SCLC associated with ectopic ACTH. The activity of hASH-1 is inhibited by hairy enhancer of split 1 (HES-1) and by Notch proteins, which also are capable of inducing growth arrest. Thus, abnormal expression of these developmental transcription factors appears to provide a link between cell proliferation and differentiation.

Ectopic hormone production would only be an epiphenomenon associated with cancer if it did not result in clinical manifestations. Excessive and unregulated production of hormones such as ACTH, PTHrP, and vasopressin can lead to substantial morbidity and complicate the cancer treatment plan. Moreover, the paraneoplastic endocrinopathies are sometimes the presenting feature of underlying malignancy and may prompt the search for an unrecognized tumor.

A large number of paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes have been described, linking overproduction of particular hormones with specific types of tumors. However, certain recurring syndromes emerge from this group (Table 100每1). The most common paraneoplastic endocrine syndromes include hypercalcemia from overproduction of PTHrP and other factors, hyponatremia from excess vasopressin, and Cushing's syndrome from ectopic ACTH.

Table 100每1 Paraneoplastic Syndromes Caused by Ectopic Hormone Production

 
 
Paraneoplastic Syndrome Ectopic Hormone Typical Tumor Typesa
  
Common      
Hypercalcemia of malignancy Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) Squamous cell (head and neck, lung, skin), breast, genitourinary, gastrointestinal 
  1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D Lymphomas 
  Parathyroid hormone (PTH) (rare) Lung, ovary 
  Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (rare) Renal, lung 
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) Vasopressin Lung (squamous, small cell), gastrointestinal, genitourinary, ovary 
Cushing's syndrome Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Lung (small cell, bronchial carcinoid, adenocarcinoma, squamous), thymus, pancreatic islet, medullary thyroid carcinoma 
  Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) (rare) Pancreatic islet, carcinoid, lung, prostate 
  Ectopic expression of gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP), luteinizing hormone (LH)/human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), other G protein每coupled receptors (rare) Macronodular adrenal hyperplasia 
Less Common  
Non-islet cell hypoglycemia Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-II) Mesenchymal tumors, sarcomas, adrenal, hepatic, gastrointestinal, kidney, prostate 
  Insulin (rare) Cervix (small cell carcinoma) 
Male feminization hCGb Testis (embryonal, seminomas), germinomas, choriocarcinoma, lung, hepatic, pancreatic islet 
Diarrhea or intestinal hypermotility Calcitoninc Lung, colon, breast, medullary thyroid carcinoma 
  Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) Pancreas, pheochromocytoma, esophagus 
Rare  
Oncogenic osteomalacia Phosphatonin [fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)] Hemangiopericytomas, osteoblastomas, fibromas, sarcomas, giant cell tumors, prostate, lung 
Acromegaly Growth hormone每releasing hormone (GHRH) Pancreatic islet, bronchial and other carcinoids 
  Growth hormone (GH) Lung, pancreatic islet 
Hyperthyroidism Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Hydatidiform mole, embryonal tumors, struma ovarii 
Hypertension Renin Juxtaglomerular tumors, kidney, lung, pancreas, ovary 
 


aOnly the most common tumor types are listed. For most ectopic hormone syndromes, an extensive list of tumors has been reported to produce one or more hormones.

bhCG is produced eutopically by trophoblastic tumors. Certain tumors produce disproportionate amounts of the hCG  or hCG  subunit. High levels of hCG rarely cause hyperthyroidism because of weak binding to the TSH receptor.cCalcitonin is produced eutopically by medullary thyroid carcinoma and is used as a tumor marker.
 

Hypercalcemia Caused by Ectopic Production of PthrP

(See also Chap. 353)

Etiology

Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM) occurs in up to 20% of patients with cancer. HHM is most common in cancers of the lung, head and neck, skin, esophagus, breast, and genitourinary tract and in multiple myeloma and lymphomas. Although several distinct humoral causes of HHM occur, it is caused most commonly by overproduction of PTHrP. In addition to acting as a circulating humoral factor, bone metastases (e.g., breast, multiple myeloma) may produce PTHrP, leading to local osteolysis and hypercalcemia.

PTHrP is structurally related to PTH and binds to the PTH receptor, explaining the similar biochemical features of HHM and hyperparathyroidism. PTHrP plays a key role in skeletal development and regulates cellular proliferation and differentiation in other tissues, including skin, bone marrow, breast, and hair follicles. The mechanism of PTHrP induction in malignancy is incompletely understood; however, tumor-bearing tissues commonly associated with HHM normally produce PTHrP during development or cell renewal. PTHrP expression is stimulated by hedgehog pathways and Gli transcription factors that are active in many malignancies. Transforming growth factor  (TGF-), which is produced by many tumors, also stimulates PTHrP, in part by activating the Gli pathway. Mutations in certain oncogenes, such as Ras, also can activate PTHrP expression. In adult T cell lymphoma, the transactivating Tax protein produced by human T cell lymphotropic virus I (HTLV-I) stimulates PTHrP promoter activity. Metastatic lesions to bone are more likely to produce PTHrP than are metastases in other tissues, suggesting that bone produces factors (e.g., TGF-) that enhance PTHrP production or that PTHrP-producing metastases have a selective growth advantage in bone. Thus, PTHrP production can be stimulated by mutations in oncogenes, altered expression of viral or cellular transcription factors, and local growth factors.

Another relatively common cause of HHM is excess production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Like granulomatous disorders associated with hypercalcemia, lymphomas can produce an enzyme that converts 25-hydroxyvitamin D to the more active 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, leading to enhanced gastrointestinal calcium absorption. Other causes of HHM include tumor-mediated production of osteolytic cytokines and inflammatory mediators.

Clinical Manifestations

The typical presentation of HHM is a patient with a known malignancy who is found to be hypercalcemic on routine laboratory tests. Less often, hypercalcemia is the initial presenting feature of malignancy. Particularly when calcium levels are markedly increased [>3.5 mmol/L (>14 mg/dL)], patients may experience fatigue, mental status changes, dehydration, or symptoms of nephrolithiasis.

Diagnosis

Features that favor HHM, as opposed to primary hyperparathyroidism, include known malignancy, recent onset of hypercalcemia, and very high serum calcium levels. Like hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia caused by PTHrP is accompanied by hypercalciuria and hypophosphatemia. Patients with HHM typically have metabolic alkalosis rather than hyperchloremic acidosis, as is seen in hyperparathyroidism. Measurement of PTH is useful to exclude primary hyperparathyroidism; the PTH level should be suppressed in HHM. An elevated PTHrP level confirms the diagnosis, and it is increased in 80% of hypercalcemic patients with cancer. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D levels may be increased in patients with lymphoma.

Treatment: Humoral Hypercalcemia of Malignancy

The management of HHM begins with removal of excess calcium in the diet, medications, or IV solutions. Oral phosphorus (e.g., 250 mg Neutra-Phos 3每4 times daily) should be given until serum phosphorus is >1 mmol/L (>3 mg/dL). Saline rehydration is used to dilute serum calcium and promote calciuresis. Forced diuresis with furosemide or other loop diuretics can enhance calcium excretion but provides relatively little value except in life-threatening hypercalcemia. When used, loop diuretics should be administered only after complete rehydration and with careful monitoring of fluid balance. Bisphosphonates such as pamidronate (60每90 mg IV), zoledronate (4每8 mg IV), and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg per day PO for 3每7 consecutive days) can reduce serum calcium within 1每2 days and suppress calcium release for several weeks. Bisphosphonate infusions can be repeated, or oral bisphosphonates can be used for chronic treatment. Dialysis should be considered in severe hypercalcemia when saline hydration and bisphosphonate treatments are not possible or are too slow in onset. Previously used agents such as calcitonin and mithramycin have little utility now that bisphosphonates are available. Calcitonin (2每8 U/kg SC every 6每12 h) should be considered when rapid correction of severe hypercalcemia is needed. Hypercalcemia associated with lymphomas, multiple myeloma, or leukemia may respond to glucocorticoid treatment (e.g., prednisone 40每100 mg PO in four divided doses).

Ectopic Vasopressin: Tumor-Associated SIADH

(See also Chap. 45)

Etiology

Vasopressin is an antidiuretic hormone normally produced by the posterior pituitary gland. Ectopic vasopressin production by tumors is a common cause of the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), occurring in at least half of patients with SCLC. SIADH also can be caused by a number of nonneoplastic conditions, including central nervous system (CNS) trauma, infections, and medications (Chap. 340). Compensatory responses to SIADH, such as decreased thirst, may mitigate the development of hyponatremia. However, with prolonged production of excessive vasopressin, the osmostat controlling thirst and hypothalamic vasopressin secretion may become reset. In addition, intake of free water, orally or intravenously, can quickly worsen hyponatremia because of reduced renal diuresis.

Tumors with neuroendocrine features, such as SCLC and carcinoids, are the most common sources of ectopic vasopressin production, but it also occurs in other forms of lung cancer and with CNS lesions, head and neck cancer, and genitourinary, gastrointestinal, and ovarian cancers. The mechanism of activation of the vasopressin gene in these tumors is unknown but often involves concomitant expression of the adjacent oxytocin gene, suggesting derepression of this locus.

Clinical Manifestations

Most patients with ectopic vasopressin secretion are asymptomatic and are identified because of the presence of hyponatremia on routine chemistry testing. Symptoms may include weakness, lethargy, nausea, confusion, depressed mental status, and seizures. The severity of symptoms reflects the rapidity of onset as well as the extent of hyponatremia. Hyponatremia usually develops slowly but may be exacerbated by the administration of IV fluids or the institution of new medications.

Diagnosis

The diagnostic features of ectopic vasopressin production are the same as those of other causes of SIADH (Chaps. 45 and 340). Hyponatremia and reduced serum osmolality occur in the setting of an inappropriately normal or increased urine osmolality. Urine sodium excretion is normal or increased unless volume depletion is present. Other causes of hyponatremia should be excluded, including renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency. Physiologic sources of vasopressin stimulation (CNS lesions, pulmonary disease, nausea), adaptive circulatory mechanisms (hypotension, heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis), and medications, including many chemotherapeutic agents, also should be considered as possible causes of hyponatremia. Vasopressin measurements are not usually necessary to make the diagnosis.

Treatment: Ectopic Vasopressin: Tumor-Associated SIADH

Most patients with ectopic vasopressin production develop hyponatremia over several weeks or months. The disorder should be corrected gradually unless mental status is altered or there is risk of seizures. Treatment of the underlying malignancy may reduce ectopic vasopressin production, but this response is slow if it occurs at all. Fluid restriction to less than urine output, plus insensible losses, is often sufficient to correct hyponatremia partially. However, strict monitoring of the amount and types of liquids consumed or administered intravenously is required for fluid restriction to be effective. Salt tablets and saline are not helpful unless volume depletion is also present. Demeclocycline (150每300 mg orally three to four times daily) can be used to inhibit vasopressin action on the renal distal tubule, but its onset of action is relatively slow (1每2 weeks). Conivaptan, a nonpeptide V2-receptor antagonist, can be administered either PO (20每120 mg bid) or IV (10每40 mg) and is particularly effective when used in combination with fluid restriction in euvolemic hyponatremia. Severe hyponatremia (Na <115 meq/L) or mental status changes may require treatment with hypertonic (3%) or normal saline infusion together with furosemide to enhance free water clearance. The rate of sodium correction should be slow (0.5每1 meq/L per h) to prevent rapid fluid shifts and the possible development of central pontine myelinolysis.

Cushing's Syndrome Caused by Ectopic ACTH Production

(See also Chap. 342)

Etiology

Ectopic ACTH production accounts for 10每20% of cases of Cushing's syndrome. The syndrome is particularly common in neuroendocrine tumors. SCLC (>50%) is by far the most common cause of ectopic ACTH, followed by thymic carcinoid (15%), islet cell tumors (10%), bronchial carcinoid (10%), other carcinoids (5%), and pheochromocytomas (2%). Ectopic ACTH production is caused by increased expression of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, which encodes ACTH, along with melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH),  lipotropin, and several other peptides. In many tumors, there is abundant but aberrant expression of the POMC gene from an internal promoter, proximal to the third exon, which encodes ACTH. However, because this product lacks the signal sequence necessary for protein processing, it is not secreted. Increased production of ACTH arises instead from less abundant, but unregulated, POMC expression from the same promoter site used in the pituitary. However, because the tumors lack many of the enzymes needed to process the POMC polypeptide, it is typically released as multiple large, biologically inactive fragments along with relatively small amounts of fully processed, active ACTH.

Rarely, corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is produced by pancreatic islet cell tumors, SCLC, medullary thyroid cancer, carcinoids, or prostate cancer. When levels are high enough, CRH can cause pituitary corticotrope hyperplasia and Cushing's syndrome. Tumors that produce CRH sometimes also produce ACTH, raising the possibility of a paracrine mechanism for ACTH production.

A distinct mechanism for ACTH-independent Cushing's syndrome involves ectopic expression of various G protein每coupled receptors in the adrenal nodules. Ectopic expression of the gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) receptor is the best-characterized example of this mechanism. In this case, meals induce GIP secretion, which inappropriately stimulates adrenal growth and glucocorticoid production.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical features of hypercortisolemia are detected in only a small fraction of patients with documented ectopic ACTH production. Patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome generally exhibit less marked weight gain and centripetal fat redistribution, probably because the exposure to excess glucocorticoids is relatively short and because cachexia reduces the propensity for weight gain and fat deposition. The ectopic ACTH syndrome is associated with several clinical features that distinguish it from other causes of Cushing's syndrome (e.g., pituitary adenomas, adrenal adenomas, iatrogenic glucocorticoid excess). The metabolic manifestations of ectopic ACTH syndrome are dominated by fluid retention and hypertension, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, glucose intolerance, and occasionally steroid psychosis. The very high ACTH levels often cause increased pigmentation, and melanotrope-stimulating hormone (MSH) activity derived from the POMC precursor peptide is also increased. The extraordinarily high glucocorticoid levels in patients with ectopic sources of ACTH can lead to marked skin fragility and easy bruising. In addition, the high cortisol levels often overwhelm the renal 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II enzyme, which normally inactivates cortisol and prevents it from binding to renal mineralocorticoid receptors. Consequently, in addition to the excess mineralocorticoids produced by ACTH stimulation of the adrenal gland, high levels of cortisol exert activity through the mineralocorticoid receptor, leading to severe hypokalemia.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of ectopic ACTH syndrome is usually not difficult in the setting of a known malignancy. Urine free cortisol levels fluctuate but are typically greater than two to four times normal, and the plasma ACTH level is usually >22 pmol/L (>100 pg/mL). A suppressed ACTH level excludes this diagnosis and indicates an ACTH-independent cause of Cushing's syndrome (e.g., adrenal or exogenous glucocorticoid). In contrast to pituitary sources of ACTH, most ectopic sources of ACTH do not respond to glucocorticoid suppression. Therefore, high-dose dexamethasone (8 mg PO) suppresses 8:00 A.M. serum cortisol (50% decrease from baseline) in 80% of pituitary ACTH-producing adenomas but fails to suppress ectopic ACTH in 90% of cases. Bronchial and other carcinoids are well-documented exceptions to these general guidelines, as these ectopic sources of ACTH may exhibit feedback regulation indistinguishable from pituitary adenomas, including suppression by high-dose dexamethasone, and ACTH responsiveness to adrenal blockade with metyrapone. If necessary, petrosal sinus catheterization can be used to evaluate a patient with ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome when the source of ACTH is unclear. After CRH stimulation, a 3:1 petrosal sinus:peripheral ACTH ratio strongly suggests a pituitary ACTH source. Imaging studies are also useful in the evaluation of suspected carcinoid lesions, allowing biopsy and characterization of hormone production using special stains.

Treatment: Dyspnea Cushing's Syndrome Caused by Ectopic ACTH Production

The morbidity associated with the ectopic ACTH syndrome can be substantial. Patients may experience depression or personality changes because of extreme cortisol excess. Metabolic derangements, including diabetes mellitus and hypokalemia, can worsen fatigue. Poor wound healing and predisposition to infections can complicate the surgical management of tumors, and opportunistic infections caused by organisms such as Pneumocystis carinii and mycoses are often the cause of death in patients with ectopic ACTH production. Depending on prognosis and treatment plans for the underlying malignancy, measures to reduce cortisol levels are often indicated. Treatment of the underlying malignancy may reduce ACTH levels but is rarely sufficient to reduce cortisol levels to normal. Adrenalectomy is not practical for most of these patients but should be considered if the underlying tumor is not resectable and the prognosis is otherwise favorable (e.g., carcinoid). Medical therapy with ketoconazole (300每600 mg PO bid), metyrapone (250每500 mg PO every 6 h), mitotane (3每6 g PO in four divided doses, tapered to maintain low cortisol production), or other agents that block steroid synthesis or action is often the most practical strategy for managing the hypercortisolism associated with ectopic ACTH production (Chap. 339). Glucocorticoid replacement should be provided to prevent adrenal insufficiency. Unfortunately, many patients eventually progress despite medical blockade.

Tumor-Induced Hypoglycemia Caused by Excess Production of IGF-II

(See also Chap. 345)

Mesenchymal tumors, hemangiopericytomas, hepatocellular tumors, adrenal carcinomas, and a variety of other large tumors have been reported to produce excessive amounts of insulin-like growth factor type II (IGF-II) precursor, which binds weakly to insulin receptors and strongly to IGF-I receptors, leading to insulin-like actions. The gene encoding IGF-II resides on a chromosome 11p15 locus that is normally imprinted (that is, expression is exclusively from a single parental allele). Biallelic expression of the IGF-II gene occurs in a subset of tumors, suggesting loss of methylation and loss of imprinting as a mechanism for gene induction. In addition to increased IGF-II production, IGF-II bioavailability is increased due to complex alterations in circulating binding proteins. Increased IGF-II suppresses growth hormone (GH) and insulin, resulting in reduced IGF binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3), IGF-I, and acid-labile subunit (ALS). The reduction in ALS and IGFBP-3, which normally sequester IGF-II, causes it to be displaced to a small circulating complex that has greater access to insulin target tissues. For this reason, circulating IGF-II levels may not be markedly increased despite causing hypoglycemia. In addition to IGF-II每mediated hypoglycemia, tumors may occupy enough of the liver to impair gluconeogenesis.

In most cases, the tumor causing hypoglycemia is clinically apparent (usually >10 cm in size) and hypoglycemia develops in association with fasting. The diagnosis is made by documenting low serum glucose and suppressed insulin levels in association with symptoms of hypoglycemia. Serum IGF-II levels may not be increased (IGF-II assays may not detect IGF-II precursors). Increased IGF-II mRNA expression is found in most of these tumors. Any medications associated with hypoglycemia should be eliminated. Treatment of the underlying malignancy, if possible, may reduce the predisposition to hypoglycemia. Frequent meals and IV glucose, especially during sleep or fasting, are often necessary to prevent hypoglycemia. Glucagon and glucocorticoids have also been used to enhance glucose production.

Human Chorionic Gonadotropin

hCG is composed of  and  subunits and can be produced as intact hormone, which is biologically active, or as uncombined biologically inert subunits. Ectopic production of intact hCG occurs most often in association with testicular embryonal tumors, germ cell tumors, extragonadal germinomas, lung cancer, hepatoma, and pancreatic islet tumors. Eutopic production of hCG occurs with trophoblastic malignancies. hCG  subunit production is particularly common in lung cancer and pancreatic islet cancer. In men, high hCG levels stimulate steroidogenesis and aromatase activity in testicular Leydig cells, resulting in increased estrogen production and the development of gynecomastia. Precocious puberty in boys or gynecomastia in men should prompt measurement of hCG and consideration of a testicular tumor or another source of ectopic hCG production. Most women are asymptomatic. hCG is easily measured. Treatment should be directed at the underlying malignancy.

Oncogenic Osteomalacia

Hypophosphatemic oncogenic osteomalacia, also called tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO), is characterized by markedly reduced serum phosphorus and renal phosphate wasting, leading to muscle weakness, bone pain, and osteomalacia. Serum calcium and PTH levels are normal, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D is low. Oncogenic osteomalacia is usually caused by benign mesenchymal tumors, such as hemangiopericytomas, fibromas, and giant cell tumors, often of the skeletal extremities or head. It has also been described in sarcomas and in patients with prostate and lung cancer. Resection of the tumor reverses the disorder, confirming its humoral basis. The circulating phosphaturic factor is called phosphatonin〞a factor that inhibits renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate and renal conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Phosphatonin has been identified as fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). FGF23 levels are increased in some, but not all, patients with osteogenic osteomalacia. The disorder exhibits biochemical features similar to those seen with inactivating mutations in the PHEX gene, the cause of hereditary X-linked hypophosphatemia. The PHEX gene encodes a protease that inactivates FGF23. Treatment involves removal of the tumor, if possible, and supplementation with phosphate and vitamin D. Octreotide treatment reduces phosphate wasting in some patients with tumors that express somatostatin receptor subtype 2. Octreotide scans may also be useful in detecting these tumors.
 
Hematologic Syndromes

The elevation of granulocyte, platelet, and eosinophil counts in most patients with myeloproliferative disorders is caused by the proliferation of the myeloid elements due to the underlying disease rather than to a paraneoplastic syndrome. The paraneoplastic hematologic syndromes in patients with solid tumors are less well characterized than are the endocrine syndromes because the ectopic hormone(s) or cytokines responsible have not been identified in most of these tumors (Table 100每2). The extent of the paraneoplastic syndromes parallels the course of the cancer.

Table 100每2 Paraneoplastic Hematologic Syndromes

 
 
Syndrome Proteins Cancers Typically Associated with Syndrome 
Erythrocytosis Erythropoietin Renal cancers

Hepatocarcinoma Cerebellar hemangioblastomas
 
Granulocytosis G-CSFGM-CSFIL-6 Lung cancer Gastrointestinal cancer Ovarian cancer

Genitourinary cancer Hodgkin's disease
 
Thrombocytosis IL-6 Lung cancer Gastrointestinal cancer

Breast cancer Ovarian cancer Lymphoma
 
Eosinophilia IL-5 Lymphoma Leukemia Lung cancer 
Thrombophlebitis Unknown Lung cancer Pancreatic cancer Gastrointestinal cancer Breast cancer

Genitourinary cancer

Ovarian cancer Prostate cancer Lymphoma
 
 


Abbreviations: G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage CSF; IL, interleukin.
 

Erythrocytosis

Ectopic production of erythropoietin by cancer cells causes most paraneoplastic erythrocytosis. The ectopically produced erythropoietin stimulates the production of red blood cells (RBCs) in the bone marrow and raises the hematocrit. Other lymphokines and hormones produced by cancer cells may stimulate erythropoietin release but have not been proved to cause erythrocytosis.

Most patients with erythrocytosis have an elevated hematocrit (>52% in men, >48% in women) that is detected on a routine blood count. Approximately 3% of patients with renal cell cancer, 10% of patients with hepatoma, and 15% of patients with cerebellar hemangioblastomas have erythrocytosis. In most cases the erythrocytosis is asymptomatic.

Patients with erythrocytosis due to a renal cell cancer, hepatoma, or CNS cancer should have measurement of red cell mass. If the red cell mass is elevated, the serum erythropoietin level should be measured. Patients with an appropriate cancer, elevated erythropoietin levels, and no other explanation for erythrocytosis (e.g., hemoglobinopathy that causes increased O2 affinity; Chap. 57) have the paraneoplastic syndrome.

Treatment: Erythrocytosis

Successful resection of the cancer usually resolves the erythrocytosis. If the tumor cannot be resected or treated effectively with radiation therapy or chemotherapy, phlebotomy may control any symptoms related to erythrocytosis.

Granulocytosis

Approximately 30% of patients with solid tumors have granulocytosis (granulocyte count >8000/L). In about half of patients with granulocytosis and cancer, the granulocytosis has an identifiable nonparaneoplastic etiology (infection, tumor necrosis, glucocorticoid administration, etc.). The other patients have proteins in urine and serum that stimulate the growth of bone marrow cells. Tumors and tumor cell lines from patients with lung, ovarian, and bladder cancers have been documented to produce granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and/or interleukin 6 (IL-6). However, the etiology of granulocytosis has not been characterized in most patients.

Patients with granulocytosis are nearly all asymptomatic, and the differential white blood cell count does not have a shift to immature forms of neutrophils. Granulocytosis occurs in 40% of patients with lung and gastrointestinal cancers, 20% of patients with breast cancer, 30% of patients with brain tumors and ovarian cancers, 20% of patients with Hodgkin's disease, and 10% of patients with renal cell carcinoma. Patients with advanced-stage disease are more likely to have granulocytosis than are those with early-stage disease.

Paraneoplastic granulocytosis does not require treatment. The granulocytosis resolves when the underlying cancer is treated.

Thrombocytosis

Some 35% of patients with thrombocytosis (platelet count >400,000/L) have an underlying diagnosis of cancer. IL-6, a candidate molecule for the etiology of paraneoplastic thrombocytosis, stimulates the production of platelets in vitro and in vivo. Some patients with cancer and thrombocytosis have elevated levels of IL-6 in plasma. Another candidate molecule is thrombopoietin, a peptide hormone that stimulates megakaryocyte proliferation and platelet production. The etiology of thrombocytosis has not been established in most cases.

Patients with thrombocytosis are nearly all asymptomatic. Thrombocytosis is not clearly linked to thrombosis in patients with cancer. Thrombocytosis is present in 40% of patients with lung and gastrointestinal cancers; 20% of patients with breast, endometrial, and ovarian cancers; and 10% of patients with lymphoma. Patients with thrombocytosis are more likely to have advanced-stage disease and have a poorer prognosis than do patients without thrombocytosis. Paraneoplastic thrombocytosis does not require treatment.

Eosinophilia

Eosinophilia is present in 1% of patients with cancer. Tumors and tumor cell lines from patients with lymphomas or leukemia may produce IL-5, which stimulates eosinophil growth. Activation of IL-5 transcription in lymphomas and leukemias may involve translocation of the long arm of chromosome 5, to which the genes for IL-5 and other cytokines map.

Patients with eosinophilia are typically asymptomatic. Eosinophilia is present in 10% of patients with lymphoma, 3% of patients with lung cancer, and occasional patients with cervical, gastrointestinal, renal, and breast cancer. Patients with markedly elevated eosinophil counts (>5000/L) can develop shortness of breath and wheezing. A chest radiograph may reveal diffuse pulmonary infiltrates from eosinophil infiltration and activation in the lungs.

Treatment: Eosinophilia

Definitive treatment is directed at the underlying malignancy: Tumors should be resected or treated with radiation or chemotherapy. In most patients who develop shortness of breath related to eosinophilia, symptoms resolve with the use of oral or inhaled glucocorticoids.

Thrombophlebitis

Deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are the most common thrombotic conditions in patients with cancer. Migratory or recurrent thrombophlebitis may be the initial manifestation of cancer. Nearly 15% of patients who develop deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism have a diagnosis of cancer (Chap. 117). The coexistence of peripheral venous thrombosis with visceral carcinoma, particularly pancreatic cancer, is called Trousseau's syndrome.

Pathogenesis

Patients with cancer are predisposed to thromboembolism because they are often at bed rest or immobilized, and tumors may obstruct or slow blood flow. Chronic IV catheters also predispose to clotting. In addition, clotting may be promoted by release of procoagulants or cytokines from tumor cells or associated inflammatory cells or by platelet adhesion or aggregation. The specific molecules that promote thromboembolism have not been identified.

In addition to cancer causing secondary thrombosis, primary thrombophilic diseases may be associated with cancer. For example, the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is associated with a wide range of pathologic manifestations (Chap. 320). About 20% of patients with this syndrome have cancers. Among patients with cancer and antiphospholipid antibodies, 35每45% develop thrombosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with cancer who develop deep venous thrombosis usually develop swelling or pain in the leg, and physical examination reveals tenderness, warmth, and redness. Patients who present with pulmonary embolism develop dyspnea, chest pain, and syncope, and physical examination shows tachycardia, cyanosis, and hypotension. Some 5% of patients with no history of cancer who have a diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism will have a diagnosis of cancer within 1 year. The most common cancers associated with thromboembolic episodes include lung, pancreatic, gastrointestinal, breast, ovarian, and genitourinary cancers; lymphomas; and brain tumors. Patients with cancer who undergo surgical procedures requiring general anesthesia have a 20每30% risk of deep venous thrombosis.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis in patients with cancer is made by impedance plethysmography or bilateral compression ultrasonography of the leg veins. Patients with a noncompressible venous segment have deep venous thrombosis. If compression ultrasonography is normal and there is a high clinical suspicion for deep venous thrombosis, venography should be done to look for a luminal filling defect. Elevation of D-dimer is not as predictive of deep venous thrombosis in patients with cancer as it is in patients without cancer; elevations are seen in people over age 65 years without concomitant evidence of thrombosis, probably as a consequence of increased thrombin deposition and turnover in aging.

Patients with symptoms and signs suggesting a pulmonary embolism should be evaluated with a chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, arterial blood gas analysis, and ventilation-perfusion scan. Patients with mismatched segmental perfusion defects have a pulmonary embolus. Patients with equivocal ventilation-perfusion findings should be evaluated as described above for deep venous thrombosis in their legs. If deep venous thrombosis is detected, they should be anticoagulated. If deep venous thrombosis is not detected, they should be considered for a pulmonary angiogram.

Patients without a diagnosis of cancer who present with an initial episode of thrombophlebitis or pulmonary embolus need no additional tests for cancer other than a careful history and physical examination. In light of the many possible primary sites, diagnostic testing in asymptomatic patients is wasteful. However, if the clot is refractory to standard treatment or is in an unusual site or if the thrombophlebitis is migratory or recurrent, efforts to find an underlying cancer are indicated.

Treatment: Thrombophlebitis

Patients with cancer and a diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism should be treated initially with IV unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin for at least 5 days, and warfarin should be started within 1 or 2 days. The warfarin dose should be adjusted so that the international normalized ratio (INR) is 2每3. Patients with proximal deep venous thrombosis and a relative contraindication to heparin anticoagulation (hemorrhagic brain metastases or pericardial effusion) should be considered for placement of a filter in the inferior vena cava (Greenfield filter) to prevent pulmonary embolism. Warfarin should be administered for 3每6 months. An alternative approach is to use low-molecular-weight heparin for 6 months. Patients with cancer who undergo a major surgical procedure should be considered for heparin prophylaxis or pneumatic boots. Breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and patients with implanted catheters should be considered for prophylaxis (1 mg/d warfarin).

Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes are discussed in Chap. 53. Neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes are discussed in Chap. 101.
 
Acknowledgment

The authors acknowledge the contributions of Bruce E. Johnson to prior versions of this chapter.
 
Further Readings

AL-Tourah AJ et al: Paraneoplastic erythropoietin-induced polycythemia associated with small lymphocytic lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 24:2388, 2006[PMID: 16710039] 

 
Gosden RG, Feinberg AP: Genetics and epigenetics〞nature's pen-and-pencil set. N Engl J Med 356:731, 2007[PMID: 17301306] 

 
Mundy GR, Edwards JR: PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) in hypercalcemia. J Am Soc Nephrol 19:672, 2008[PMID: 18256357] 

 
Pelosof LC, Gerber DE: Paraneoplastic syndromes: An approach to diagnosis and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc 85:838, 2010[PMID: 20810794] 

 
Rikhof B ET AL: The insulin-like growth factor system and sarcomas. J Pathol 217:469, 2009[PMID: 19148905] 

 
Shaikh A et al: Regulation of phosphate homeostasis by the phosphatonins and other novel mediators. Pediatr Nephrol 23:1203, 2008[PMID: 18288501] 

 
Stewart AF: Clinical practice: Hypercalcemia associated with cancer. N Engl J Med 352:373, 2005[PMID: 15673803] 
 
 

^^
Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes: Introduction

Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are cancer-related syndromes that can affect any part of the nervous system (Table 101每1). They are caused by mechanisms other than metastasis or by any of the complications of cancer such as coagulopathy, stroke, metabolic and nutritional conditions, infections, and side effects of cancer therapy. In 60% of patients the neurologic symptoms precede the cancer diagnosis. Clinically disabling PNDs occur in 0.5每1% of all cancer patients, but they affect 2每3% of patients with neuroblastoma or small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and 30每50% of patients with thymoma or sclerotic myeloma.

Table 101每1 Paraneoplastic Syndromes of the Nervous System

 
 
Classic Syndromes: Usually Occur With Cancer Association Nonclassic Syndromes: May Occur With and Without Cancer Association 
Encephalomyelitis

Limbic encephalitis

Cerebellar degeneration (adults)

Opsoclonus-myoclonus

Subacute sensory neuronopathy

Gastrointestinal paresis or pseudo-obstruction

Dermatomyositis (adults)

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome

Cancer or melanoma associated retinopathy
 Brainstem encephalitis

Stiff-person syndrome

Necrotizing myelopathy

Motor neuron disease

Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome

Subacute and chronic mixed sensory-motor neuropathies

Neuropathy associated with plasma cell dyscrasias and lymphoma

Vasculitis of nerve

Pure autonomic neuropathy

Acute necrotizing myopathy

Polymyositis

Vasculitis of muscle

Optic neuropathy

BDUMP
 
 


Abbreviation: BDUMP, bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation.

 
 
Pathogenesis

Most PNDs are mediated by immune responses triggered by neuronal proteins (onconeuronal antigens) expressed by tumors. In PNDs of the central nervous system (CNS), many antibody-associated immune responses have been identified (Table 101每2). These antibodies react with the patient's tumor, and their detection in serum or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) usually predicts the presence of cancer. When the antigens are intracellular, most syndromes are associated with extensive infiltrates of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, microglial activation, gliosis, and variable neuronal loss. The infiltrating T cells are often in close contact with neurons undergoing degeneration, suggesting a primary pathogenic role. T cell〞mediated cytotoxicity may contribute directly to cell death in these PNDs. Thus both humoral and cellular immune mechanisms participate in the pathogenesis of many PNDs. This complex immunopathogenesis may underlie the resistance of many of these conditions to therapy.

Table 101每2 Antibodies to Intracellular Antigens, Syndromes, and Associated Cancers

 
 
Antibody Associated Neurologic Syndrome(s) Tumors 
Anti-Hu Encephalomyelitis, subacute sensory neuronopathy SCLC 
Anti-Yo Cerebellar degeneration Ovary, breast 
Anti-Ri Cerebellar degeneration, opsoclonus Breast, gynecologic, SCLC 
Anti-Tr Cerebellar degeneration Hodgkin lymphoma 
Anti-CV2/CRMP5
  Encephalomyelitis, chorea, optic neuritis, uveitis, peripheral neuropathy SCLC, thymoma, other 
Anti-Ma proteins Limbic, hypothalamic, brainstem encephalitis Testicular (Ma2), other (Ma) 
Anti-amphiphysin Stiff-person syndrome, encephalomyelitis Breast, SCLC 
Recoverin, bipolar cell antibodies, othersa  Cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR)

Melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR)
 SCLC (CAR), melanoma (MAR) 
Anti-GAD Stiff-person, cerebellar syndromes Infrequent tumor association (thymoma) 
 


aA variety of target antigens have been identified.

Abbreviations: CRMP, collapsing response-mediator protein; SCLC, small cell lung cancer.
 

In contrast to the disorders associated with immune responses against intracellular antigens, those associated with antibodies to antigens expressed on the neuronal cell surface of the CNS or at neuromuscular synapses are more responsive to immunotherapy (Table 101每3, Fig. 101-1). These disorders occur with and without a cancer association, and there is increasing evidence that they are mediated by the antibodies.

Table 101每3 Antibodies to Cell Surface or Synaptic Antigens, Syndromes, and Associated Tumors

 
 
Antibody Neurologic Syndrome Tumor Type when Associated 
Anti-AChR (muscle)a  Myasthenia gravis Thymoma 
Anti-AChR (neuronal)a  Autonomic neuropathy SCLC 
Anti-VGKC- related proteinsb (LGI1, Caspr2)  Neuromyotonia, limbic encephalitis Thymoma, SCLC 
Anti-VGCCc  LEMS, cerebellar degeneration SCLC 
Anti-NMDARd  Anti-NMDAR encephalitis Teratoma 
Anti-AMPARd  Limbic encephalitis with relapses SCLC, thymoma, breast 
Anti-GABABRd 
  Limbic encephalitis, seizures SCLC, neuroendocrine 
Glycine receptord  Encephalomyelitis with rigidity, stiff-person syndrome Lung cancer 
 


aA direct pathogenic role of these antibodies has been demonstrated.

bAnti-VGKC-related proteins are pathogenic for some types of neuromyotonia.

cAnti-VGCC antibodies are pathogenic for LEMS.

d These antibodies are strongly suspected to be pathogenic.

Abbreviations: AChR, acetylcholine receptor; AMPAR, -amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptor; GABABR, Gamma-amino-butyric acid B receptor; GAD, glutamic acid decarboxylase; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; NMDAR, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; VGCC, voltage-gated calcium channel; VGKC, voltage-gated potassium channel.
 

Other PNDs are likely immune-mediated, although their antigens are unknown. These include several syndromes of inflammatory neuropathies and myopathies. In addition, many patients with typical PND syndromes are antibody-negative. For still other PNDs, the cause remains quite obscure. These include, among others, several neuropathies that occur in the terminal stages of cancer and a number of neuropathies associated with plasma cell dyscrasias or lymphoma without evidence of inflammatory infiltrates or deposits of immunoglobulin, cryoglobulin, or amyloid.

Figure 101-1

 
 
 
 
Antibodies to NR1/NR2 subunits of the NMDA receptor in a patient with paraneoplastic encephalitis and ovarian teratoma.Panel A is a section of dentate gyrus of rat hippocampus immunolabeled (brown staining) with the patient's antibodies. The reactivity predominates in the molecular layer, which is highly enriched in dendritic processes. Panel B shows the antibody reactivity with cultures of rat hippocampal neurons; the intense green -immunolabeling is due to the antibodies against the NR1 subunits of NMDA receptors.
 
 

Approach to the Patient: Paraneoplastic Neurologic Disorders

Three key concepts are important for the diagnosis and management of PNDs. First, it is common for symptoms to appear before the presence of a tumor is known; second, the neurologic syndrome usually develops rapidly, producing severe deficits in a short period of time; and third, there is evidence that prompt tumor control improves the neurologic outcome. Therefore, the major concern of the physician is to recognize a disorder promptly as paraneoplastic to identify and treat the tumor.

Pnd of the Central Nervous System and Dorsal Root Ganglia

When symptoms involve brain, spinal cord, or dorsal root ganglia, the suspicion of PND is usually based on a combination of clinical, radiologic, and CSF findings. In these cases, a biopsy of the affected tissue is often difficult to obtain, and although useful to rule out other disorders (e.g., metastasis, infection), neuropathologic findings are not specific for PND. Furthermore, there are no specific radiologic or electrophysiologic tests that are diagnostic of PND. The presence of antineuronal antibodies (Tables 101每2 and 101每3) may help in the diagnosis, but only 60每70% of PNDs of the CNS and less than 20% of those involving the peripheral nervous system have neuronal or neuromuscular antibodies that can be used as diagnostic tests. MRI and CSF studies are important to rule out neurologic complications due to the direct spread of cancer, particularly metastatic and leptomeningeal disease. In most PNDs the MRI findings are nonspecific. Paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis is usually associated with characteristic MRI abnormalities in the mesial temporal lobes (see below), but similar findings can occur with other disorders [e.g., nonparaneoplastic autoimmune limbic encephalitis, and human herpesvirus type 6 (HHV-6) encephalitis] (Fig. 101-2). The CSF profile of patients with PND of the CNS or dorsal root ganglia typically consists of mild to moderate pleocytosis (<200 mononuclear cells, predominantly lymphocytes), an increase in the protein concentration, intrathecal synthesis of IgG, and a variable presence of oligoclonal bands.

Figure 101-2

 
 
 
Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence MRI of a patient with limbic encephalitis and LGI1 antibodies. Note the abnormal hyperintensity involving the medial aspect of the temporal lobes.
 
 

Pnd of Nerve and Muscle

If symptoms involve peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction, or muscle, the diagnosis of a specific PND is usually established on clinical, electrophysiologic, and pathologic grounds. The clinical history, accompanying symptoms (e.g., anorexia, weight loss), and type of syndrome dictate the studies and degree of effort needed to demonstrate a neoplasm. For example, the frequent association of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) with SCLC should lead to a chest and abdomen CT or body positron emission tomography (PET) scan and, if negative, periodic tumor screening for at least 3 years after the neurologic diagnosis. In contrast, the weak association of polymyositis with cancer calls into question the need for repeated cancer screenings in this situation. Serum and urine immunofixation studies should be considered in patients with peripheral neuropathy of unknown cause; detection of a monoclonal gammopathy suggests the need for additional studies to uncover a B cell or plasma cell malignancy. In paraneoplastic neuropathies, diagnostically useful antineuronal antibodies are limited to anti-CV2/CRMP5 and anti-Hu. For any type of PND, if antineuronal antibodies are negative, the diagnosis relies on the demonstration of cancer and the exclusion of other cancer-related or independent neurologic disorders. Combined CT and PET scans often uncover tumors undetected by other tests.

For germ-cell tumors of the testis and teratomas of the ovary ultrasound and MRI may reveal tumors undetectable by PET.
 
Specific Paraneoplastic Neurologic Syndromes

Paraneoplastic Encephalomyelitis and Focal Encephalitis

The term encephalomyelitis describes an inflammatory process with multifocal involvement of the nervous system, including brain, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord. It is often associated with dorsal root ganglia and autonomic dysfunction. For any given patient, the clinical manifestations are determined by the areas predominantly involved, but pathologic studies almost always reveal abnormalities beyond the symptomatic regions. Several clinicopathologic syndromes may occur alone or in combination: (1) cortical encephalitis, which may present as "epilepsia partialis continua"; (2) limbic encephalitis, characterized by confusion, depression, agitation, anxiety, severe short-term memory deficits, partial complex seizures, and sometimes dementia (the MRI usually shows unilateral or bilateral medial temporal lobe abnormalities, best seen with T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences, and occasionally enhancing with gadolinium); (3) brainstem encephalitis, resulting in eye movement disorders (nystagmus, opsoclonus, supranuclear or nuclear paresis), cranial nerve paresis, dysarthria, dysphagia, and central autonomic dysfunction; (4) cerebellar gait and limb ataxia; (5) myelitis, which may cause lower or upper motor neuron symptoms, myoclonus, muscle rigidity, and spasms; and (6) autonomic dysfunction as a result of involvement of the neuraxis at multiple levels, including hypothalamus, brainstem, and autonomic nerves (see autonomic neuropathy). Cardiac arrhythmias, postural hypotension, or central hypoventilation are frequent causes of death in patients with encephalomyelitis.

Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and focal encephalitis are usually associated with SCLC, but many other cancers have also been reported. Patients with SCLC and these syndromes usually have anti-Hu antibodies in serum and CSF. Anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies occur less frequently; some of these patients may develop chorea, uveitis, or optic neuritis. Antibodies to Ma proteins are associated with limbic, hypothalamic, and brainstem encephalitis and occasionally with cerebellar symptoms (Fig. 101-3); some patients develop hypersomnia, cataplexy, and severe hypokinesia. MRI abnormalities are frequent, including those described with limbic encephalitis and variable involvement of the hypothalamus, basal ganglia, or upper brainstem. The oncologic associations of these antibodies are shown in Table 101每2.

Figure 101-3

 
 
 
 
 
MRI and tumor of a patient with anti-Ma2-associated encephalitis. Panels A and B are fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MRI sequences showing abnormal hyperintensities in the medial temporal lobes, hypothalamus, and upper brainstem. Panel C corresponds to a section of the -patient's orchiectomy incubated with a specific marker (Oct4) of germ-cell tumors. The positive (brown) cells correspond to an intratubular germ-cell neoplasm.
 
 

Treatment: Encephalomyelitis and Focal Encephalitis

Most types of paraneoplastic encephalitis and encephalomyelitis respond poorly to treatment. Stabilization of symptoms or partial neurologic improvement may occasionally occur, particularly if there is a satisfactory response of the tumor to treatment. The roles of plasma exchange, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), and immunosuppression have not been established. Approximately 30% of patients with anti-Ma2-associated encephalitis respond to treatment of the tumor (usually a germ-cell neoplasm of the testis) and immunotherapy.

Encephalitides with Antibodies to Cell-Surface or Synaptic Proteins (Table 101每3)

These disorders are important for three reasons: (1) they can occur with and without tumor association, (2) some syndromes predominate in young individuals and children, and (3) despite the severity of the symptoms patients usually respond to treatment of the tumor, if found, and immunotherapy (glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, IVIg, rituximab, or cyclophosphamide).

Encephalitis with antibodies to voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKC)-related proteins (LGI1, Caspr2) predominates in men and frequently presents with memory loss and seizures (limbic encephalopathy), along with hyponatremia and sleep and autonomic dysfunction. Less commonly, patients develop neuromyotonia or a mixed clinical picture (Morvan's syndrome). Approximately 20% of patients with antibodies to VGKC-related proteins have an underlying tumor, usually SCLC or thymoma.

Encephalitis with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibodies (Fig. 101-1) usually occurs in young women and children, but men and older patients of both sexes can be affected. The disorder has a characteristic pattern of symptom progression that includes a prodrome resembling a viral process, followed in a few days by the onset of severe psychiatric symptoms, memory loss, seizures, decreased level of consciousness, abnormal movements (orofacial, limb, and trunk dyskinesias, dystonic postures), autonomic instability, and frequent hypoventilation. The syndrome is often misdiagnosed as a viral or idiopathic encephalitis, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, or encephalitis lethargica, and many patients are initially evaluated by psychiatrists with the suspicion of drug abuse or an acute psychosis. The detection of an associated ovarian teratoma is age-dependant; 50% of female patients older than age 18 have uni- or bilateral ovarian teratomas, while less than 9% of girls younger than 14 years have a teratoma. In male patients the detection of a tumor is rare.

Encephalitis with -amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate (AMPA) receptor antibodies affects middle-aged women, who develop acute limbic dysfunction or less frequently prominent psychiatric symptoms; 70% of the patients have an underlying tumor in the lung, breast, or thymus. The neurologic disorder responds to treatment of the tumor and immunotherapy. Neurologic relapses may occur; these also respond to immunotherapy and are not necessarily associated with tumor recurrence.

Encephalitis with -aminobutyric acid type B (GABAB) receptor antibodies usually presents with limbic encephalitis and seizures; 50% of the patients have SCLC or a neuroendocrine tumor of the lung. Neurologic symptoms often respond to immunotherapy and treatment of the tumor if found. Patients may have additional antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), of unclear significance. Other antibodies to nonneuronal proteins are often found in these patients as well as in patients with AMPA receptor antibodies, indicating a general tendency to autoimmunity.

Paraneoplastic Cerebellar Degeneration

This disorder is often preceded by a prodrome that may include dizziness, oscillopsia, blurry or double vision, nausea, and vomiting. A few days or weeks later, patients develop dysarthria, gait and limb ataxia, and variable dysphagia. The examination usually shows downbeating nystagmus and, rarely, opsoclonus. Brainstem dysfunction, upgoing toes, or a mild neuropathy may occur, but more often the clinical features are restricted to the cerebellum. Early in the course, MRI studies are usually normal; later, the MRI typically reveals cerebellar atrophy. The disorder results from extensive degeneration of Purkinje cells, with variable involvement of other cerebellar cortical neurons, deep cerebellar nuclei, and spinocerebellar tracts. The tumors more frequently involved are SCLC, cancer of the breast and ovary, and Hodgkin lymphoma.

Anti-Yo antibodies in patients with breast and gynecologic cancers and anti-Tr antibodies in patients with Hodgkin lymphoma are the two immune responses typically associated with prominent or pure cerebellar degeneration. Antibodies to P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) occur in some patients with SCLC and cerebellar dysfunction; only some of these patients develop LEMS. A variable degree of cerebellar dysfunction can be associated with virtually any of the antibodies and PND of the CNS shown in Table 101每2. A number of single case reports have described neurologic improvement after tumor removal, plasma exchange, IVIg, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, or glucocorticoids. However, large series of patients with antibody-positive paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration show that this disorder rarely improves with any treatment.
 
Paraneoplastic Opsoclonus-Myoclonus Syndrome

Opsoclonus is a disorder of eye movement characterized by involuntary, chaotic saccades that occur in all directions of gaze; it is frequently associated with myoclonus and ataxia. Opsoclonus-myoclonus may be cancer-related or idiopathic. When the cause is paraneoplastic, the tumors involved are usually cancer of the lung and breast in adults and neuroblastoma in children. The pathologic substrate of opsoclonus-myoclonus is unclear, but studies suggest that disinhibition of the fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum is involved. Most patients do not have detectable antineuronal antibodies. A small subset of patients with ataxia, opsoclonus, and other eye-movement disorders develop anti-Ri antibodies; in rare instances muscle rigidity, autonomic dysfunction, and dementia also occur. The tumors most frequently involved in anti-Ri-associated syndromes are breast and ovarian cancer. If the tumor is not successfully treated, the neurologic syndrome in adults often progresses to encephalopathy, coma, and death. In addition to treating the tumor, symptoms may respond to immunotherapy (glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and/or IVIg).

At least 50% of children with opsoclonus-myoclonus have an underlying neuroblastoma. Hypotonia, ataxia, behavioral changes, and irritability are frequent accompanying symptoms. Neurologic symptoms often improve with treatment of the tumor and glucocorticoids, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), plasma exchange, IVIg, and rituximab. Many patients are left with psychomotor retardation and behavioral and sleep problems.

Paraneoplastic Syndromes of the Spinal Cord

The number of reports of paraneoplastic spinal cord syndromes, such as subacute motor neuronopathy and acute necrotizing myelopathy, has decreased in recent years. This may represent a true decrease in incidence, due to improved and prompt oncologic interventions, or the identification of nonparaneoplastic etiologies.

Some patients with cancer develop upper or lower motor neuron dysfunction or both, resembling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. It is unclear whether these disorders have a paraneoplastic etiology or simply coincide with the presence of cancer. There are isolated case reports of cancer patients with motor neuron dysfunction who had neurologic improvement after tumor treatment. A search for lymphoma should be undertaken in patients with a rapidly progressive motor neuron syndrome and a monoclonal protein in serum or CSF.

Paraneoplastic myelitis may present with upper or lower motor neuron symptoms, segmental myoclonus, and rigidity, and can be the first manifestation of encephalomyelitis.

Paraneoplastic myelopathy can also produce several syndromes characterized by prominent muscle stiffness and rigidity. The spectrum ranges from focal symptoms in one or several extremities (stiff-limb syndrome or stiff-person syndrome) to a disorder that also affects the brainstem (known as encephalomyelitis with rigidity) and likely has a different pathogenesis. Some patients with encephalomyelitis and rigidity have glycine receptor antibodies.

Paraneoplastic Stiff-Person Syndrome

This disorder is characterized by progressive muscle rigidity, stiffness, and painful spasms triggered by auditory, sensory, or emotional stimuli. Rigidity mainly involves the lower trunk and legs, but it can affect the upper extremities and neck. Symptoms improve with sleep and general anesthetics. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate continuous motor unit activity. Antibodies associated with the stiff-person syndrome target proteins (GAD, amphiphysin) involved in the function of inhibitory synapses utilizing -aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glycine as neurotransmitters. Paraneoplastic stiff-person syndrome and amphiphysin antibodies are often related to SCLC and breast cancer. By contrast, antibodies to GAD may occur in some cancer patients but are much more frequently present in the nonparaneoplastic disorder.

Treatment: Stiff-Person Syndrome

Optimal treatment of stiff-person syndrome requires therapy of the underlying tumor, glucocorticoids, and symptomatic use of drugs that enhance GABA-ergic transmission (diazepam, baclofen, sodium valproate, tiagabine, vigabatrin). A benefit of IVIg has been demonstrated for the nonparaneoplastic disorder but remains to be established for the paraneoplastic syndrome.

Paraneoplastic Sensory Neuronopathy or Dorsal Root Ganglionopathy

This syndrome is characterized by sensory deficits that may be symmetric or asymmetric, painful dysesthesias, radicular pain, and decreased or absent reflexes. All modalities of sensation and any part of the body including face and trunk can be involved. Specialized sensations such as taste and hearing can also be affected. Electrophysiologic studies show decreased or absent sensory nerve potentials with normal or near-normal motor conduction velocities. Symptoms result from an inflammatory, likely immune-mediated, process that targets the dorsal root ganglia, causing neuronal loss, proliferation of satellite cells, and secondary degeneration of the posterior columns of the spinal cord. The dorsal and less frequently the anterior nerve roots and peripheral nerves may also be involved. This disorder often precedes or is associated with encephalomyelitis and autonomic dysfunction and has the same immunologic and oncologic associations, e.g., anti-Hu antibodies and SCLC.

Treatment: Sensory Neuronopathy

As with anti-Hu-associated encephalomyelitis, the therapeutic approach focuses on prompt treatment of the tumor. Glucocorticoids occasionally produce clinical stabilization or improvement. The benefit of IVIg and plasma exchange is not proved.
 
Paraneoplastic Peripheral Neuropathies

These disorders may develop any time during the course of the neoplastic disease. Neuropathies occurring at late stages of cancer or lymphoma usually cause mild to moderate sensorimotor deficits due to axonal degeneration of unclear etiology. These neuropathies are often masked by concurrent neurotoxicity from chemotherapy and other cancer therapies. In contrast, the neuropathies that develop in the early stages of cancer frequently show a rapid progression, sometimes with a relapsing and remitting course, and evidence of inflammatory infiltrates and axonal loss or demyelination in biopsy studies. If demyelinating features predominate (Chap. 384), IVIg, plasma exchange, or glucocorticoids may improve symptoms. Occasionally anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies are present; detection of anti-Hu suggests concurrent dorsal root ganglionitis.

Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome and brachial plexitis have occasionally been reported in patients with lymphoma, but there is no clear evidence of a paraneoplastic association.

Malignant monoclonal gammopathies include: (1) multiple myeloma and sclerotic myeloma associated with IgG or IgA monoclonal proteins; and (2) Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, B cell lymphoma, and chronic B cell lymphocytic leukemia associated with IgM monoclonal proteins. These disorders may cause neuropathy by a variety of mechanisms, including compression of roots and plexuses by metastasis to vertebral bodies and pelvis, deposits of amyloid in peripheral nerves, and paraneoplastic mechanisms. The paraneoplastic variety has several distinctive features. Approximately half of patients with sclerotic myeloma develop a sensorimotor neuropathy with predominantly motor deficits, resembling a chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy (Chap. 385); some patients develop elements of the POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, skin changes). Treatment of the plasmacytoma or sclerotic lesions usually improves the neuropathy. In contrast, the sensorimotor or sensory neuropathy associated with multiple myeloma rarely responds to treatment. Between 5 and 10% of patients with Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia develop a distal symmetric sensorimotor neuropathy with predominant involvement of large sensory fibers. These patients may have IgM antibodies in their serum against myelin-associated glycoprotein and various gangliosides (Chap. 385). In addition to treating the Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, other therapies may improve the neuropathy, including plasma exchange, IVIg, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, or rituximab.

Vasculitis of the nerve and muscle causes a painful symmetric or asymmetric distal axonal sensorimotor neuropathy with variable proximal weakness. It predominantly affects elderly men and is associated with an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and increased CSF protein concentration. SCLC and lymphoma are the primary tumors involved. Glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide often result in neurologic improvement.

Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (neuromyotonia, or Isaacs' syndrome) is characterized by spontaneous and continuous muscle fiber activity of peripheral nerve origin. Clinical features include cramps, muscle twitching (fasciculations or myokymia), stiffness, delayed muscle relaxation (pseudomyotonia), and spontaneous or evoked carpal or pedal spasms. The involved muscles may be hypertrophic, and some patients develop paresthesias and hyperhidrosis. CNS dysfunction, including mood changes, sleep disorder, or hallucinations, may occur. The electromyogram (EMG) shows fibrillations; fasciculations; and doublet, triplet, or multiplet single-unit (myokymic) discharges that have a high intraburst frequency. Approximately 20% of patients have serum antibodies to Caspr2-related proteins. The disorder often occurs without cancer; if paraneoplastic, benign, and malignant thymomas and SCLC are the usual tumors. Phenytoin, carbamazepine, and plasma exchange improve symptoms.

Paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy usually develops as a component of other disorders, such as LEMS and encephalomyelitis. It may rarely occur as a pure or predominantly autonomic neuropathy with adrenergic or cholinergic dysfunction at the pre- or postganglionic levels. Patients can develop several life-threatening complications, such as gastrointestinal paresis with pseudoobstruction, cardiac dysrhythmias, and postural hypotension. Other clinical features include abnormal pupillary responses, dry mouth, anhidrosis, erectile dysfunction, and problems in sphincter control. The disorder occurs in association with several tumors, including SCLC, cancer of the pancreas or testis, carcinoid tumors, and lymphoma. Because autonomic symptoms can be the presenting feature of encephalomyelitis, serum anti-Hu and anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies should be sought. Antibodies to ganglionic (alpha3-type) neuronal acetylcholine receptors are the cause of autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy, a disorder that frequently occurs without cancer association (Chap. 375).

Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome

LEMS is discussed in Chap. 386.

Myasthenia Gravis

Myasthenia gravis is discussed in Chap. 386.

Polymyositis-Dermatomyositis

Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are discussed in detail in Chap. 388.

Acute Necrotizing Myopathy

Patients with this syndrome develop myalgias and rapid progression of weakness involving the extremities and the pharyngeal and respiratory muscles, often resulting in death. Serum muscle enzymes are elevated, and muscle biopsy shows extensive necrosis with minimal or absent inflammation and sometimes deposits of complement. The disorder occurs as a paraneoplastic manifestation of a variety of cancers including SCLC and cancer of the gastrointestinal tract, breast, kidney, and prostate, among others. Glucocorticoids and treatment of the underlying tumor rarely control the disorder.

Paraneoplastic Visual Syndromes

This group of disorders involves the retina and, less frequently, the uvea and optic nerves. The term cancer-associated retinopathy is used to describe paraneoplastic cone and rod dysfunction characterized by photosensitivity, progressive loss of vision and color perception, central or ring scotomas, night blindness, and attenuation of photopic and scotopic responses in the electroretinogram (ERG). The most commonly associated tumor is SCLC. Melanoma-associated retinopathy affects patients with metastatic cutaneous melanoma. Patients develop acute onset of night blindness and shimmering, flickering, or pulsating photopsias that often progress to visual loss. The ERG shows reduced b waves with normal dark adapted a waves. Paraneoplastic optic neuritis and uveitis are very uncommon and can develop in association with encephalomyelitis. Some patients with paraneoplastic uveitis harbor anti-CV2/CRMP5 antibodies.

Some paraneoplastic retinopathies are associated with serum antibodies that specifically react with the subset of retinal cells undergoing degeneration, supporting an immune-mediated pathogenesis (Table 101每2). Paraneoplastic retinopathies usually fail to improve with treatment, although rare responses to glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and IVIg have been reported.
 
Further Readings

Antoine JC, Camdessanch谷 JP: Peripheral nervous system involvement in patients with cancer. Lancet Neurol 6:75, 2007[PMID: 17166804] 

 
Graus F et al: Antibodies and neuronal autoimmune disorders of the CNS. J Neurol 257:509, 2010[PMID: 20035430] 

 
Lai M et al: Investigation of LGI1 as the antigen in limbic encephalitis previously attributed to potassium channels: A case series. Lancet Neurol 9:776, 2010[PMID: 20580615] 

 
Rosenfeld MR, Dalmau J: Update on paraneoplastic and autoimmune disorders of the central nervous system. Semin Neurol 30:320, 2010[PMID: 20577938] 

 
Titulaer MJ et al: Screening for tumours in paraneoplastic syndromes: Report of an EFNS task force. Eur J Neurol 18:19, 2011[PMID: 20880069] 
 
 

^^
Thymoma: Introduction

The thymus is derived from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches and is located in the anterior mediastinum. It is composed of epithelial and stromal cells derived from the pharyngeal pouch and lymphoid precursors derived from mesodermal cells. It is the site to which bone marrow precursors that are committed to differentiate into T cells migrate to complete their differentiation. Like many organs, it is organized into functional regions, in this case the cortex and the medulla. The cortex of the thymus contains ~85% of the lymphoid cells, and the medulla contains ~15%. It appears that the primitive bone marrow progenitors enter the thymus at the corticomedullary junction and migrate first through the cortex toward the periphery of the gland and then toward the medulla as they mature. Medullary thymocytes have a phenotype that cannot be distinguished readily from that of mature peripheral blood and lymph node T cells.

Several things can go wrong with the thymus, but thymic abnormalities are very rare. If the thymus does not develop properly, serious deficiencies in T cell development ensue and severe immunodeficiency is seen (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome, Chap. 316). If a lymphoid cell within the thymus becomes neoplastic, the disease that develops is a lymphoma. The majority of lymphoid tumors that develop in the thymus are derived from the precursor T cells, and the tumor is a precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma (Chap. 110). Rare B cells exist in the thymus, and when they become neoplastic, the tumor is a mediastinal (thymic) B cell lymphoma (Chap. 110). Hodgkin's disease, particularly the nodular sclerosing subtype, often involves the anterior mediastinum. Extranodal marginal zone (MALT) lymphomas have been reported to involve the thymus in the setting of Sj?gren's syndrome or other autoimmune disorders, and the lymphoma cells often express IgA instead of IgM on their surface. Castleman's disease can involve the thymus. Germ cell tumors and carcinoid tumors occasionally may arise in the thymus. If the epithelial cells of the thymus become neoplastic, the tumor that develops is a thymoma.

Clinical Presentation and Differential Diagnosis

Thymoma is the most common cause of an anterior mediastinal mass in adults, accounting for ~40% of all mediastinal masses. The other major causes of anterior mediastinal masses are lymphomas, germ cell tumors, and substernal thyroid tumors. Carcinoid tumors, lipomas, and thymic cysts also may produce radiographic masses. After combination chemotherapy for another malignancy, teenagers and young adults may develop a rebound thymic hyperplasia in the first few months after treatment. Granulomatous inflammatory diseases (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis) can produce thymic enlargement. Thymomas are most common in the fifth and sixth decades, are uncommon in children, and are distributed evenly between men and women.

About 40每50% of patients are asymptomatic; masses are detected incidentally on routine chest radiographs. When symptomatic, patients may have cough, chest pain, dyspnea, fever, wheezing, fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, or anorexia. Occasionally, thymomas may obstruct the superior vena cava. About 40% of patients with thymoma have another systemic autoimmune illness related to the thymoma. About 30% of patients with thymoma have myasthenia gravis, 5每8% have pure red cell aplasia, and ~5% have hypogammaglobulinemia. Thymoma with hypogammaglobulinemia also is called Good's syndrome. Among patients with myasthenia gravis, ~10每15% have a thymoma. Thymoma more rarely may be associated with polymyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyroiditis, Sj?gren's syndrome, ulcerative colitis, pernicious anemia, Addison's disease, scleroderma, and panhypopituitarism. In one series, 70% of patients with thymoma were found to have another systemic illness.

Diagnosis and Staging

Once a mediastinal mass is detected, a surgical procedure is required for definitive diagnosis. An initial mediastinoscopy or limited thoracotomy can be undertaken to get sufficient tissue to make an accurate diagnosis. Fine-needle aspiration is poor at distinguishing between lymphomas and thymomas but is more reliable in diagnosing germ cell tumors and metastatic carcinoma. Thymomas and lymphomas require sufficient tissue to examine the tumor architecture to assure an accurate diagnosis and obtain prognostic information.

Once a diagnosis of thymoma is defined, subsequent staging generally occurs at surgery. However, chest CT scans can assess local invasiveness in some instances. MRI has a defined role in the staging of posterior mediastinal tumors, but it is not clear that it adds important information to the CT scan in anterior mediastinal tumors. Somatostatin receptor imaging with indium-labeled somatostatin analogues may be of value. If invasion is not distinguished by noninvasive testing, an effort to resect the entire tumor should be undertaken. If invasion is present, neoadjuvant chemotherapy may be warranted before surgery (see "Approach to Treatment," below).

Some 90% of thymomas are in the anterior mediastinum, but some may be in other mediastinal sites or even the neck, based on aberrant migration of the developing thymic enlage.

The staging system for thymoma was developed by Masaoka and colleagues (Table e20-1). It is an anatomic system in which the stage is increased on the basis of the degree of invasiveness. The 5-year survival of patients in the various stages is as follows: stage I, 96%; stage II, 86%; stage III, 69%; stage IV, 50%. The French Study Group on Thymic Tumors (GETT) has proposed modifications to the Masaoka scheme based on the degree of surgical removal because the extent of surgery has been noted to be a prognostic indicator. In their system, stage I tumors are divided into A and B on the basis of whether the surgeon suspects adhesions to adjacent structures; stage III tumors are divided into A and B based on whether disease was subtotally resected or only biopsied. The concurrence between the two systems is high.

Table e20-1 Masaoka Staging System for Thymo-Mas

 
 
Stage Diagnostic Criteria 
I Macroscopically and mi-croscopically completely encapsulated; no invasion through cap-sule 
II   
  IIA Microscopic invasion out-side the capsule 
  IIB Macroscopic invasion into surrounding fat or grossly adherent to pleura or pericardium 
III   
  IIIA Macroscopic invasion into neighboring organs, pericardium, or pleura but not great ves-sels 
  IIIB Macroscopic invasion into neighboring organs that includes great ves-sels 
IV   
  IVA Pleural or pericardial dis-semination 
  IVB Lymphatic or hematoge-nous metasta-ses 
  Stage Distribution, %  5-Year Survival, %  10-Year Survival, %  
I 36 95每100 86每100 
II 26 70每100 50每100 
III 22 68每89 47每60 
IV 10 47每69 0每11 
 


Source: From A Masaoka et al: Cancer 48:2485, 1981. Updated from S Tomaszek et al: Ann Thorac Surg 87:1973, 2009, and CB Falkson et al: J Thorac Oncol 4:911, 2009
 

Pathology and Etiology

Thymomas are epithelial tumors, and all of them have malignant potential. It is not worthwhile to try to divide them into benign and malignant forms; the key prognostic feature is whether they are noninvasive or invasive. About 65% of thymomas are encapsulated and noninvasive, and about 35% are invasive. They may have a variable percentage of lymphocytes within the tumor, but genetic studies suggest that the lymphocytes are benign polyclonal cells. The epithelial component of the tumor may consist primarily of round or oval cells derived mainly from the cortex or spindle-shaped cells derived mainly from the medulla or combinations of the two types (Table e20-2). Cytologic features are not reliable predictors of biologic behavior. About 90% of A, AB, and B1 tumors are localized. A very small number of patients have aggressive histology features characteristic of carcinomas. Thymic carcinomas are invasive and have a poor prognosis.

Table e20-2 World Health Organization (WHO) Histologic Classification of Thymus Tumors

 
 
Type Histologic Description 
A Medullary thymoma 
AB Mixed thymoma 
B1 Predominantly cortical thymoma 
B2 Cortical thymoma 
B3 Well-differentiated thymic carcinoma 
C Thymic carcinoma 
Type Distribution, % Prognosis (10-year disease-free survival), % 
A 8 100 
AB 26 90〞100 
B1 15 78〞94 
B2 28 83 
B3 15 36 
C 8 0每35 
 


Source: From S Tomaszek et al: Ann Thorac Surg 87:1973, 2009.
 

The genetic lesions in thymomas are not well characterized. Some data suggest that Epstein-Barr virus may be associated with thymomas. Some tumors overexpress the p21 ras gene product. However, molecular pathogenesis remains undefined. A thymoma susceptibility locus has been defined on rat chromosome 7, but the relationship between this gene locus, termed Tsr1, and human thymoma has not been examined.

Treatment: Thymoma

Treatment is determined by the stage of disease. For patients with encapsulated tumors and stage I disease, complete resection is sufficient to cure 96% of patients. For patients with stage II disease, complete resection may be followed by 30每60 Gy of postoperative radiation therapy to the site of the primary tumor. However, the value of radiation therapy in this setting has not been established. The main predictors of long-term survival are Masaoka stage and completeness of resection. For patients with stage III and IV disease, the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical surgery, with or without additional radiation therapy, and additional consolidation chemotherapy has been associated with excellent survival. Chemotherapy regimens that are most effective generally include a platinum compound (either cisplatin or carboplatin) and an anthracycline. Addition of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone seems to improve response rates. Response rates of 50每93% have been reported in series of patients each of which involved fewer than 40 patients. A single most effective regimen has not been defined. If surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy fails to produce a complete resection of residual disease, radiation therapy (50每60 Gy) may help reduce recurrence rates.

This multimodality approach appears to be superior to the use of surgery followed by radiation therapy alone, which produces a 5-year survival of 50% in patients with advanced-stage disease.

Some thymic carcinomas express c-kit, and one patient whose c-kit locus was mutated responded dramatically to imatinib. Many thymomas express epidermal growth factor receptors, but the antibodies to the receptor and the kinase inhibitors that block its action have not been evaluated systematically. Octreotide plus prednisone produces responses in about one-third of patients.

Influence of Thymectomy on the Course of Accompanying Diseases

Patients with myasthenia gravis have a high incidence of thymic abnormalities (~80%), but overt thymoma is present in only ~10每15% of patients with myasthenia gravis. It is thought that the thymus plays a role in breaking self-tolerance and generating T cells that recognize the acetylcholine receptor as a foreign antigen. Although patients with thymoma and myasthenia gravis are less likely to have a remission in the myasthenia as a consequence of thymectomy than are patients with thymic abnormalities other than thymoma, the course of myasthenia gravis is not significantly different in patients with or without thymoma. Thymectomy produces at least some symptomatic improvement in ~65% of patients with myasthenia gravis. In one large series, thymoma patients with myasthenia gravis had a better long-term survival from thymoma resection than did those without myasthenia gravis.

About 30每50% of patients with pure red cell aplasia have a thymoma. Thymectomy results in the resolution of pure red cell aplasia in ~30% of patients. About 10% of patients with hypogammaglobulinemia have a thymoma, but hypogammaglobulinemia rarely responds to thymectomy.
 
Further Readings

Bril V et al: The long-term clinical outcome of myasthenia gravis in patients with thymoma. Neurology 51:1198, 1998[PMID: 9781560] 

 
Chen YD et al: Role of adjuvant radiotherapy for stage II thymoma after complete tumor resection. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010 [Epub ahead of print] 

 
Falkson CB et al: The management of thymoma: A systematic review and practice guideline. J Thorac Oncol 4:911, 2009[PMID: 19557895] 

 
Kelesidis T, Yang O: Good's syndrome remains a mystery after 55 years: A systematic review of the scientific evidence. Clin Immunol 135:347, 2010[PMID: 20149753] 

 
Margaritora S et al: Thirty-five-year follow-up analysis of clinical and pathologic outcomes of thymoma surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 89:245, 2010[PMID: 20103246] 

 
Okereke IC et al: Prognostic indicators after surgery for thymoma. Ann Thorac Surg 89:1071, 2010[PMID: 20338309] 

 
Rajan A, Giaccone G: Treatment of advanced thymoma and thymic carcinoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol 9:277, 2008 Shelly S et al: Thymoma and autoimmunity. Cell Mol Immunol Feb 14, 2011 [Epub ahead of print] 

 
Shin DM et al: A multidisciplinary approach to therapy for unresectable malignant thymoma. Ann Intern Med 129:100, 1998[PMID: 9669967] 

 
Souadjian JV et al: The spectrum of diseases associated with thymoma. Arch Intern Med 134:374, 1974[PMID: 4602050] 

 
Wright CD: Management of thymomas. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 65:109, 2008[PMID: 17570676] 
 
 

^^
Late Consequences of Cancer and Its Treatment: Introduction

Over 10 million Americans are cancer survivors. The vast majority of these people will bear some mark of their cancer and/or its treatment, and a large proportion will experience long-term consequences that include medical problems, psychosocial dysfunction, economic hardship, sexual dysfunction, and discrimination in employment and insurance. Many of these problems are directly related to cancer treatment. As patients with more types of malignancies survive longer, the biologic toll that very imperfect therapies take in terms of morbidity and mortality rates is being recognized increasingly. These consequences of therapy confront the patients and the cancer specialists and general internists who manage them every day. Although long-term survivors of childhood leukemias, Hodgkin's lymphoma, and testicular cancer have increased knowledge about the consequences of cancer treatment, researchers and physicians keep learning more as patients survive longer with newer therapies. The pace of the development of therapies that mitigate treatment-related consequences has been slow, partly due to an understandable aversion to altering regimens that work and partly due to a lack of new, effective, less toxic therapeutic agents with less "collateral damage" to replace known agents with known toxicities. The types of damage from cancer treatment vary. Often, a final common pathway is irreparable damage to DNA. Surgery can create dysfunction, including blind gut loops that lead to absorption problems and loss of function of removed body parts. Radiation may damage end-organ function, for example, loss of potency in prostate cancer patients, pulmonary fibrosis, neurocognitive impairment, acceleration of atherosclerosis, and second cancers. Cancer chemotherapy may act as a carcinogen and has a kaleidoscope of other toxicities, as discussed in this chapter. Table 102每1 lists the long-term effects of treatment.

Table 102每1 Late Effects of Cancer Therapy

 
 
Surgical Procedure Effect 
Amputation Functional loss 
Lymph node dissection   Risk of lymphedema 
Ostomy Psychosocial impact 
Splenectomy Risk of sepsis 
Adhesions Risk of obstruction 
Bowel anastomoses Malabsorption syndromes 
Radiation Therapy Effect 
Organ    
  Bone Premature termination of growth, osteonecrosis 
  Soft tissues Atrophy, fibrosis 
  Brain Neuropsychiatric deficits, cognitive dysfunction 
  Thyroid Hypothyroidism, Graves' disease, cancer 
  Salivary glands Dry mouth, caries, dysgeusia 
  Eyes Cataracts 
  Heart Pericarditis, myocarditis, coronary artery disease 
  Lung Pulmonary fibrosis 
  Kidney Decreased function, hypertension 
  Liver Decreased function 
  Intestine Malabsorption, stricture 
  Gonads Infertility, premature menopause 
  Any Secondary neoplasia 
 

 
Chemotherapy    Effect  
Organ  Drug    
  Bone Glucocorticoids Osteoporosis, avascular necrosis 
  Brain Methotrexate, cytarabine (Ara-C), others Neuropsychiatric deficits, cognitive decline? 
  Peripheral nerves Vincristine, platinum, taxanes Neuropathy, hearing loss 
  Eyes Glucocorticoids Cataracts 
  Heart Anthracyclines, trastuzumab Cardiomyopathy 
  Lung Bleomycin Pulmonary fibrosis 
  Methotrexate Pulmonary hypersensitivity 
  Kidney Platinum, others Decreased function, hypomagnesemia 
  Liver Various Altered function 
  Gonads Alkylating agents, others Infertility, premature menopause 
  Bone marrow Various Aplasia, myelodysplasia, secondary leukemia 
 

 

The first goal of therapy is to eradicate or control the malignancy. Late treatment consequences are, indeed, testimony to the increasing success of such treatment. Their occurrence sharply underlines the necessity to develop more effective therapies with less long-term morbidity and mortality. At the same time, a sense of perspective and relative risk is necessary; fear of long-term complications should not prevent the application of effective (particularly curative) cancer treatment.
 
Cardiovascular Dysfunction

Chemotherapeutic Agents

The cardiovascular toxicity of cancer chemotherapeutic agents includes dysrhythmias, cardiomyopathic congestive heart failure (CHF), pericardial disease, and peripheral vascular disease. Because these cardiac toxicities are difficult to distinguish from disease that is not associated with cancer treatment, determining the clear etiologic implication of cancer chemotherapeutic agents may be difficult. Cardiovascular complications occurring in an unexpected clinical setting in patients who have undergone cancer therapy is often important in raising suspicion. Dose-dependent myocardial toxicity of anthracyclines with characteristic myofibrillar dropout is pathologically pathagnomonic on endomyocardial biopsy. Anthracycline cardiotoxity occurs through a root mechanism of chemical free-radical damage. Fe(III)-doxorubicin complexes damage DNA, nuclear and cytoplasmic membranes, and mitochondria. About 5% of patients receiving >450每550 mg/m2 doxorubicin will develop CHF. Cardiotoxicity in relation to the dose of anthracycline is clearly not a step function but rather a continuous function, and occasional patients are seen with CHF at substantially lower doses. Advanced age, other concomitant cardiac disease, hypertension, diabetes, and thoracic radiation therapy are all important cofactors in promoting anthracycline-associated CHF. Anthracycline-related CHF is difficult to reverse; the mortality rate is as high as 50%, making prevention crucial. Some anthracyclines, such as mitoxantrone, are associated with less cardiotoxicity, and continuous infusion regimens or doxorubicin encapsulated in liposomes are associated with less cardiotoxicity. Dexrazoxane, an intracellular iron chelator, may limit anthracycline toxicity, but concern about limiting chemotherapeutic efficacy has limited its use. Monitoring patients for cardiac toxicity typically involves periodic gated nuclear cardiac blood pool ejection fraction testing [multi-gated acquisition scan (MUGA)] or cardiac ultrasonography. Cardiac MRI has been used but is not standard or widespread. Testing is performed more frequently at higher cumulative doses, with additional risk factors, certainly for any newly developing CHF or other symptoms of cardiac dysfunction.

Trastuzumab after anthracyclines is currently the next most commonly used cardiotoxic drug. Trastuzumab is commonly used in adjuvant therapy or for advanced HER2-positive breast cancer, sometimes in conjunction with anthracyclines, and is believed to result in additive or possibly synergistic toxicity. In contrast to anthracyclines, cardiotoxicity from trastuzumab is not dose-related, is usually reversible, is not associated with pathologic changes of anthracyclines on cardiac myofibrils, and has a different biochemical mechanism inhibiting intrinsic cardiac repair mechanisms. Toxicity is monitored routinely every three to four doses with functional cardiac testing as described above for anthracyclines.

Other cardiotoxic drugs include lapatinib, phosphoramide mustards (cyclophosphamide), ifosfamide, interleukin 2, imatinib, and sunitinib.

Radiation Therapy

Radiation therapy that includes the heart can cause interstitial myocardial fibrosis, acute and chronic pericarditis, valvular disease, and accelerated premature atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. Repeated or high (>6000 cGy) radiation doses are associated with greater risk, as is concomitant or distant cardiotoxic cancer chemotherapy exposure. Symptoms of acute pericarditis, which peaks about 9 months after treatment, include dyspnea, chest pain, and fever. Chronic constrictive pericarditis may develop 5每10 years after radiation therapy. Cardiac valvular disease includes aortic insufficiency from fibrosis and papillary muscle dysfunction that results in mitral regurgitation. A threefold increased risk of fatal myocardial infarction is associated with mantle field radiation, with accelerated coronary artery disease. Carotid radiation similarly increases the risk of embolic stroke.

Treatment: Chemotherapeutic/Radiation-Induced Cardiovascular Disease

Therapy for chemotherapeutic/radiation-induced cardiovascular disease is essentially the same as therapy for disease that is not associated with cancer treatment. Discontinuation of the offending agent is the first step. Diuretics, fluid and sodium restriction, and antiarylthmic agents are often useful for treating acute symptoms. Afterload reduction with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or, in some cases, -adrenergic blockers (carvedilol) often is of significant benefit, and digitalis may be helpful as well.

Pulmonary Dysfunction

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Bleomycin generates activated free-radical oxygen species and causes pneumonitis associated with a radiographic or interstitial ground-glass appearance diffusely throughout both lungs, often worse in the lower lobes. This toxicity is dose-related and dose-limiting. The diffusion capacity of the lungs for carbon dioxide (DLCO) is a sensitive measure of toxicity and recovery, and a baseline value generally is obtained for future comparison before bleomycin therapy. Additive or synergistic risk factors include age, prior lung disease, and concomitant use of other chemotherapy, along with lung irradiation and high concentrations of inspired oxygen. Other chemotherapeutic agents notable for pulmonary toxicity include mitomycin, nitrosoureas, doxorubicin with radiation, gemcitabine combined with weekly docetaxel, methotrexate, and fludarabine. High-dose alkylating agents, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and melphalan are used frequently in the hematopoietic stem cell transplant setting, often with whole-body radiation. This therapy may result in severe pulmonary fibrosis and/or pulmonary venoocclusive disease.

Radiation Therapy

Risk factors for radiation pneumonitis include advanced age, poor performance status, preexisting compromised pulmonary function, radiation volume, and dose. The dose "threshold" for lung damage is thought to be in the range of 5每20 Gy. Hypoxemia and dyspnea on exertion are characteristic. Fine, high-pitched "Velcro rales" may be an accompanying physical finding, and fever, cough, and pleuritic chest pain are common symptoms. The DLCO is the most sensitive measure of pulmonary functional impairment, and ground-glass infiltrates often correspond with relatively sharp edges to the irradiated volume, although the pneumonitis may progress beyond the field and occasionally involve the contralateral unirradiated lung.

Treatment: Pulmonary Dysfunction

Chemotherapy and radiation-induced pneumonitis are generally glucocorticoid-responsive, except in the case of nitrosoureas. Prednisone, 1 mg/kg, often is used to control acute symptoms and pulmonary dysfunction, with a generally slow taper. Prolonged glucocorticoid therapy requires gastrointestinal protection with proton pump inhibitors, management of hyperglycemia, heightened infection management, and prevention or treatment of steroid-induced osteoporosis. Antibiotics, bronchodilators, oxygen in only necessary doses, and diuretics may all play an important role in management of pneumonitis, and consultation with a pulmonologist should be undertaken routinely. Amifostine has been studied as a pulmonary radioprotectant, with inconclusive results, and is associated with skin rash, fatigue, and nausea; hence, it is not considered standard therapy at this time. Transforming growth factor  (TGF-) is believed to be a major inducer of radiation fibrosis and represents a therapeutic target for development of anti-TGF- therapies. As a general rule, patients who have received chest radiation therapy or bleomycin should receive supplemental O2 when only absolutely necessary and at the lowest FiO2 possible.

Neurologic Dysfunction

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Chemotherapy and radiation-induced neurologic dysfunction are increasing in both incidence and severity as a result of improved supportive care leading to more aggressive regimens and longer cancer survival allowing the development of late toxicity. Direct effects on myelin, glial cells, and neurons have been implicated, with alterations in cellular cytoskeleton, axonal transport, and cellular metabolism as mechanisms.

Vinca alkaloids produce a characteristic "stocking-glove" neuropathy, with numbness and tingling advancing to loss of motor function, which is highly dose-related. Distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy prominently involves loss of deep tendon reflexes with initially loss of pain and temperature sensation, followed by proprioceptive and vibratory loss. This requires a careful patient history and physical examination by experienced oncologists to decide when the drug must be stopped due to toxicity. Milder toxicity often slowly resolves completely. Vinca alkaloids may be associated with jaw claudication, autonomic neuropathy, ileus, cranial nerve palsies, and, in severe cases, encephalopathy, seizures, and coma.

Cisplatin is associated with sensorimotor neuropathy as well as hearing loss, especially at doses >400 mg/m2, requiring audiometry in patients with preexisting hearing compromise. Carboplatin often is substituted in such cases because of its lesser effect on hearing.

Neurocognitive dysfunction has been well described in childhood survivors of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) treatment, including intrathecal methotrexate or cytarabine in conjunction with prophylactic cranial irradiation. Methotrexate alone may cause acute leucoencephalopathy characterized by somnolence and confusion that is often reversible. Acute toxicity is dose-related, especially at doses > 3 g/m2, with younger patients being at greater risk. Subacute methotrexate toxicity occurs weeks after therapy and often is ameliorated with glucocorticoid therapy. Chronic methotrexate toxicity (leucoencephalopathy) develops months or years after treatment and is characterized clinically as progressive loss of cognitive function and focal neurologic signs that are irreversible, are promoted by synchronous or metachronous radiation therapy, and are more pronounced at a younger age.

Neurocognitive decline after chemotherapy alone occurs notably in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy; this has been referred to as "chemo brain." It is clinically associated with impaired memory, learning, attention, and speed of information processing. The magnitude of the problem has been difficult to assess in light of the fact that cognitive decline is a normal feature of aging. It is not entirely clear that women receiving adjuvant therapy for breast cancer have a more rapid cognitive decline than do age-matched controls. Furthermore, its causes are unexplained given the poor penetrance of chemotherapy agents into the central nervous system (CNS). No prevention or therapy has been developed. This entity is attracting the attention of investigators.

Many cancer patients experience intrusive or debilitating concerns about cancer recurrence after successful therapy. In addition, these patients may experience job, insurance, stress, relationship, financial, and sexual difficulties. Physicians need to ask about and address these issues explicitly with cancer survivors, with referral to the appropriate counseling or support systems. Suicidal ideation and suicide have an increased incidence in cancer patients and survivors.

Radiation Therapy

Acute radiation CNS toxicity occurs within weeks and is characterized by nausea, drowsiness, hypersomnia, and ataxia, symptoms that most often abate with time. Early-delayed toxicity occurring weeks to 3 months after therapy is associated with symptoms similar to those of acute toxicity and is pathologically associated with reversible demyelination. Chronic, late radiation injury occurs 9 months to up to 10 years after therapy. Focal necrosis is a common pathologic finding, and glucocorticoid therapy may be helpful. Diffuse radiation injury is associated with global CNS neurologic dysfunction and diffuse white matter changes on CT or MRI. Pathologically, small vessel changes are prominent. Glucocorticoids may be symptomatically useful but do not alter the course. Necrotizing encephalopathy is the most severe form of radiation injury and almost always is associated with chemotherapy, notably methotrexate.

Cranial radiation also may be associated with an array of endocrine abnormalities with disruption of normal pituitary-hypothalamic axis function. A high index of suspicion needs to be maintained to identify and treat this toxicity.

Radiation-associated spinal cord injury (myelopathy) is highly dose-dependent and rarely occurs with modern radiation therapy. An early, self-limited form involving electric sensations down the spine on neck flexion (Lhermitte's sign) is seen 6每12 weeks after treatment, and generally resolves over weeks. Peripheral nerve toxicity is quite rare owing to relative radiation resistance.

Hepatic Dysfunction

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Long-term hepatic damage from standard chemotherapy regimens is rare. Long-term methotrexate or high-dose chemotherapy alone or with radiation therapy〞e.g., in preparative regimens for bone marrow transplantation〞may result in venoocclusive disease of the liver. This potentially lethal complication classically presents with anicteric ascites, elevated alkaline phosphatase, and hepatosplenomegaly. Pathologically, venous congestion, epithelial cell proliferation, and hepatocyte atrophy progressing to frank fibrosis are noted. Frequent monitoring of liver function tests during any type of chemotherapy is necessary to avoid both idiosyncratic and expected toxicities. Ursodiol may prevent cholestasis in the setting of high-dose therapy before bone marrow transplant.

Radiation Therapy

Hepatic radiation damage depends on dose, volume, fractionation, preexisting liver disease, and synchronous or metachronous chemotherapy. In general, radiation doses to the liver >1500 cGy can produce hepatic dysfunction with a steep dose-injury curve. Radiation-induced liver disease (RILD) closely mimics hepatic venoocclusive disease.

Renal/Bladder Dysfunction

Cisplatin produces reversible decrements in renal function but also may produce severe irreversible toxicity in the presence of renal disease and may predispose to accentuated damage with subsequent renal insults. Magnesium wasting with hypomagnesemia may be seen. Cyclophosphamide and ifosphamide, as prodrugs primarily activated in the liver, have cleavage products (acrolein) that can produce hemorrhagic cystitis. This can be prevented with the free-radical scavenger 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate (MESNA), which is required for ifosfamide administration. Hemorrhagic cystitis caused by these agents may predispose these patients to bladder cancer.

Reproductive and Endocrine Dysfunction

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Alkylating agents are associated with the highest rates of male and female infertility, which is directly dependent on age, dose, and duration of treatment. The age at treatment is an important determinant of fertility outcome, with prepubertal patients having the highest tolerance. Ovarian failure is age-related, and females who resume menses after treatment are still at increased risk for premature menopause. Males generally have reversible azospermia during lower-intensity alkylator chemotherapy, and long-term infertility is associated with total doses of cyclophosphamide >9 g/m2 and with high-intensity therapy such as that used in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Males undergoing potentially sterilizing chemotherapy should be offered sperm banking. However, some cancers are associated with defective spermatogenesis. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues to preserve ovarian function remain experimental. Assisted reproductive technologies may be helpful to couples with chemotherapy-induced infertility.

Radiation Therapy

The testicles and ovaries of prepubertal patients are less sensitive to radiation damage; spermatogenesis is affected by low doses of radiation, and complete azospermia occurs at 600每700 cGy. Leydig cell dysfunction, in contrast, occurs at <2000 cGy; hence, endocrine function is lost at much higher radiation doses than spermatogenesis. Erectile dysfunction occurs in up to 80% of men treated with external-beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer. Sildenafil (and congeners) may be useful in reversing erectile dysfunction. Ovarian function damage with radiation is age-related and occurs at doses of 150每500 cGY. Premature induction of menopause can have serious medical and psychological sequelae. Hormone replacement therapy often is contraindicated, as in estrogen receptor每positive breast cancer. Attention must be paid to maintenance of bone mass with calcium and vitamin D supplements and oral bisphosphonates; this is monitored by bone density determinations. Paroxetine, clonidine, pregabalin, and other drugs may be useful in symptomatically controlling hot flashes. In those without contraindications, estrogen may be used for periods <5 years at the lowest dose that relieves symptoms.

Long每term survivors of childhood cancer (e.g., ALL) who have received cranial radiation may have altered leptin biology and growth hormone deficiency, leading to obesity and reduced strength, exercise tolerance, and bone density.

Radiation therapy to the neck, for example, in Hodgkin's lymphoma, may lead to hypothyroidism, Graves' disease, thyroiditis, and thyroid malignancies. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is followed routinely in these patients and suppressed with synthroid when elevated to prevent hypothyroidism and suppress the TSH drive, which may cause thyroid cancer.

Ocular Complications

Cataracts may be caused by glucocorticoids, depending on the duration and dose; radiation therapy; and, uncommonly, tamoxifen. Orbital radiation therapy may cause blindness.

Oral Complications

Radiation therapy can produce xerostomia (dry mouth) with an attendant increase in caries and poor dentition. Taste and appetite may be suppressed. Bisphosphonate use may result in osteonecrosis of the jaw.

Raynaud's Phenomenon

Up to 40% of patients treated with bleomycin may develop Raynaud's phenomenon. The mechanism is unknown.
 
Second Malignancies

Second malignancies in patients cured of cancer are a major cause of death, and treated cancer patients must be monitored for their occurrence. The induction of second malignancies is governed by the complex interplay of a number of factors, including age, sex, environmental exposures, genetic susceptibility, and cancer treatment itself. In a number of settings, the events leading to the primary cancer themselves increase the risk of second malignancies. Patients with lung cancer are at increased risk of esophageal and head and neck cancers, and vice versa, due to shared risk factors, including alcohol and tobacco abuse. Indeed, the risk of developing a second primary head and neck, esophageal, or lung cancer is also increased in these patients. Patients with breast cancer are at increased risk of cancer in the opposite breast. Patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma are at risk for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Genetic cancer syndromes, for example, multiple endocrine neoplasia and Li-Fraumeni, Lynch, Cowden, and Gardner's syndromes, are examples of genetically based second malignancies of specific types. Cancer treatment itself does not appear to be responsible for the risk of these secondary malignancies. Deficient DNA repair can greatly increase the risk of cancers from DNA-damaging agents, as in ataxia-telangectasia. Importantly, the risk of treatment-related second malignancies is at least additive and often is synergistic with combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy; hence, for such combined therapy treatment approaches, it is important to establish the necessity of each modality in the treatment program. All these patients require special surveillance or in some cases prophylactic surgery as part of appropriate treatment and follow-up.

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Chemotherapy is significantly associated with two fatal second malignancies: acute leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. Two types of leukemia have been described. In patients treated with alkylating agents, acute myeloid leukemia is associated with deletions in chromosomes 5 or 7. The lifetime risk is about 1每5%, is increased by radiation therapy, and increases with age. The incidence of these leukemias peaks at 4每6 years, with risk returning close to baseline at 10 years. The other type of acute myeloid leukemia is related to therapy with topoisomerase inhibitors, is associated with chromosome 10q23 translocations, has an incidence <1%, and generally occurs 1.5每3 years after treatment. Both of these acute leukemias are refractory to treatment and have a high mortality rate. The development of myelodysplastic syndromes is increased after chemotherapy, particularly chronic alkylating agent therapy, and these syndromes often are associated with leukemic progression with a dismal prognosis.

Radiation Therapy

Patients receiving radiation have an increasing and lifelong risk of second malignancies that is 1每2% per year in the second decade after treatment but increases to >25% after 25 years. These malignancies include cancers of the thyroid and breast, sarcomas, and CNS cancers, which often tend to be aggressive and have a poor prognosis. An example of organ-, age-, and sex-dependent radiation-induced secondary malignancy is breast cancer, in which the risk is small with radiation 30 years. A 25-year-old woman treated with mantle radiation for Hodgkin's lymphoma has a 29% actuarial risk of developing breast cancer by age 55.

Hormonal Therapy

Treatment of breast cancer with tamoxifen for 5 years or longer is associated with a 1每2% risk of endometrial cancer. Surveillance is generally effective at finding these cancers at an early stage. The risk of mortality from tamoxifen-induced endometrial cancer is low compared to the benefit of tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer.

Immunosupressive Therapy

Immunosupressive therapy, as used in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, particularly with T cell depletion and using antithymocyte globulin or other means, increases the risk of Epstein Barr virus每associated B cell lymphoproliferative disorder. The incidence at 10 years after T cell depletion is 9每12%. Discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy, if possible, often is associated with complete disease regression.
 
Recommendations for Follow-Up

All former cancer patients should be followed indefinitely. This is done most often by oncologists, but demographic changes suggest that more primary care physicians will need to be trained in the follow-up of treated cancer patients in remission. Cancer patients need to be educated about signs and symptoms of recurrence and potentially adverse effects related to therapy. Localized pain or palpable abnormality in a previously radiated field should prompt radiographic evaluation. Screening tests, when available and validated, should be used on a routine and regular basis, for example, mammography and Pap smear, particularly in patients receiving radiation to specific organs. Annual mammography should start no later than 10 years after breast radiation. Patients receiving radiation fields that encompass thyroid tissue should have regular thyroid exams and TSH testing. Patients treated with alkylating agents or topoisomerase inhibitors should have a complete blood count every 6每12 months, and cytopenias, abnormal cells on peripheral smear, or macrocytosis should be evaluated with bone marrow biopsy and aspirate, along with cytogenetics, flow cytometry, or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies as appropriate.

Cancer survival, as the population lives longer and expands, has become an increasingly recognized subject. The Institute of Medicine and the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences have published a monograph titled From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition. It proposes a plan to inform clinicians caring for cancer survivors in complete detail about their previous treatments, the complications of those treatments, signs and symptoms of late effects, and recommended screening and follow-up procedures. Table 102每2 describes long-term treatment effects by cancer type.

Table 102每2 Long-Term Treatment Effects by Cancer Type

 
 
Cancer Type Late Effects 
Pediatric cancers  Majority have at least one late effect; 30% with moderate/severe problems

Cardiovascular: radiation,

anthracyclines

Lungs: radiation

Skeletal abnormalities: radiation

Psychological, cognitive, and sexual problems

Second neoplasms significant cause of death
 
Hodgkin's lymphoma Thyroid dysfunction: radiation

Premature coronary artery

disease: radiation

Gonadal dysfunction: chemotherapy

Postsplenectomy sepsis

Myelodysplasia

Acute myeloid leukemia

Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas

Breast cancer, lung cancer, and melanoma

Fatigue, psychological, and sexual problems

Peripheral neuropathy
 
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma Myelodysplasia

Acute leukemia

Bladder cancer

Peripheral neuropathy
 
Acute leukemia Second malignancies: hematologic, solid tumors

Neurophychiatric dysfunction

Subnormal growth

Thyroid abnormalities

Infertility
 
Bone marrow stem cell transplantation
 Infertility

Graft-versus-host disease (allogeneic transplant)

Psychosexual dysfunction
 
Head and neck cancer Poor dentition, dry mouth, poor nutrition: radiation 
Breast cancer Tamoxifen: endometrial cancer, blood clots

Aromatase inhibitors: osteoporosis, arthritis.

Cardiomyopathy: anthracycline ㊣ radiation, trastuzaumab

Acute leukemia

Hormone-deficiency symptoms: hot flashes, vaginal dryness, dyspareunia

Psychosocial dysfunction

"Chemo brain"
 
Testicular cancer Raynaud's phenomenon

Renal dysfunction

Pulmonary dysfunction

Retrograde ejaculation: surgery

15% sexual dysfunction
 
Colon cancer Major risk is second colon cancer

Quality of life high in survivors
 
Prostate cancer Impotence

Urinary incontinence (0每15%)

Chronic prostatitis/cystitis: radiation
 
 

 
 
Outlook

Clearly, the challenge for the future is to combine chemotherapy, targeted agents, biologic therapies, radiation, and surgery to produce better outcomes with less toxicity, including late effects of therapy. This is easily said and less easily accomplished. As treatment becomes more effective in new patient populations (ovarian, bladder, anal, and laryngeal cancers, for example), one can expect to discover new populations at risk for late effects. These populations will have to be followed carefully so that such effects are recognized and treated. Cancer survivors represent an underutilized resource for prevention studies. Childhood cancer survivors especially have multiple chronic health impairments. The incidence of these late treatment consequences appears to have no plateau with age, throwing in stark relief the necessity of close monitoring and therapies with fewer late consequences of treatment.
 
Further Readings

Ahles T et al: Neuropsychiatric impact of standard-dose chemotherapy in long-term survivors of breast cancer and lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 20:485, 2002[PMID: 11786578] 

 
Bookman MA et al: Late complications of curative treatment in Hodgkin's disease. JAMA 260:680, 1988[PMID: 3392794] 

 
Brown LM et al: Risk of second non-hematologic malignancies among 376,825 breast cancer survivors. Breast Cancer Res Treat 106:439, 2007[PMID: 17277968] 

 
Hewitt M et al (eds): From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition. Committee on Cancer Survivorship: Improving Care and Quality of Life. Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2006 

 
Liles A et al: Monitoring pulmonary complications in long-term childhood cancer survivors for the primary care physician. Cleve Clin J Med 75:531, 2008[PMID: 18646589] 

 
〞〞〞: Factors affecting late mortality from heart disease after treatment of Hodgkin's disease. JAMA 270:1949, 1993 

 
Murphy BA: Advances in quality of life and symptom management for head and neck cancer patients. Curr Opin Oncol 21:242, 2009[PMID: 19322081] 

 
Ng AK et al: Secondary malignancies across the age spectrum. Semin Radiat Oncol 20:67, 2010[PMID: 19959033] 

 
Stubblefield MD, O'Dell MW (eds): Cancer Rehabilitation: Principles and Practice New York, Demos Medical, 2009 

 
Travis LB et al: Cumulative absolute breast cancer risk for young women treated for Hodgkin lymphoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 97:1428, 2005[PMID: 16204692] 
 
 

^^
Iron Deficiency and Other Hypoproliferative Anemias: Introduction

Anemias associated with normocytic and normochromic red cells and an inappropriately low reticulocyte response (reticulocyte index <2每2.5) are hypoproliferative anemias. This category includes early iron deficiency (before hypochromic microcytic red cells develop), acute and chronic inflammation (including many malignancies), renal disease, hypometabolic states such as protein malnutrition and endocrine deficiencies, and anemias from marrow damage.

Marrow damage states are discussed in Chap. 107.

Hypoproliferative anemias are the most common anemias, and anemia associated with chronic inflammation is the most common of these. The anemia of inflammation, similar to iron deficiency, is related in part to abnormal iron metabolism. The anemias associated with renal disease, inflammation, cancer, and hypometabolic states are characterized by an abnormal erythropoietin response to the anemia.
 
Iron Metabolism

Iron is a critical element in the function of all cells, although the amount of iron required by individual tissues varies during development. At the same time, the body must protect itself from free iron, which is highly toxic in that it participates in chemical reactions that generate free radicals such as singlet O2 or OH每. Consequently, elaborate mechanisms have evolved that allow iron to be made available for physiologic functions while at the same time conserving this element and handling it in such a way that toxicity is avoided.

The major role of iron in mammals is to carry O2 as part of hemoglobin. O2 is also bound by myoglobin in muscle. Iron is a critical element in iron-containing enzymes, including the cytochrome system in mitochondria. Iron distribution in the body is shown in Table 103-1. Without iron, cells lose their capacity for electron transport and energy metabolism. In erythroid cells, hemoglobin synthesis is impaired, resulting in anemia and reduced O2 delivery to tissue.

Table 103-1 Body Iron Distribution

 
 
  Iron Content, mg 
  Adult Male, 80 kg Adult Female, 60 kg 
Hemoglobin

Myoglobin/enzymes

Transferrin iron

Iron stores
 2500

500

3

600每1000
 1700

300

3

0每300
 
 

 

The Iron Cycle in Humans

Figure 103-1 outlines the major pathways of internal iron exchange in humans. Iron absorbed from the diet or released from stores circulates in the plasma bound to transferrin, the iron transport protein. Transferrin is a bilobed glycoprotein with two iron binding sites. Transferrin that carries iron exists in two forms〞monoferric (one iron atom) or diferric (two iron atoms). The turnover (half-clearance time) of transferrin-bound iron is very rapid〞typically 60每90 min. Because almost all of the iron transported by transferrin is delivered to the erythroid marrow, the clearance time of transferrin-bound iron from the circulation is affected most by the plasma iron level and the erythroid marrow activity. When erythropoiesis is markedly stimulated, the pool of erythroid cells requiring iron increases and the clearance time of iron from the circulation decreases. The half-clearance time of iron in the presence of iron deficiency is as short as 10每15 min. With suppression of erythropoiesis, the plasma iron level typically increases and the half-clearance time may be prolonged to several hours. Normally, the iron bound to transferrin turns over 6每8 times per day. Assuming a normal plasma iron level of 80每100 g/dL, the amount of iron passing through the transferrin pool is 20每24 mg/d.

Figure 103-1

 
 
 
Internal iron exchange. Normally approximately 80% of iron passing through the plasma transferrin pool is recycled from broken-down red cells. Absorption of approximately 1 mg/d is required from the diet in men, and 1.4 mg/d in women to maintain homeostasis. As long as transferrin saturation is maintained between 20每60% and erythropoiesis is not increased, use of iron stores is not required. However, in the event of blood loss, dietary iron deficiency, or inadequate iron absorption, up to 40 mg/d of iron can be mobilized from stores. RE, reticuloendothelial.
 
 

The iron-transferrin complex circulates in the plasma until it interacts with specific transferrin receptors on the surface of marrow erythroid cells. Diferric transferrin has the highest affinity for transferrin receptors; apotransferrin (not carrying iron) has very little affinity. Although transferrin receptors are found on cells in many tissues within the body〞and all cells at some time during development will display transferrin receptors〞the cell having the greatest number of receptors (300,000 to 400,000/cell) is the developing erythroblast.

Once the iron-bearing transferrin interacts with its receptor, the complex is internalized via clathrin-coated pits and transported to an acidic endosome, where the iron is released at the low pH. The iron is then made available for heme synthesis while the transferrin-receptor complex is recycled to the surface of the cell, where the bulk of the transferrin is released back into circulation and the transferrin receptor reanchors into the cell membrane. At this point a certain amount of the transferrin receptor protein may be released into circulation and can be measured as soluble transferrin receptor protein. Within the erythroid cell, iron in excess of the amount needed for hemoglobin synthesis binds to a storage protein, apoferritin, forming ferritin. This mechanism of iron exchange also takes place in other cells of the body expressing transferrin receptors, especially liver parenchymal cells where the iron can be incorporated into heme-containing enzymes or stored. The iron incorporated into hemoglobin subsequently enters the circulation as new red cells are released from the bone marrow. The iron is then part of the red cell mass and will not become available for reutilization until the red cell dies.

In a normal individual, the average red cell life span is 120 days. Thus, 0.8每1% of red cells turn over each day. At the end of its life span, the red cell is recognized as senescent by the cells of the reticuloendothelial (RE) system, and the cell undergoes phagocytosis. Once within the RE cell, the hemoglobin from the ingested red cell is broken down, the globin and other proteins are returned to the amino acid pool, and the iron is shuttled back to the surface of the RE cell, where it is presented to circulating transferrin. It is the efficient and highly conserved recycling of iron from senescent red cells that supports steady state (and even mildly accelerated) erythropoiesis.

Because each milliliter of red cells contains 1 mg of elemental iron, the amount of iron needed to replace those red cells lost through senescence amounts to 20 mg/d (assuming an adult with a red cell mass of 2 L). Any additional iron required for daily red cell production comes from the diet. Normally, an adult male will need to absorb at least 1 mg of elemental iron daily to meet needs, while females in the childbearing years will need to absorb an average of 1.4 mg/d. However, to achieve a maximum proliferative erythroid marrow response to anemia, additional iron must be available. With markedly stimulated erythropoiesis, demands for iron are increased by as much as six- to eightfold. With extravascular hemolytic anemia, the rate of red cell destruction is increased, but the iron recovered from the red cells is efficiently reutilized for hemoglobin synthesis. In contrast, with intravascular hemolysis or blood loss anemia, the rate of red cell production is limited by the amount of iron that can be mobilized from stores. Typically, the rate of mobilization under these circumstances will not support red cell production more than 2.5 times normal. If the delivery of iron to the stimulated marrow is suboptimal, the marrow's proliferative response is blunted, and hemoglobin synthesis is impaired. The result is a hypoproliferative marrow accompanied by microcytic, hypochromic anemia.

Whereas blood loss or hemolysis places a demand on the iron supply, inflammatory conditions interfere with iron release from stores and can result in a rapid decrease in the serum iron (see below).

Nutritional Iron Balance

The balance of iron in humans is tightly controlled and designed to conserve iron for reutilization. There is no regulated excretory pathway for iron, and the only mechanisms by which iron is lost are blood loss (via gastrointestinal bleeding, menses, or other forms of bleeding) and the loss of epithelial cells from the skin, gut, and genitourinary tract. Normally, the only route by which iron comes into the body is via absorption from food or from medicinal iron taken orally. Iron may also enter the body through red-cell transfusions or injection of iron complexes. The margin between the amount of iron available for absorption and the requirement for iron in growing infants and the adult female is narrow; this accounts for the great prevalence of iron deficiency worldwide〞currently estimated at one-half billion people.

The amount of iron required from the diet to replace losses averages approximately 10% of body iron content a year in men and 15% in women of childbearing age. Dietary iron content is closely related to total caloric intake (approximately 6 mg of elemental iron per 1000 calories). Iron bioavailability is affected by the nature of the foodstuff, with heme iron (e.g., red meat) being most readily absorbed. In the United States, the average iron intake in an adult male is 15 mg/d with 6% absorption; for the average female, the daily intake is 11 mg/d with 12% absorption. An individual with iron deficiency can increase iron absorption to approximately 20% of the iron present in a meat-containing diet but only 5每10% of the iron in a vegetarian diet. As a result, one-third of the female population in the United States has virtually no iron stores. Vegetarians are at an additional disadvantage because certain foodstuffs that include phytates and phosphates reduce iron absorption by approximately 50%. When ionizable iron salts are given together with food, the amount of iron absorbed is reduced. When the percentage of iron absorbed from individual food items is compared with the percentage for an equivalent amount of ferrous salt, iron in vegetables is only about one-twentieth as available, egg iron one-eighth, liver iron one-half, and heme iron one-half to two-thirds.

Infants, children, and adolescents may be unable to maintain normal iron balance because of the demands of body growth and lower dietary intake of iron. During the last two trimesters of pregnancy, daily iron requirements increase to 5每6 mg. That is the reason why iron supplements are strongly recommended for pregnant women in developed countries.

Iron absorption takes place largely in the proximal small intestine and is a carefully regulated process. For absorption, iron must be taken up by the luminal cell. That process is facilitated by the acidic contents of the stomach, which maintains the iron in solution. At the brush border of the absorptive cell, the ferric iron is converted to the ferrous form by a ferrireductase. Transport across the membrane is accomplished by divalent metal transporter type 1 [DMT-1, also known as natural resistance macrophage-associated protein type 2 (Nramp 2) or DCT-1]. DMT-1 is a general cation transporter. Once inside the gut cell, iron may be stored as ferritin or transported through the cell to be released at the basolateral surface to plasma transferrin through the membrane-embedded iron exporter, ferroportin. The function of ferroportin is negatively regulated by hepcidin, the principal iron regulatory hormone. In the process of release, iron interacts with another ferroxidase, hephaestin, which oxidizes the iron to the ferric form for transferrin binding. Hephaestin is similar to ceruloplasmin, the copper-carrying protein.

Iron absorption is influenced by a number of physiologic states. Erythroid hyperplasia stimulates iron absorption even in the face of normal or increased iron stores, and hepcidin levels are inappropriately low. The molecular mechanism underlying this relationship is not known. Thus, patients with anemias associated with high levels of ineffective erythropoiesis absorb excess amounts of dietary iron. Over time, this may lead to iron overload and tissue damage. In iron deficiency, hepcidin levels are low and iron is much more efficiently absorbed; the contrary is true in states of secondary iron overload. The normal individual can reduce iron absorption in situations of excessive intake or medicinal iron intake; however, while the percentage of iron absorbed goes down, the absolute amount goes up. This accounts for the acute iron toxicity occasionally seen when children ingest large numbers of iron tablets. Under these circumstances, the amount of iron absorbed exceeds the transferrin binding capacity of the plasma, resulting in free iron that affects critical organs such as cardiac muscle cells.
 
Iron-Deficiency Anemia

Iron deficiency is one of the most prevalent forms of malnutrition. Globally, 50% of anemia is attributable to iron deficiency and accounts for approximately 841,000 deaths annually worldwide. Africa and parts of Asia bear 71% of the global mortality burden; North America represents only 1.4% of the total morbidity and mortality associated with iron deficiency.

Stages of Iron Deficiency

The progression to iron deficiency can be divided into three stages (Fig. 103-2). The first stage is negative iron balance, in which the demands for (or losses of) iron exceed the body's ability to absorb iron from the diet. This stage results from a number of physiologic mechanisms, including blood loss, pregnancy (in which the demands for red cell production by the fetus outstrip the mother's ability to provide iron), rapid growth spurts in the adolescent, or inadequate dietary iron intake. Blood loss in excess of 10每20 mL of red cells per day is greater than the amount of iron that the gut can absorb from a normal diet. Under these circumstances the iron deficit must be made up by mobilization of iron from RE storage sites. During this period, iron stores〞reflected by the serum ferritin level or the appearance of stainable iron on bone marrow aspirations〞decrease. As long as iron stores are present and can be mobilized, the serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and red cell protoporphyrin levels remain within normal limits. At this stage, red cell morphology and indices are normal.

Figure 103-2

 
 
 
Laboratory studies in the evolution of iron deficiency. Measurements of marrow iron stores, serum ferritin, and total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) are sensitive to early iron-store depletion. Iron-deficient erythropoiesis is recognized from additional abnormalities in the serum iron (SI), percent transferrin saturation, the pattern of marrow sideroblasts, and the red cell protoporphyrin level. Patients with iron-deficiency anemia demonstrate all the same abnormalities plus hypochromic microcytic anemia. (From Hillman and Finch, with permission.)
 
 

When iron stores become depleted, the serum iron begins to fall. Gradually, the TIBC increases, as do red cell protoporphyrin levels. By definition, marrow iron stores are absent when the serum ferritin level is <15 g/L. As long as the serum iron remains within the normal range, hemoglobin synthesis is unaffected despite the dwindling iron stores. Once the transferrin saturation falls to 15每20%, hemoglobin synthesis becomes impaired. This is a period of iron-deficient erythropoiesis. Careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear reveals the first appearance of microcytic cells, and if the laboratory technology is available, one finds hypochromic reticulocytes in circulation. Gradually, the hemoglobin and hematocrit begin to fall, reflecting iron-deficiency anemia. The transferrin saturation at this point is 10每15%.

When moderate anemia is present (hemoglobin 10每13 g/dL), the bone marrow remains hypoproliferative. With more severe anemia (hemoglobin 7每8 g/dL), hypochromia and microcytosis become more prominent, target cells and misshapen red cells (poikilocytes) appear on the blood smear as cigar- or pencil-shaped forms, and the erythroid marrow becomes increasingly ineffective. Consequently, with severe prolonged iron-deficiency anemia, erythroid hyperplasia of the marrow develops, rather than hypoproliferation.

Causes of Iron Deficiency

Conditions that increase demand for iron, increase iron loss, or decrease iron intake or absorption can produce iron deficiency (Table 103-2).

Table 103-2 Causes of Iron Deficiency

 
 
Increased Demand for Iron  
  Rapid growth in infancy or adolescence

  Pregnancy

  Erythropoietin therapy
 
Increased Iron Loss  
  Chronic blood loss

  Menses

  Acute blood loss

  Blood donation

  Phlebotomy as treatment for polycythemia vera
 
Decreased Iron Intake or Absorption  
  Inadequate diet

  Malabsorption from disease (sprue, Crohn's disease)

  Malabsorption from surgery (postgastrectomy)

  Acute or chronic inflammation
 
 

 

Clinical Presentation of Iron Deficiency

Certain clinical conditions carry an increased likelihood of iron deficiency. Pregnancy, adolescence, periods of rapid growth, and an intermittent history of blood loss of any kind should alert the clinician to possible iron deficiency. A cardinal rule is that the appearance of iron deficiency in an adult male means gastrointestinal blood loss until proven otherwise. Signs related to iron deficiency depend on the severity and chronicity of the anemia in addition to the usual signs of anemia〞fatigue, pallor, and reduced exercise capacity. Cheilosis (fissures at the corners of the mouth) and koilonychia (spooning of the fingernails) are signs of advanced tissue iron deficiency. The diagnosis of iron deficiency is typically based on laboratory results.

Laboratory Iron Studies

Serum Iron and Total Iron-Binding Capacity

The serum iron level represents the amount of circulating iron bound to transferrin. The TIBC is an indirect measure of the circulating transferrin. The normal range for the serum iron is 50每150 g/dL; the normal range for TIBC is 300每360 g/dL. Transferrin saturation, which is normally 25每50%, is obtained by the following formula: serum iron x 100 ‾ TIBC. Iron-deficiency states are associated with saturation levels below 20%. There is a diurnal variation in the serum iron. A transferrin saturation >50% indicates that a disproportionate amount of the iron bound to transferrin is being delivered to nonerythroid tissues. If this persists for an extended time, tissue iron overload may occur.

Serum Ferritin

Free iron is toxic to cells, and the body has established an elaborate set of protective mechanisms to bind iron in various tissue compartments. Within cells, iron is stored complexed to protein as ferritin or hemosiderin. Apoferritin binds to free ferrous iron and stores it in the ferric state. As ferritin accumulates within cells of the RE system, protein aggregates are formed as hemosiderin. Iron in ferritin or hemosiderin can be extracted for release by the RE cells, although hemosiderin is less readily available. Under steady-state conditions, the serum ferritin level correlates with total body iron stores; thus, the serum ferritin level is the most convenient laboratory test to estimate iron stores. The normal value for ferritin varies according to the age and gender of the individual (Fig. 103-3). Adult males have serum ferritin values averaging 100 g/L, while adult females have levels averaging 30 g/L. As iron stores are depleted, the serum ferritin falls to <15 g/L. Such levels are diagnostic of absent body iron stores.

Figure 103-3

 
 
 
Serum ferritin levels as a function of sex and age. Iron store depletion and iron deficiency are accompanied by a decrease in serum ferritin level below 20 g/L. (From Hillman et al, with permission.)
 
 

Evaluation of Bone Marrow Iron Stores

Although RE cell iron stores can be estimated from the iron stain of a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy, the measurement of serum ferritin has largely supplanted bone marrow aspirates for determination of storage iron (Table 103-3). The serum ferritin level is a better indicator of iron overload than the marrow iron stain. However, in addition to storage iron, the marrow iron stain provides information about the effective delivery of iron to developing erythroblasts. Normally, when the marrow smear is stained for iron, 20每40% of developing erythroblasts〞called sideroblasts〞will have visible ferritin granules in their cytoplasm. This represents iron in excess of that needed for hemoglobin synthesis. In states in which release of iron from storage sites is blocked, RE iron will be detectable, and there will be few or no sideroblasts. In the myelodysplastic syndromes, mitochondrial dysfunction can occur, and accumulation of iron in mitochondria appears in a necklace fashion around the nucleus of the erythroblast. Such cells are referred to as ringed sideroblasts.

Table 103-3 Iron Store Measurements

 
 
Iron Stores Marrow Iron Stain, 0-4+ Serum Ferritin, g/L 
0

1每300 mg

300每800 mg

800每1000 mg

1每2 g

Iron overload
 0

Trace to 1+

2+

3+

4+

〞
 <15

15每30

30每60

60每150

>150

>500每1000
 
 

 

Red Cell Protoporphyrin Levels

Protoporphyrin is an intermediate in the pathway to heme synthesis. Under conditions in which heme synthesis is impaired, protoporphyrin accumulates within the red cell. This reflects an inadequate iron supply to erythroid precursors to support hemoglobin synthesis. Normal values are <30 g/dL of red cells. In iron deficiency, values in excess of 100 g/dL are seen. The most common causes of increased red cell protoporphyrin levels are absolute or relative iron deficiency and lead poisoning.

Serum Levels of Transferrin Receptor Protein

Because erythroid cells have the highest numbers of transferrin receptors of any cell in the body, and because transferrin receptor protein (TRP) is released by cells into the circulation, serum levels of TRP reflect the total erythroid marrow mass. Another condition in which TRP levels are elevated is absolute iron deficiency. Normal values are 4每9 g/L determined by immunoassay. This laboratory test is becoming increasingly available and, along with the serum ferritin, has been proposed to distinguish between iron deficiency and the anemia of chronic inflammation (see below).

Differential Diagnosis

Other than iron deficiency, only three conditions need to be considered in the differential diagnosis of a hypochromic microcytic anemia (Table 103-4). The first is an inherited defect in globin chain synthesis: the thalassemias. These are differentiated from iron deficiency most readily by serum iron values; normal or increased serum iron levels and transferrin saturation are characteristic of the thalassemias. In addition, red blood cell distribution width (RDW) index is generally small in thalassemia and elevated in iron deficiency.

Table 103-4 Diagnosis of Microcytic Anemia

 
 
Tests Iron Deficiency Inflammation Thalassemia Sideroblastic Anemia 
Smear Micro/hypo Normal micro/hypo Micro/hypo with targeting Variable 
SI <30 <50 Normal to high Normal to high 
TIBC >360 <300 Normal Normal 
Percent saturation <10 10每20 30每80 30每80 
Ferritin (g/L) <15 30每200 50每300 50每300 
Hemoglobin pattern on electrophoresis Normal Normal Abnormal with  thalassemia; can be normal with  thalassemia Normal 
 


Abbreviations: SI, serum iron; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity.
 

The second condition is the anemia of chronic inflammation with inadequate iron supply to the erythroid marrow. The distinction between true iron-deficiency anemia and the anemia associated with chronic inflammation is among the most common diagnostic problem encountered by clinicians (see below). Usually the anemia of chronic inflammation is normocytic and normochromic. The iron values usually make the differential diagnosis clear, as the ferritin level is normal or increased and the percent transferrin saturation and TIBC are typically below normal.

Finally, the myelodysplastic syndromes represent the third and least common condition. Occasionally, patients with myelodysplasia have impaired hemoglobin synthesis with mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in impaired iron incorporation into heme. The iron values again reveal normal stores and more than an adequate supply to the marrow, despite the microcytosis and hypochromia.

Treatment: Iron-Deficiency Anemia

The severity and cause of iron-deficiency anemia will determine the appropriate approach to treatment. As an example, symptomatic elderly patients with severe iron-deficiency anemia and cardiovascular instability may require red cell transfusions. Younger individuals who have compensated for their anemia can be treated more conservatively with iron replacement. The foremost issue for the latter patient is the precise identification of the cause of the iron deficiency.

For the majority of cases of iron deficiency (pregnant women, growing children and adolescents, patients with infrequent episodes of bleeding, and those with inadequate dietary intake of iron), oral iron therapy will suffice. For patients with unusual blood loss or malabsorption, specific diagnostic tests and appropriate therapy take priority. Once the diagnosis of iron-deficiency anemia and its cause is made, there are three major therapeutic approaches.

Red Cell Transfusion

Transfusion therapy is reserved for individuals who have symptoms of anemia, cardiovascular instability, continued and excessive blood loss from whatever source, and require immediate intervention. The management of these patients is less related to the iron deficiency than it is to the consequences of the severe anemia. Not only do transfusions correct the anemia acutely, but the transfused red cells provide a source of iron for reutilization, assuming they are not lost through continued bleeding. Transfusion therapy will stabilize the patient while other options are reviewed.

Oral Iron Therapy

In the asymptomatic patient with established iron-deficiency anemia, treatment with oral iron is usually adequate. Multiple preparations are available, ranging from simple iron salts to complex iron compounds designed for sustained release throughout the small intestine (Table 103-5). Although the various preparations contain different amounts of iron, they are generally all absorbed well and are effective in treatment. Some come with other compounds designed to enhance iron absorption, such as ascorbic acid. It is not clear whether the benefits of such compounds justify their costs. Typically, for iron replacement therapy, up to 300 mg of elemental iron per day is given, usually as three or four iron tablets (each containing 50每65 mg elemental iron) given over the course of the day. Ideally, oral iron preparations should be taken on an empty stomach, since food may inhibit iron absorption. Some patients with gastric disease or prior gastric surgery require special treatment with iron solutions, as the retention capacity of the stomach may be reduced. The retention capacity is necessary for dissolving the shell of the iron tablet before the release of iron. A dose of 200每300 mg of elemental iron per day should result in the absorption of iron up to 50 mg/d. This supports a red cell production level of two to three times normal in an individual with a normally functioning marrow and appropriate erythropoietin stimulus. However, as the hemoglobin level rises, erythropoietin stimulation decreases, and the amount of iron absorbed is reduced. The goal of therapy in individuals with iron-deficiency anemia is not only to repair the anemia, but also to provide stores of at least 0.5每1 g of iron. Sustained treatment for a period of 6每12 months after correction of the anemia will be necessary to achieve this.

Table 103-5 Oral Iron Preparations

 
 
Generic Name Tablet (Iron Content), mg Elixir (Iron Content), mg in 5 mL 
Ferrous sulfate 325 (65)

195 (39)
 300 (60)

90 (18)
 
Extended release 525 (105)   
Ferrous fumarate 325 (107)

195 (64)
  

100 (33)
 
Ferrous gluconate 325 (39) 300 (35) 
Polysaccharide iron 150 (150)

50 (50)
 100 (100) 
 

 

Of the complications of oral iron therapy, gastrointestinal distress is the most prominent and is seen in 15每20% of patients. Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or constipation may lead to noncompliance. Although small doses of iron or iron preparations with delayed release may help somewhat, the gastrointestinal side effects are a major impediment to the effective treatment of a number of patients.

The response to iron therapy varies, depending on the erythropoietin stimulus and the rate of absorption. Typically, the reticulocyte count should begin to increase within 4每7 days after initiation of therapy and peak at 1每11/2 weeks. The absence of a response may be due to poor absorption, noncompliance (which is common), or a confounding diagnosis. A useful test in the clinic to determine the patient's ability to absorb iron is the iron tolerance test. Two iron tablets are given to the patient on an empty stomach, and the serum iron is measured serially over the subsequent 2 hours. Normal absorption will result in an increase in the serum iron of at least 100 g/dL. If iron deficiency persists despite adequate treatment, it may be necessary to switch to parenteral iron therapy.

Parenteral Iron Therapy

Intravenous iron can be given to patients who are unable to tolerate oral iron; whose needs are relatively acute; or who need iron on an ongoing basis, usually due to persistent gastrointestinal blood loss. Parenteral iron use has been increasing rapidly in the last several years with the recognition that recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) therapy induces a large demand for iron〞a demand that frequently cannot be met through the physiologic release of iron from RE sources or oral iron absorption. The safety of parenteral iron〞particularly iron dextran〞has been a concern. The serious adverse reaction rate to intravenous high-molecular weight iron dextran is 0.7%. Fortunately, newer iron complexes are available in the United States, such as sodium ferric gluconate (Ferrlecit) and iron sucrose (Venofer) that have much lower rates of adverse effects.

Parenteral iron is used in two ways: one is to administer the total dose of iron required to correct the hemoglobin deficit and provide the patient with at least 500 mg of iron stores; the second is to give repeated small doses of parenteral iron over a protracted period. The latter approach is common in dialysis centers, where it is not unusual for 100 mg of elemental iron to be given weekly for 10 weeks to augment the response to recombinant EPO therapy. The amount of iron needed by an individual patient is calculated by the following formula:

Body weight (kg) x 2.3 x (15每patient's hemoglobin, g/dL) + 500 or 1000 mg (for stores).

In administering intravenous irondextran, anaphylaxis is a concern. Anaphylaxis is much rarer with the newer preparations. The factors that have correlated with an anaphylactic-like reaction include a history of multiple allergies or a prior allergic reaction to dextran (in the case of iron dextran). Generalized symptoms appearing several days after the infusion of a large dose of iron can include arthralgias, skin rash, and low-grade fever. These may be dose-related, but they do not preclude the further use of parenteral iron in the patient. To date, patients with sensitivity to iron dextran have been safely treated with iron gluconate. If a large dose of iron dextran is to be given (>100 mg), the iron preparation should be diluted in 5% dextrose in water or 0.9% NaCl solution. The iron solution can then be infused over a 60- to 90-minute period (for larger doses) or at a rate convenient for the attending nurse or physician. Although a test dose (25 mg) of parenteral iron dextran is recommended, in reality a slow infusion of a larger dose of parenteral iron solution will afford the same kind of early warning as a separately injected test dose. Early in the infusion of iron, if chest pain, wheezing, a fall in blood pressure, or other systemic symptoms occur, the infusion of iron should be stopped immediately.
 
Other Hypoproliferative Anemias

In addition to mild to moderate iron-deficiency anemia, the hypoproliferative anemias can be divided into four categories: (1) chronic inflammation, (2) renal disease, (3) endocrine and nutritional deficiencies (hypometabolic states), and (4) marrow damage (Chap. 107). With chronic inflammation, renal disease, or hypometabolism, endogenous EPO production is inadequate for the degree of anemia observed. For the anemia of chronic inflammation, the erythroid marrow also responds inadequately to stimulation, due in part to defective iron reutilization. As a result of the lack of adequate EPO stimulation, an examination of the peripheral blood smear will disclose only an occasional polychromatophilic ("shift") reticulocyte. In cases of iron deficiency or marrow damage, appropriate elevations in endogenous EPO levels are typically found, and shift reticulocytes will be present on the blood smear.

Anemia of Acute and Chronic Inflammation/Infection (the Anemia of Inflammation)

The anemia of inflammation〞which encompasses inflammation, infection, tissue injury, and conditions (such as cancer) associated with the release of proinflammatory cytokines〞is one of the most common forms of anemia seen clinically. It is the most important anemia in the differential diagnosis of iron deficiency, because many of the features of the anemia are brought about by inadequate iron delivery to the marrow, despite the presence of normal or increased iron stores. This is reflected by a low serum iron, increased red cell protoporphyrin, a hypoproliferative marrow, transferrin saturation in the range of 15每20%, and a normal or increased serum ferritin. The serum ferritin values are often the most distinguishing features between true iron-deficiency anemia and the iron-restricted erythropoiesis associated with inflammation. Typically, serum ferritin values increase threefold over basal levels in the face of inflammation. These changes are due to the effects of inflammatory cytokines and hepcidin, the key iron regulatory hormone, acting at several levels of erythropoiesis (Fig. 103-4).

Figure 103-4

 
 
 
Suppression of erythropoiesis by inflammatory cytokines. Through the release of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interferon  (IFN-), neoplasms and bacterial infections suppress erythropoietin (EPO) production and the proliferation of erythroid progenitors [erythroid burst-forming units and erythroid colony-forming units (BFU/CFU-E)]. The mediators in patients with vasculitis and rheumatoid arthritis include interleukin 1 (IL-1) and IFN- The red arrows indicate sites of inflammatory cytokine inhibitory effects.
 
 

Interleukin 1 (IL-1) directly decreases EPO production in response to anemia. IL-1, acting through accessory cell release of interferon  (IFN-), suppresses the response of the erythroid marrow to EPO〞an effect that can be overcome by EPO administration in vitro and in vivo. In addition, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), acting through the release of IFN- by marrow stromal cells, also suppresses the response to EPO. Hepcidin, made by the liver, is increased in inflammation and acts to suppress iron absorption and iron release from storage sites. The overall result is a chronic hypoproliferative anemia with classic changes in iron metabolism. The anemia is further compounded by a mild to moderate shortening in red cell survival.

With chronic inflammation, the primary disease will determine the severity and characteristics of the anemia. For example, many patients with cancer also have anemia that is typically normocytic and normochromic. In contrast, patients with long-standing active rheumatoid arthritis or chronic infections such as tuberculosis will have a microcytic, hypochromic anemia. In both cases, the bone marrow is hypoproliferative, but the differences in red cell indices reflect differences in the availability of iron for hemoglobin synthesis. Occasionally, conditions associated with chronic inflammation are also associated with chronic blood loss. Under these circumstances, a bone marrow aspirate stained for iron may be necessary to rule out absolute iron deficiency. However, the administration of iron in this case will correct the iron deficiency component of the anemia and leave the inflammatory component unaffected.

The anemia associated with acute infection or inflammation is typically mild but becomes more pronounced over time. Acute infection can produce a decrease in hemoglobin levels of 2每3 g/dL within 1 or 2 days; this is largely related to the hemolysis of red cells near the end of their natural life span. The fever and cytokines released exert a selective pressure against cells with more limited capacity to maintain the red cell membrane. In most individuals the mild anemia is reasonably well tolerated, and symptoms, if present, are associated with the underlying disease. Occasionally, in patients with preexisting cardiac disease, moderate anemia (hemoglobin 10每11 g/dL) may be associated with angina, exercise intolerance, and shortness of breath. The erythropoietic profile that distinguishes the anemia of inflammation from the other causes of hypoproliferative anemias is shown in Table 103-6.

Table 103-6 Diagnosis of Hypoproliferative Anemias

 
 
Tests Iron Deficiency Inflammation Renal Disease Hypometabolic States 
Anemia

MCV (fL)

Morphology

SI

TIBC

Saturation (%)

Serum ferritin (?g/L)

Iron stores
 Mild to severe

60每90

Normo-microcytic

<30

>360

<10

<15

0
 Mild

80每90

Normocytic

<50

<300

10每20

30每200

2每4+
 Mild to severe

90

Normocytic

Normal

Normal

Normal

115每150

1每4+
 Mild

90

Normocytic

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal
 
 


Abbreviations: MCV, mean corpuscular volume; SI, serum iron; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity.
 

Anemia of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)

Progressive CKD is usually associated with a moderate to severe hypoproliferative anemia; the level of the anemia correlates with the stage of CKD. Red cells are typically normocytic and normochromic, and reticulocytes are decreased. The anemia is primarily due to a failure of EPO production by the diseased kidney and a reduction in red cell survival. In certain forms of acute renal failure, the correlation between the anemia and renal function is weaker. Patients with the hemolytic-uremic syndrome increase erythropoiesis in response to the hemolysis, despite renal failure requiring dialysis. Polycystic kidney disease also shows a smaller degree of EPO deficiency for a given level of renal failure. By contrast, patients with diabetes or myeloma have more severe EPO deficiency for a given level of renal failure.

Assessment of iron status provides information to distinguish the anemia of CKD from the other forms of hypoproliferative anemia (Table 103-6) and to guide management. Patients with the anemia of CKD usually present with normal serum iron, TIBC, and ferritin levels. However, those maintained on chronic hemodialysis may develop iron deficiency from blood loss through the dialysis procedure. Iron must be replenished in these patients to ensure an adequate response to EPO therapy (see below).

Anemia in Hypometabolic States

Patients who are starving, particularly for protein, and those with a variety of endocrine disorders that produce lower metabolic rates, may develop a mild to moderate hypoproliferative anemia. The release of EPO from the kidney is sensitive to the need for O2, not just O2 levels. Thus, EPO production is triggered at lower levels of blood O2 content in disease states (such as hypothyroidism and starvation) where metabolic activity, and thus O2 demand, is decreased.

Endocrine Deficiency States

The difference in the levels of hemoglobin between men and women is related to the effects of androgen and estrogen on erythropoiesis. Testosterone and anabolic steroids augment erythropoiesis; castration and estrogen administration to males decrease erythropoiesis. Patients who are hypothyroid or have deficits in pituitary hormones also may develop a mild anemia. Pathogenesis may be complicated by other nutritional deficiencies because iron and folic acid absorption can be affected by these disorders. Usually, correction of the hormone deficiency reverses the anemia.

Anemia may be more severe in Addison's disease, depending on the level of thyroid and androgen hormone dysfunction; however, anemia may be masked by decreases in plasma volume. Once such patients are given cortisol and volume replacement, the hemoglobin level may fall rapidly. Mild anemia complicating hyperparathyroidism may be due to decreased EPO production as a consequence of the renal effects of hypercalcemia or to impaired proliferation of erythroid progenitors.

Protein Starvation

Decreased dietary intake of protein may lead to mild to moderate hypoproliferative anemia; this form of anemia may be prevalent in the elderly. The anemia can be more severe in patients with a greater degree of starvation. In marasmus, where patients are both protein and calorie deficient, the release of EPO is impaired in proportion to the reduction in metabolic rate; however, the degree of anemia may be masked by volume depletion and becomes apparent after refeeding. Deficiencies in other nutrients (iron, folate) may also complicate the clinical picture but may not be apparent at diagnosis. Changes in the erythrocyte indices on refeeding should prompt evaluation of iron, folate, and B12 status.

Anemia in Liver Disease

A mild hypoproliferative anemia may develop in patients with chronic liver disease from nearly any cause. The peripheral blood smear may show spur cells and stomatocytes from the accumulation of excess cholesterol in the membrane from a deficiency of lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase. Red cell survival is shortened, and the production of EPO is inadequate to compensate. In alcoholic liver disease, nutritional deficiencies are common and complicate the management. Folate deficiency from inadequate intake, as well as iron deficiency from blood loss and inadequate intake, can alter the red cell indices.

Treatment: Hypoproliferative Anemias

Many patients with hypoproliferative anemias experience recovery of normal hemoglobin levels when the underlying disease is appropriately treated. For those in whom such reversals are not possible〞such as patients with end-stage kidney disease, cancer, and chronic inflammatory diseases〞symptomatic anemia requires treatment. The two major forms of treatment are transfusions and EPO.

Transfusions

Thresholds for transfusion should be altered based on the patient's symptoms. In general, patients without serious underlying cardiovascular or pulmonary disease can tolerate hemoglobin levels above 8 g/dL and do not require intervention until the hemoglobin falls below that level. Patients with more physiologic compromise may need to have their hemoglobin levels kept above 11 g/dL. A typical unit of packed red cells increases the hemoglobin level by 1 g/dL. Transfusions are associated with certain infectious risks (Chap. 113), and chronic transfusions can produce iron overload. Importantly, the liberal use of blood has been associated with increased morbidity and mortality, particularly in the intensive care setting. Therefore, in the absence of documented tissue hypoxia, a conservative approach to the use of red cell transfusions is preferable.

Erythropoietin (Epo)

EPO is particularly useful in anemias in which endogenous EPO levels are inappropriately low, such as CKD or the anemia of chronic inflammation. Iron status must be evaluated and iron repleted to obtain optimal effects from EPO. In patients with CKD, the usual dose of EPO is 50每150 U/kg three times a week intravenously. Hemoglobin levels of 10每12 g/dL are usually reached within 4每6 weeks if iron levels are adequate; 90% of these patients respond. Once a target hemoglobin level is achieved, the EPO dose can be decreased. A decrease in hemoglobin level occurring in the face of EPO therapy usually signifies the development of an infection or iron depletion. Aluminum toxicity and hyperparathyroidism can also compromise the EPO response. When an infection intervenes, it is best to interrupt the EPO therapy and rely on transfusion to correct the anemia until the infection is adequately treated. The dose needed to correct the anemia in patients with cancer is higher, up to 300 U/kg three times a week, and only approximately 60% of patients respond. Because of evidence that tumor progression may result from EPO administration, the risks and benefits of using EPO in patients with chemotherapy-induced anemia must be weighed carefully, and the target hemoglobin should be that necessary to avoid transfusions.

Longer-acting preparations of EPO can reduce the frequency of injections. Darbepoetin alfa, a molecularly modified EPO with additional carbohydrate, has a half-life in the circulation that is three to four times longer than recombinant human EPO, permitting weekly or every other week dosing.
 
Further Readings

Andrews, NC. Forging a field: The golden age of iron biology. Blood 112:219, 2008[PMID: 18606887] 

 
Bailie GR et al: Parenteral iron use in the management of anemia in end-stage renal disease patients. Am J Kidney Dis 35:1, 2000[PMID: 10620537] 

 
Brugnara C: Iron deficiency and erythropoiesis: New diagnostic approaches. Clin Chem 49:1573, 2003[PMID: 14500582] 

 
Ferrucci L et al: Proinflammatory state, hepcidin, and anemia in older persons. Blood 115:3810, 2010[PMID: 20081092] 

 
Ganz T: Hepcidin, a key regulator of iron metabolism and mediator of inflammation. Blood 102:783, 2003[PMID: 12663437] 

 
Hillman RS et al: Hematology in Clinical Practice, 5th ed, New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010 

 
Stoltzfus RF: Iron deficiency: Global prevalence and consequences. Food Nutr Bull 24:S99, 2003 

 
Thomas C et al: The diagnostic plot: A concept for identifying different states of iron deficiency and monitoring the response to epoetin therapy. Med Oncol 23:23, 2006[PMID: 16645227] 

 
 

^^
Disorders of Hemoglobin: Introduction

Hemoglobin is critical for normal oxygen delivery to tissues; it is also present in erythrocytes in such high concentrations that it can alter red cell shape, deformability, and viscosity. Hemoglobinopathies are disorders affecting the structure, function, or production of hemoglobin. These conditions are usually inherited and range in severity from asymptomatic laboratory abnormalities to death in utero. Different forms may present as hemolytic anemia, erythrocytosis, cyanosis, or vasoocclusive stigmata.
 
Properties of the Human Hemoglobins

Hemoglobin Structure

Different hemoglobins are produced during embryonic, fetal, and adult life (Fig. 104-1). Each consists of a tetramer of globin polypeptide chains: a pair of -like chains 141 amino acids long and a pair of -like chains 146 amino acids long. The major adult hemoglobin, HbA, has the structure 22. HbF (22) predominates during most of gestation, and HbA2 (22) is minor adult hemoglobin. Embryonic hemoglobins need not be considered here.

Figure 104-1

 
 
 
The globin genes. The -like genes (,) are encoded on chromosome 16; the -like genes (,,,) are encoded on chromosome 11. The  and  genes encode embryonic globins.
 
 

Each globin chain enfolds a single heme moiety, consisting of a protoporphyrin IX ring complexed with a single iron atom in the ferrous state (Fe2+). Each heme moiety can bind a single oxygen molecule; a molecule of hemoglobin can transport up to four oxygen molecules.

The amino acid sequences of the various globins are highly homologous to one another. Each has a highly helical secondary structure. Their globular tertiary structures cause the exterior surfaces to be rich in polar (hydrophilic) amino acids that enhance solubility, and the interior to be lined with nonpolar groups, forming a hydrophobic pocket into which heme is inserted. The tetrameric quaternary structure of HbA contains two  dimers. Numerous tight interactions (i.e., 11 contacts) hold the  and  chains together. The complete tetramer is held together by interfaces (i.e., 12 contacts) between the -like chain of one dimer and the non- chain of the other dimer.

The hemoglobin tetramer is highly soluble but individual globin chains are insoluble. Unpaired globin precipitates, forming inclusions that damage the cell. Normal globin chain synthesis is balanced so that each newly synthesized  or non- globin chain will have an available partner with which to pair.

Solubility and reversible oxygen binding are the key properties deranged in hemoglobinopathies. Both depend most on the hydrophilic surface amino acids, the hydrophobic amino acids lining the heme pocket, a key histidine in the F helix, and the amino acids forming the 11 and 12 contact points. Mutations in these strategic regions tend to be the ones that alter oxygen affinity or solubility.

Function of Hemoglobin

To support oxygen transport, hemoglobin must bind O2 efficiently at the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of the alveolus, retain it, and release it to tissues at the PO2 of tissue capillary beds. Oxygen acquisition and delivery over a relatively narrow range of oxygen tensions depend on a property inherent in the tetrameric arrangement of heme and globin subunits within the hemoglobin molecule called cooperativity or heme-heme interaction.

At low oxygen tensions, the hemoglobin tetramer is fully deoxygenated (Fig. 104-2). Oxygen binding begins slowly as O2 tension rises. However, as soon as some oxygen has been bound by the tetramer, an abrupt increase occurs in the slope of the curve. Thus, hemoglobin molecules that have bound some oxygen develop a higher oxygen affinity, greatly accelerating their ability to combine with more oxygen. This S-shaped oxygen equilibrium curve (Fig. 104-2), along which substantial amounts of oxygen loading and unloading can occur over a narrow range of oxygen tensions, is physiologically more useful than the high-affinity hyperbolic curve of individual monomers.

Figure 104-2

 
 
 
Hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve. The hemoglobin tetramer can bind up to four molecules of oxygen in the iron-containing sites of the heme molecules. As oxygen is bound, 2,3-BPG and CO2 are expelled. Salt bridges are broken, and each of the globin molecules changes its conformation to facilitate oxygen binding. Oxygen release to the tissues is the reverse process, salt bridges being formed and 2,3-BPG and CO2 bound. Deoxyhemoglobin does not bind oxygen efficiently until the cell returns to conditions of higher pH, the most important modulator of O2 affinity (Bohr effect). When acid is produced in the tissues, the dissociation curve shifts to the right, facilitating oxygen release and CO2 binding. Alkalosis has the opposite effect, reducing oxygen delivery.
 
 

Oxygen affinity is modulated by several factors. The Bohr effect is the ability of hemoglobin to deliver more oxygen to tissues at low pH. It arises from the stabilizing action of protons on deoxyhemoglobin, which binds protons more readily than oxyhemoglobin because the latter is a weaker acid (Fig. 104-2). Thus, hemoglobin has a lower oxygen affinity at low pH. The major small molecule that alters oxygen affinity in humans is 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG, formerly 2,3-DPG), which lowers oxygen affinity when bound to hemoglobin. HbA has a reasonably high affinity for 2,3-BPG. HbF does not bind 2,3-BPG, so it tends to have a higher oxygen affinity in vivo. Hemoglobin also binds nitric oxide reversibly; this interaction influences vascular tone, but its clinical relevance remains controversial.

Proper oxygen transport depends on the tetrameric structure of the proteins, the proper arrangement of the charged amino acids, and interaction with protons or 2,3-BPG.

Developmental Biology of Human Hemoglobins

Red cells first appearing at about 6 weeks after conception contain the embryonic hemoglobins Hb Portland (22), Hb Gower I (22), and Hb Gower II (22). At 10每11 weeks, fetal hemoglobin (HbF; 22) becomes predominant. The switch to nearly exclusive synthesis of adult hemoglobin (HbA; 22) occurs at about 38 weeks (Fig. 104-1). Fetuses and newborns therefore require -globin but not -globin for normal gestation. A major advance in understanding the HbF to HbA transition has been the demonstration that the transcription factor Bcl11a plays a pivotal role in its regulation. Small amounts of HbF are produced during postnatal life. A few red cell clones called F cells are progeny of a small pool of immature committed erythroid precursors (BFU-e) that retain the ability to produce HbF. Profound erythroid stresses, such as severe hemolytic anemias, bone marrow transplantation, or cancer chemotherapy, cause more of the F-potent BFU-e to be recruited. HbF levels thus tend to rise in some patients with sickle cell anemia or thalassemia. This phenomenon probably explains the ability of hydroxyurea to increase levels of HbF in adults. Agents such as butyrate and histone deacetylase inhibitors can also activate fetal globin genes partially after birth.

Genetics and Biosynthesis of Human Hemoglobin

The human hemoglobins are encoded in two tightly linked gene clusters; the -like globin genes are clustered on chromosome 16 and the -like genes on chromosome 11 (Fig. 104-1). The -like cluster consists of two -globin genes and a single copy of the  gene. The non- gene cluster consists of a single  gene, the G and A fetal globin genes, and the adult  and  genes.

Important regulatory sequences flank each gene. Immediately upstream are typical promoter elements needed for the assembly of the transcription initiation complex. Sequences in the 5' flanking region of the  and the  genes appear to be crucial for the correct developmental regulation of these genes, while elements that function like classic enhancers and silencers are in the 3' flanking regions. The locus control region (LCR) elements located far upstream appear to control the overall level of expression of each cluster. These elements achieve their regulatory effects by interacting with trans-acting transcription factors. Some of these factors are ubiquitous (e.g., Sp1 and YY1), while others are more or less limited to erythroid cells or hematopoietic cells (e.g., GATA-1, NFE-2, and EKLF). The LCR controlling the -globin gene cluster is modulated by a SWI/SNF-like protein called ATRX; this protein appears to influence chromatin remodeling and DNA methylation. The association of  thalassemia with mental retardation and myelodysplasia in some families appears to be related to mutations in the ATRX pathway. This pathway also modulates genes specifically expressed during erythropoiesis, such as those that encode the enzymes for heme biosynthesis. Normal red blood cell (RBC) differentiation requires the coordinated expression of the globin genes with the genes responsible for heme and iron metabolism. RBC precursors contain a protein, -hemoglobin-stabilizing protein (AHSP), that enhances the folding and solubility of  globin, which is otherwise easily denatured, leading to insoluble precipitates. These precipitates play an important role in the thalassemia syndromes and certain unstable hemoglobin disorders. Polymorphic variation in the amounts and/or functional capacity of AHSP might explain some of the clinical variability seen in patients inheriting identical thalassemia mutations.
 
Classification of Hemoglobinopathies

There are five major classes of hemoglobinopathies (Table 104-1). Structural hemoglobinopathies occur when mutations alter the amino acid sequence of a globin chain, altering the physiologic properties of the variant hemoglobins and producing the characteristic clinical abnormalities. The most clinically relevant variant hemoglobins polymerize abnormally, as in sickle cell anemia, or exhibit altered solubility or oxygen-binding affinity. Thalassemia syndromes arise from mutations that impair production or translation of globin mRNA, leading to deficient globin chain biosynthesis. Clinical abnormalities are attributable to the inadequate supply of hemoglobin and the imbalances in the production of individual globin chains, leading to premature destruction of erythroblasts and RBC. Thalassemic hemoglobin variants combine features of thalassemia (e.g., abnormal globin biosynthesis) and of structural hemoglobinopathies (e.g., an abnormal amino acid sequence). Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is characterized by synthesis of high levels of fetal hemoglobin in adult life. Acquired hemoglobinopathies include modifications of the hemoglobin molecule by toxins (e.g., acquired methemoglobinemia) and clonal abnormalities of hemoglobin synthesis (e.g., high levels of HbF production in preleukemia and  thalassemia in myeloproliferative disorders).

Table 104-1 Classification of Hemoglobinopathies

 
 
I. Structural hemoglobinopathies〞hemoglobins with altered amino acid sequences that result in deranged function or altered physical or chemical properties

   A. Abnormal hemoglobin polymerization〞HbS, hemoglobin sickling

   B. Altered O2 affinity

      1. High affinity〞polycythemia

      2. Low affinity〞cyanosis, pseudoanemia

   C. Hemoglobins that oxidize readily

      1. Unstable hemoglobins〞hemolytic anemia, jaundice

      2. M hemoglobins〞methemoglobinemia, cyanosis

II. Thalassemias〞defective biosynthesis of globin chains

   A.  Thalassemias

   B.  Thalassemias

   C. , ,  Thalassemias

III.

Thalassemic hemoglobin variants〞structurally abnormal Hb

associated with co-inherited thalassemic phenotype

   A. HbE

   B. Hb Constant Spring

   C. Hb Lepore

IV. Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin〞persistence of high levels of HbF into adult life

V. Acquired hemoglobinopathies

   A. Methemoglobin due to toxic exposures

   B. Sulfhemoglobin due to toxic exposures

   C. Carboxyhemoglobin

   D. HbH in erythroleukemia

   E. Elevated HbF in states of erythroid stress and bone marrow dysplasia
 
 

 

Epidemiology

Hemoglobinopathies are especially common in areas in which malaria is endemic. This clustering of hemoglobinopathies is assumed to reflect a selective survival advantage for the abnormal RBC, which presumably provide a less hospitable environment during the obligate RBC stages of the parasitic life cycle. Very young children with  thalassemia are more susceptible to infection with the nonlethal Plasmodium vivax. Thalassemia might then favor a natural protection against infection with the more lethal P. falciparum.

Thalassemias are the most common genetic disorders in the world, affecting nearly 200 million people worldwide. About 15% of American blacks are silent carriers for  thalassemia; -thalassemia trait (minor) occurs in 3% of American blacks and in 1每15% of persons of Mediterranean origin. -Thalassemia has a 10每15% incidence in individuals from the Mediterranean and Southeast Asia and 0.8% in American blacks. The number of severe cases of thalassemia in the United States is about 1000. Sickle cell disease is the most common structural hemoglobinopathy, occurring in heterozygous form in 8% of American blacks and in homozygous form in 1 in 400. Between 2 and 3% of American blacks carry a hemoglobin C allele.

Inheritance and Ontogeny

Hemoglobinopathies are autosomal codominant traits〞compound heterozygotes who inherit a different abnormal mutant allele from each parent exhibit composite features of each. For example, patients inheriting sickle  thalassemia exhibit features of  thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. The  chain is present in HbA, HbA2, and HbF; -chain mutations thus cause abnormalities in all three. The -globin hemoglobinopathies are symptomatic in utero and after birth because normal function of the -globin gene is required throughout gestation and adult life. In contrast, infants with -globin hemoglobinopathies tend to be asymptomatic until 3每9 months of age, when HbA has largely replaced HbF. Prevention or partial reversion of the switch should thus be an effective therapeutic strategy for -chain hemoglobinopathies.
 
Detection and Characterization of Hemoglobinopathies〞General Methods

Electrophoretic techniques are widely used for hemoglobin analysis. Electrophoresis at pH 8.6 on cellulose acetate membranes is especially simple, inexpensive, and reliable for initial screening. Agar gel electrophoresis at pH 6.1 in citrate buffer is often used as a complementary method because each method detects different variants. Some important variants are electrophoretically silent. These mutant hemoglobins can usually be characterized by more specialized techniques such as isoelectric focusing and/or high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), which is rapidly replacing electrophoresis for initial analysis.

Quantitation of the hemoglobin profile is often desirable. HbA2 is frequently elevated in -thalassemia trait and depressed in iron deficiency. HbF is elevated in HPFH, some -thalassemia syndromes, and occasional periods of erythroid stress or marrow dysplasia. For characterization of sickle cell trait, sickle thalassemia syndromes, or HbSC disease, and for monitoring the progress of exchange transfusion therapy to lower the percentage of circulating HbS, quantitation of individual hemoglobins is also required. In most laboratories, quantitation is performed only if the test is specifically ordered. Complete characterization, including amino acid sequencing or gene cloning and sequencing, is readily available from several reference laboratories.

Because some variants can comigrate with HbA or HbS (sickle hemoglobin), electrophoretic assessment should always be regarded as incomplete unless functional assays for hemoglobin sickling, solubility, or oxygen affinity are also performed, as dictated by the clinical presentation. The best sickling assays involve measurement of the degree to which the hemoglobin sample becomes insoluble, or gelated, as it is deoxygenated (i.e., sickle solubility test). Unstable hemoglobins are detected by their precipitation in isopropanol or after heating to 50∼C. High-O2 affinity and low-O2 affinity variants are detected by quantitating the P50, the partial pressure of oxygen at which the hemoglobin sample becomes 50% saturated with oxygen. Direct tests for the percentage carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin, employing spectrophotometric techniques, can readily be obtained from most clinical laboratories on an urgent basis.

Laboratory evaluation remains an adjunct, rather than the primary diagnostic aid. Diagnosis is best established by recognition of a characteristic history, physical findings, peripheral blood smear morphology, and abnormalities of the complete blood cell count (e.g., profound microcytosis with minimal anemia in thalassemia trait).
 
Structurally Abnormal Hemoglobins

Sickle Cell Syndromes

The sickle cell syndromes are caused by a mutation in the -globin gene that changes the sixth amino acid from glutamic acid to valine. HbS (226 GluVa1) polymerizes reversibly when deoxygenated to form a gelatinous network of fibrous polymers that stiffen the RBC membrane, increase viscosity, and cause dehydration due to potassium leakage and calcium influx (Fig. 104-3). These changes also produce the sickle shape. Sickled cells lose the pliability needed to traverse small capillaries. They possess altered "sticky" membranes that are abnormally adherent to the endothelium of small venules. These abnormalities provoke unpredictable episodes of microvascular vasoocclusion and premature RBC destruction (hemolytic anemia). Hemolysis occurs because the spleen destroys the abnormal RBC. The rigid adherent cells clog small capillaries and venules, causing tissue ischemia, acute pain, and gradual end-organ damage. This venoocclusive component usually dominates the clinical course. Prominent manifestations include episodes of ischemic pain (i.e., painful crises) and ischemic malfunction or frank infarction in the spleen, central nervous system, bones, liver, kidneys, and lungs (Fig. 104-3).

Figure 104-3

 
 
 
Pathophysiology of sickle cell crisis.
 
 

Several sickle syndromes occur as the result of inheritance of HbS from one parent and another hemoglobinopathy, such as  thalassemia or HbC (226 GluLys), from the other parent. The prototype disease, sickle cell anemia, is the homozygous state for HbS (Table 104-2).

Table 104-2 Clinical Features of Sickle Hemoglobinopathies

 
 
Condition Clinical Abnormalities Hemoglobin Level g/L (g/dL) MCV, fL Hemoglobin Electrophoresis 
Sickle cell trait None; rare painless hematuria Normal Normal Hb S/A:40/60 
Sickle cell anemia Vasoocclusive crises with infarction of spleen, brain, marrow, kidney, lung; aseptic necrosis of bone; gallstones; priapism; ankle ulcers 70每100 (7每10) 80每100 Hb S/A:100/0

Hb F:2每25%
 
S/∼ thalassemia Vasoocclusive crises; aseptic necrosis of bone 70每100 (7每10) 60每80 Hb S/A:100/0

Hb F:1每10%
 
S/+ thalassemia Rare crises and aseptic necrosis 100每140 (10每14) 70每80 Hb S/A:60/40 
Hemoglobin SC Rare crises and aseptic necrosis; painless hematuria 100每140 (10每14) 80每100 Hb S/A:50/0

Hb C:50%
 
 

 

Clinical Manifestations of Sickle Cell Anemia

Most patients with sickling syndromes suffer from hemolytic anemia, with hematocrits from 15 to 30%, and significant reticulocytosis. Anemia was once thought to exert protective effects against vasoocclusion by reducing blood viscosity. However, natural history and drug therapy trials suggest that an increase in the hematocrit and feedback inhibition of reticulocytosis might be beneficial, even at the expense of increased blood viscosity. The role of adhesive reticulocytes in vasoocclusion might account for these paradoxical effects.

Granulocytosis is common. The white count can fluctuate substantially and unpredictably during and between painful crises, infectious episodes, and other intercurrent illnesses.

Vasoocclusion causes protean manifestations. Intermittent episodes of vasoocclusion in connective and musculoskeletal structures produce ischemia manifested by acute pain and tenderness, fever, tachycardia, and anxiety. These recurrent episodes, called painful crises, are the most common clinical manifestation. Their frequency and severity vary greatly. Pain can develop almost anywhere in the body and may last from a few hours to 2 weeks. Repeated crises requiring hospitalization (>3 per year) correlate with reduced survival in adult life, suggesting that these episodes are associated with accumulation of chronic end organ damage. Provocative factors include infection, fever, excessive exercise, anxiety, abrupt changes in temperature, hypoxia, or hypertonic dyes.

Repeated micro-infarction can destroy tissues having microvascular beds prone to sickling. Thus, the spleen is frequently lost within the first 18每36 months of life, causing susceptibility to infection, particularly by pneumococci. Acute venous obstruction of the spleen (splenic sequestration crisis), a rare occurrence in early childhood, may require emergency transfusion and/or splenectomy to prevent trapping of the entire arterial output in the obstructed spleen. Occlusion of retinal vessels can produce hemorrhage, neovascularization, and eventual detachments. Renal papillary necrosis invariably produces isosthenuria. More widespread renal necrosis leads to renal failure in adults, a common late cause of death. Bone and joint ischemia can lead to aseptic necrosis, especially of the femoral or humeral heads; chronic arthropathy; and unusual susceptibility to osteomyelitis, which may be caused by organisms, such as Salmonella, rarely encountered in other settings. The hand-foot syndrome is caused by painful infarcts of the digits and dactylitis. Stroke is especially common in children; a small subset tend to suffer repeated episodes. Stroke is less common in adults and is often hemorrhagic. A particularly painful complication in males is priapism, due to infarction of the penile venous outflow tracts; permanent impotence is a frequent consequence. Chronic lower leg ulcers probably arise from ischemia and superinfection in the distal circulation.

Acute chest syndrome is a distinctive manifestation characterized by chest pain, tachypnea, fever, cough, and arterial oxygen desaturation. It can mimic pneumonia, pulmonary emboli, bone marrow infarction and embolism, myocardial ischemia, or in situ lung infarction. Acute chest syndrome is thought to reflect in situ sickling within the lung, producing pain and temporary pulmonary dysfunction. Often it is difficult or impossible to distinguish among other possibilities. Pulmonary infarction and pneumonia are the most frequent underlying or concomitant conditions in patients with this syndrome. Repeated episodes of acute chest pain correlate with reduced survival. Acutely, reduction in arterial oxygen saturation is especially ominous because it promotes sickling on a massive scale. Chronic acute or subacute pulmonary crises lead to pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale, an increasingly common cause of death as patients survive longer. Considerable controversy exists about the possible role played by free plasma HbS in scavenging NO2, thus raising pulmonary vascular tone. Trials of sildenafil to restore NO2 levels were terminated because of adverse effects.

Sickle cell syndromes are remarkable for their clinical heterogeneity. Some patients remain virtually asymptomatic into or even through adult life, while others suffer repeated crises requiring hospitalization from early childhood. Patients with sickle thalassemia and sickle-HbE tend to have similar, slightly milder, symptoms, perhaps because of the ameliorating effects of production of other hemoglobins within the RBC. Hemoglobin SC disease, one of the more common variants of sickle cell anemia, is frequently marked by lesser degrees of hemolytic anemia and a greater propensity for the development of retinopathy and aseptic necrosis of bones. In most respects, however, the clinical manifestations resemble sickle cell anemia. Some rare hemoglobin variants actually aggravate the sickling phenomenon.

The clinical variability in different patients inheriting the same disease-causing mutation (sickle hemoglobin) has made sickle cell disease the focus of efforts to identify modifying genetic polymorphisms in other genes that might account for the heterogeneity. The complexity of the data obtained thus far has dampened the expectation that genomewide analysis will yield individualized profiles that predict a patient's clinical course. Nevertheless, a number of interesting patterns have emerged from these modifying gene analyses. For example, genes affecting the inflammatory response or cytokine expression appear to be modifying candidates. Genes that affect transcriptional regulation of lymphocytes may be involved. Thus, it appears likely that key polymorphic changes in the patient's inflammatory response to the damages provoked by sickle red cells or in the response to chronic or recurrent infections may prove to be important for prognosticating the clinical severity of disease.

Clinical Manifestations of Sickle Cell Trait

Sickle cell trait is usually asymptomatic. Anemia and painful crises are rare. An uncommon but highly distinctive symptom is painless hematuria often occurring in adolescent males, probably due to papillary necrosis. Isosthenuria is a more common manifestation of the same process. Sloughing of papillae with urethral obstruction has been reported, as have isolated cases of massive sickling or sudden death due to exposure to high altitudes or extremes of exercise and dehydration. Avoidance of dehydration or extreme physical stress should be advised.

Diagnosis

Sickle cell syndromes are suspected on the basis of hemolytic anemia, RBC morphology (Fig. 104-4), and intermittent episodes of ischemic pain. Diagnosis is confirmed by hemoglobin electrophoresis and the sickling tests already discussed. Thorough characterization of the exact hemoglobin profile of the patient is important, because sickle thalassemia and hemoglobin SC disease have distinct prognoses or clinical features. Diagnosis is usually established in childhood, but occasional patients, often with compound heterozygous states, do not develop symptoms until the onset of puberty, pregnancy, or early adult life. Genotyping of family members and potential parental partners is critical for genetic counseling. Details of the childhood history establish prognosis and need for aggressive or experimental therapies. Factors associated with increased morbidity and reduced survival are more than three crises requiring hospitalization per year, chronic neutrophilia, a history of splenic sequestration or hand-foot syndrome, and second episodes of acute chest syndrome. Patients with a history of cerebrovascular accidents are at higher risk for repeated episodes and require partial exchange transfusion and especially close monitoring using Doppler carotid flow measurements. Patients with severe or repeated episodes of acute chest syndrome may need lifelong transfusion support, utilizing partial exchange transfusion, if possible.

Figure 104-4

 
 
 
Sickle cell anemia. The elongated and crescent-shaped red blood cells seen on this smear represent circulating irreversibly sickled cells. Target cells and a nucleated red blood cell are also seen.
 
 

Treatment: Sickle Cell Syndromes

Patients with sickle cell syndromes require ongoing continuity of care. Familiarity with the pattern of symptoms provides the best safeguard against excessive use of the emergency room, hospitalization, and habituation to addictive narcotics. Additional preventive measures include regular slit-lamp examinations to monitor development of retinopathy; antibiotic prophylaxis appropriate for splenectomized patients during dental or other invasive procedures; and vigorous oral hydration during or in anticipation of periods of extreme exercise, exposure to heat or cold, emotional stress, or infection. Pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae vaccines are less effective in splenectomized individuals. Thus, patients with sickle cell anemia should be vaccinated early in life.

The management of acute painful crisis includes vigorous hydration, thorough evaluation for underlying causes (such as infection), and aggressive analgesia administered by a standing order and/or patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump. Morphine (0.1每0.15 mg/kg every 3每4 h) should be used to control severe pain. Bone pain may respond as well to ketorolac (30每60 mg initial dose, then 15每30 mg every 6每8 h). Inhalation of nitrous oxide can provide short-term pain relief, but great care must be exercised to avoid hypoxia and respiratory depression. Nitrous oxide also elevates O2 affinity, reducing O2 delivery to tissues. Its use should be restricted to experts. Many crises can be managed at home with oral hydration and oral analgesia. Use of the emergency room should be reserved for especially severe symptoms or circumstances in which other processes, e.g., infection, are strongly suspected. Nasal oxygen should be employed as appropriate to protect arterial saturation. Most crises resolve in 1每7 days. Use of blood transfusion should be reserved for extreme cases: transfusions do not shorten the duration of the crisis.

No tests are definitive to diagnose acute painful crisis. Critical to good management is an approach that recognizes that most patients reporting crisis symptoms do indeed have crisis or another significant medical problem. Diligent diagnostic evaluation for underlying causes is imperative, even though these are found infrequently. In adults, the possibility of aseptic necrosis or sickle arthropathy must be considered, especially if pain and immobility become repeated or chronic at a single site. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are often effective for sickle cell arthropathy.

Acute chest syndrome is a medical emergency that may require management in an intensive care unit. Hydration should be monitored carefully to avoid the development of pulmonary edema, and oxygen therapy should be especially vigorous for protection of arterial saturation. Diagnostic evaluation for pneumonia and pulmonary embolism should be especially thorough, since these may occur with atypical symptoms. Critical interventions are transfusion to maintain a hematocrit >30, and emergency exchange transfusion if arterial saturation drops to <90%. As patients with sickle cell syndrome increasingly survive into their fifth and sixth decades, end-stage renal failure and pulmonary hypertension are becoming increasingly prominent causes of end-stage morbidity. A sickle cell cardiomyopathy and/or premature coronary artery disease may compromise cardiac function in later years. Sickle cell patients have received kidney transplants, but they often experience an increase in the frequency and severity of crises, possibly due to increased infection as a consequence of immunosuppression.

The most significant advance in the therapy of sickle cell anemia has been the introduction of hydroxyurea as a mainstay of therapy for patients with severe symptoms. Hydroxyurea (10每30 mg/kg per day) increases fetal hemoglobin and may also exert beneficial affects on RBC hydration, vascular wall adherence, and suppression of the granulocyte and reticulocyte counts; dosage is titrated to maintain a white cell count between 5000 and 8000 per L. White cells and reticulocytes may play a major role in the pathogenesis of sickle cell crisis, and their suppression may be an important benefit of hydroxyurea therapy.

Hydroxyurea should be considered in patients experiencing repeated episodes of acute chest syndrome or with more than three crises per year requiring hospitalization. The utility of this agent for reducing the incidence of other complications (priapism, retinopathy) is under evaluation, as are the long-term side effects. Hydroxyurea offers broad benefits to most patients whose disease is severe enough to impair their functional status, and it may improve survival. HbF levels increase in most patients within a few months.

The antitumor drug 5-azacytidine was the first agent found to elevate HbF. It never achieved widespread use because of concerns about acute toxicity and carcinogenesis. However, low doses of the related agent 5-deoxyazacytidine (decitabine) can elevate HbF with more acceptable toxicity.

Bone marrow transplantation can provide definitive cures but is known to be effective and safe only in children. Partially myeloablative conditioning regimens ("mini" transplants) may allow more widespread use of this modality. Prognostic features justifying bone marrow transplant are the presence of repeated crises early in life, a high neutrophil count, or the development of hand-foot syndrome. Children at risk for stroke can now be identified through the use of Doppler ultrasound techniques. Prophylactic exchange transfusion appears to substantially reduce the risk of stroke in this population. Children who do suffer a cerebrovascular accident should be maintained for at least 3每5 years on a program of vigorous exchange transfusion, as the risk of second strokes is extremely high.

Gene therapy for sickle cell anemia is being intensively pursued, but no safe measures are currently available. Agents blocking RBC dehydration or vascular adhesion, such as clotrimazole or magnesium, may have value as an adjunct to hydroxyurea therapy, pending the completion of ongoing trials. Combinations of clotrimazole and magnesium are being evaluated.

Unstable Hemoglobins

Amino acid substitutions that reduce solubility or increase susceptibility to oxidation produce unstable hemoglobins that precipitate, forming inclusion bodies injurious to the RBC membrane. Representative mutations are those that interfere with contact points between the  and  subunits [e.g., Hb Philly (35TyrPhe)], alter the helical segments [e.g., Hb Genova (28LeuPro)], or disrupt interactions of the hydrophobic pockets of the globin subunits with heme [e.g., Hb Koln (98ValMet)] (Table 104-3). The inclusions, called Heinz bodies, are clinically detectable by staining with supravital dyes such as crystal violet. Removal of these inclusions by the spleen generates pitted, rigid cells that have shortened life spans, producing hemolytic anemia of variable severity, sometimes requiring chronic transfusion support. Splenectomy may be needed to correct the anemia. Leg ulcers and premature gallbladder disease due to bilirubin loading are frequent stigmata.

Table 104-3 Representative Abnormal Hemoglobins with Altered Synthesis or Function

 
 
Designation Mutation Population Main Clinical Effectsa  
Sickle or S 6GluVal
  African Anemia, ischemic infarcts 
C 6GluLys
  African Mild anemia; interacts with HbS 
E 26GluLys
  Southeast Asian Microcytic anemia, splenomegaly, thalassemic phenotype 
K?ln 98ValMet
  Sporadic Hemolytic anemia, Heinz bodies when splenectomized 
Yakima 99AspHis
  Sporadic Polycythemia 
Kansas 102AsnLys
  Sporadic Mild anemia 
M. Iwata 87HisTyr
  Sporadic Methemoglobinemia 
 


aSee text for details.
 

Unstable hemoglobins occur sporadically, often by spontaneous new mutations. Heterozygotes are often symptomatic because a significant Heinz body burden can develop even when the unstable variant accounts for only a portion of the total hemoglobin. Symptomatic unstable hemoglobins tend to be -globin variants, because sporadic mutations affecting only one of the four  globins would generate only 20每30% abnormal hemoglobin.

Hemoglobins with Altered Oxygen Affinity

High-affinity hemoglobins [e.g., Hb Yakima (99AspHis)] bind oxygen more readily but deliver less O2 to tissues at normal capillary PO2 levels (Fig. 104-2). Mild tissue hypoxia ensues, stimulating RBC production and erythrocytosis (Table 104-3). In extreme cases, the hematocrits can rise to 60每65%, increasing blood viscosity and producing typical symptoms (headache, somnolence, or dizziness). Phlebotomy may be required. Typical mutations alter interactions within the heme pocket or disrupt the Bohr effect or salt-bond site. Mutations that impair the interaction of HbA with 2,3-BPG can increase O2 affinity because 2,3-BPG binding lowers O2 affinity.

Low-affinity hemoglobins [e.g., Hb Kansas (102AsnLys)] bind sufficient oxygen in the lungs, despite their lower oxygen affinity, to achieve nearly full saturation. At capillary oxygen tensions, they lose sufficient amounts of oxygen to maintain homeostasis at a low hematocrit (Fig. 104-2) (pseudoanemia). Capillary hemoglobin desaturation can also be sufficient to produce clinically apparent cyanosis. Despite these findings, patients usually require no specific treatment.

Methemoglobinemias

Methemoglobin is generated by oxidation of the heme iron moieties to the ferric state, causing a characteristic bluish-brown muddy color resembling cyanosis. Methemoglobin has such high oxygen affinity that virtually no oxygen is delivered. Levels >50每60% are often fatal.

Congenital methemoglobinemia arises from globin mutations that stabilize iron in the ferric state [e.g., HbM Iwata (87HisTyr), Table 104-3] or from mutations that impair the enzymes that reduce methemoglobin to hemoglobin (e.g., methemoglobin reductase, NADP diaphorase). Acquired methemoglobinemia is caused by toxins that oxidize heme iron, notably nitrate and nitrite-containing compounds, including drugs commonly used in cardiology and anesthesiology.

Diagnosis and Management of Patients with Unstable Hemoglobins, High-Affinity Hemoglobins, and Methemoglobinemia

Unstable hemoglobin variants should be suspected in patients with nonimmune hemolytic anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, or premature biliary tract disease. Severe hemolysis usually presents during infancy as neonatal jaundice or anemia. Milder cases may present in adult life with anemia or only as unexplained reticulocytosis, hepatosplenomegaly, premature biliary tract disease, or leg ulcers. Because spontaneous mutation is common, family history of anemia may be absent. The peripheral blood smear often shows anisocytosis, abundant cells with punctate inclusions, and irregular shapes (i.e., poikilocytosis).

The two best tests for diagnosing unstable hemoglobins are the Heinz body preparation and the isopropanol or heat stability test. Many unstable Hb variants are electrophoretically silent. A normal electrophoresis does not rule out the diagnosis.

Severely affected patients may require transfusion support for the first 3 years of life, because splenectomy before age 3 is associated with a significantly higher immune deficit. Splenectomy is usually effective thereafter, but occasional patients may require lifelong transfusion support. After splenectomy, patients can develop cholelithiasis and leg ulcers, hypercoagulable states, and susceptibility to overwhelming sepsis. Splenectomy should be avoided or delayed unless it is the only alternative. Precipitation of unstable hemoglobins is aggravated by oxidative stress, e.g., infection and antimalarial drugs, which should be avoided where possible.

High-O2 affinity hemoglobin variants should be suspected in patients with erythrocytosis. The best test for confirmation is measurement of the P50. A high-O2 affinity Hb causes a significant left shift (i.e., lower numeric value of the P50); confounding conditions, e.g., tobacco smoking or carbon monoxide exposure, can also lower the P50.

High-affinity hemoglobins are often asymptomatic; rubor or plethora may be telltale signs. When the hematocrit reaches to 55每60%, symptoms of high blood viscosity and sluggish flow (headache, lethargy, dizziness, etc.) may be present. These persons may benefit from judicious phlebotomy. Erythrocytosis represents an appropriate attempt to compensate for the impaired oxygen delivery by the abnormal variant. Overzealous phlebotomy may stimulate increased erythropoiesis or aggravate symptoms by thwarting this compensatory mechanism. The guiding principle of phlebotomy should be to improve oxygen delivery by reducing blood viscosity and increasing blood flow rather than restoration of a normal hematocrit. Modest iron deficiency may aid in control.

Low-affinity hemoglobins should be considered in patients with cyanosis or a low hematocrit with no other reason apparent after thorough evaluation. The P50 test confirms the diagnosis. Counseling and reassurance are the interventions of choice.

Methemoglobin should be suspected in patients with hypoxic symptoms who appear cyanotic but have a PaO2 sufficiently high that hemoglobin should be fully saturated with oxygen. A history of nitrite or other oxidant ingestions may not always be available; some exposures may be inapparent to the patient, and others may result from suicide attempts. The characteristic muddy appearance of freshly drawn blood can be a critical clue. The best diagnostic test is methemoglobin assay, which is usually available on an emergency basis.

Methemoglobinemia often causes symptoms of cerebral ischemia at levels >15%; levels >60% are usually lethal. Intravenous injection of 1 mg/kg of methylene blue is effective emergency therapy. Milder cases and follow-up of severe cases can be treated orally with methylene blue (60 mg three to four times each day) or ascorbic acid (300每600 mg/d).
 
Thalassemia Syndromes

The thalassemia syndromes are inherited disorders of - or -globin biosynthesis. The reduced supply of globin diminishes production of hemoglobin tetramers, causing hypochromia and microcytosis. Unbalanced accumulation of  and  subunits occurs because the synthesis of the unaffected globins proceeds at a normal rate. Unbalanced chain accumulation dominates the clinical phenotype. Clinical severity varies widely, depending on the degree to which the synthesis of the affected globin is impaired, altered synthesis of other globin chains, and coinheritance of other abnormal globin alleles.

Clinical Manifestations of -Thalassemia Syndromes

Mutations causing thalassemia can affect any step in the pathway of globin gene expression: transcription, processing of the mRNA precursor, translation, and posttranslational metabolism of the -globin polypeptide chain. The most common forms arise from mutations that derange splicing of the mRNA precursor or prematurely terminate translation of the mRNA.

Hypochromia and microcytosis characterize all forms of  thalassemia because of the reduced amounts of hemoglobin tetramers (Fig. 104-5). In heterozygotes (-thalassemia trait), this is the only abnormality seen. Anemia is minimal. In more severe homozygous states, unbalanced - and -globin accumulation causes accumulation of highly insoluble unpaired  chains. They form toxic inclusion bodies that kill developing erythroblasts in the marrow. Few of the proerythroblasts beginning erythroid maturation survive. The surviving RBCs bear a burden of inclusion bodies that are detected in the spleen, shortening the RBC life span and producing severe hemolytic anemia. The resulting profound anemia stimulates erythropoietin release and compensatory erythroid hyperplasia, but the marrow response is sabotaged by the ineffective erythropoiesis. Anemia persists. Erythroid hyperplasia can become exuberant and produce masses of extramedullary erythropoietic tissue in the liver and spleen.

Figure 104-5

 
 
 
-Thalassemia intermedia. Microcytic and hypochromic red blood cells are seen that resemble the red blood cells of severe iron deficiency anemia. Many elliptical and teardrop-shaped red blood cells are noted.
 
 

Massive bone marrow expansion deranges growth and development. Children develop characteristic "chipmunk" facies due to maxillary marrow hyperplasia and frontal bossing. Thinning and pathologic fracture of long bones and vertebrae may occur due to cortical invasion by erythroid elements and profound growth retardation. Hemolytic anemia causes hepatosplenomegaly, leg ulcers, gallstones, and high-output congestive heart failure. The conscription of caloric resources to support erythropoiesis leads to inanition, susceptibility to infection, endocrine dysfunction, and in the most severe cases, death during the first decade of life. Chronic transfusions with RBCs improve oxygen delivery, suppress the excessive ineffective erythropoiesis, and prolong life, but the inevitable side effects, notably iron overload, usually prove fatal by age 30 years.

Severity is highly variable. Known modulating factors are those that ameliorate the burden of unpaired -globin inclusions. Alleles associated with milder synthetic defects and coinheritance of -thalassemia trait reduce clinical severity by reducing accumulation of excess  globin. HbF persists to various degrees in  thalassemias. -Globin gene chains can substitute for  chains, generating more hemoglobin and reducing the burden of -globin inclusions. The terms -thalassemia major and -thalassemia intermedia are used to reflect the clinical heterogeneity. Patients with -thalassemia major require intensive transfusion support to survive. Patients with -thalassemia intermedia have a somewhat milder phenotype and can survive without transfusion. The terms -thalassemia minor and -thalassemia trait describe asymptomatic heterozygotes for  thalassemia.

Thalassemia Syndromes

The four classic  thalassemias, most common in Asians, are -thalassemia-2 trait, in which one of the four -globin loci is deleted; -thalassemia-1 trait, with two deleted loci; HbH disease, with three loci deleted; and hydrops fetalis with Hb Barts, with all four loci deleted (Table 104-4). Nondeletion forms of  thalassemia also exist.

Table 104-4 The  Thalassemias

 
 
Condition Hemoglobin A, % Hemoglobin H (4), % Hemoglobin Level, g/L (g/dL) MCV, fL 
Normal 97 0 150 (15) 90 
Silent thalassemia: 每/ 98每100 0 150 (15) 90 
Thalassemia trait:

每/每 homozygous -thal-2a

or

每每/ heterozygous -thal-1a
 85每95 Rare red blood cell inclusions 120每130 (12每13) 70每80 
Hemoglobin H disease:

每每/每 heterozygous -thal-1/-thal-2
 70每95 5每30 60每100 (6每10) 60每70 
Hydrops fetalis:

每每/每每 homozygous -thal-1
 0 5每10b Fatal in utero or at birth   
 


aWhen both  alleles on one chromosome are deleted, the locus is called -thal-1; when only a single  allele on one chromosome is deleted, the locus is called -thal-2.

b90每95% of the hemoglobin is hemoglobin Barts (tetramers of  chains).
 

-Thalassemia-2 trait is an asymptomatic, silent carrier state. -Thalassemia-1 trait resembles -thalassemia minor. Offspring doubly heterozygous for -thalassemia-2 and -thalassemia-1 exhibit a more severe phenotype called HbH disease. Heterozygosity for a deletion that removes both genes from the same chromosome (cis deletion) is common in Asians and in those from the Mediterranean region, as is homozygosity for -thalassemia-2 (trans deletion). Both produce asymptomatic hypochromia and microcytosis.

In HbH disease, HbA production is only 25每30% normal. Fetuses accumulate some unpaired  chains (Hb Barts; -chain tetramers). In adults, unpaired  chains accumulate and are soluble enough to form 4 tetramers called HbH. HbH forms few inclusions in erythroblasts and precipitates in circulating RBC. Patients with HbH disease have thalassemia intermedia characterized by moderately severe hemolytic anemia but milder ineffective erythropoiesis. Survival into midadult life without transfusions is common.

The homozygous state for the -thalassemia-1 cis deletion (hydrops fetalis) causes total absence of -globin synthesis. No physiologically useful hemoglobin is produced beyond the embryonic stage. Excess  globin forms tetramers called Hb Barts (4), which has a very high oxygen affinity. It delivers almost no O2 to fetal tissues, causing tissue asphyxia, edema (hydrops fetalis), congestive heart failure, and death in utero. -Thalassemia-2 trait is common (15每20%) among people of African descent. The cis -thalassemia-1 deletion is almost never seen, however. Thus, -thalassemia-2 and the trans form of -thalassemia-1 are very common, but HbH disease and hydrops fetalis are rare.

It has been known for some time that some patients with myelodysplasia or erythroleukemia produce RBC clones containing HbH. This phenomenon is due to mutations in the ATRX pathway that affect the LCR of the -globin gene cluster.

Diagnosis and Management of Thalassemias

The diagnosis of -thalassemia major is readily made during childhood on the basis of severe anemia accompanied by the characteristic signs of massive ineffective erythropoiesis: hepatosplenomegaly, profound microcytosis, a characteristic blood smear (Fig. 104-5), and elevated levels of HbF, HbA2, or both. Many patients require chronic hypertransfusion therapy designed to maintain a hematocrit of at least 27每30% so that erythropoiesis is suppressed. Splenectomy is required if the annual transfusion requirement (volume of RBCs per kilogram of body weight per year) increases by >50%. Folic acid supplements may be useful. Vaccination with Pneumovax in anticipation of eventual splenectomy is advised, as is close monitoring for infection, leg ulcers, and biliary tract disease. Many patients develop endocrine deficiencies as a result of iron overload. Early endocrine evaluation is required for glucose intolerance, thyroid dysfunction, and delayed onset of puberty or secondary sexual characteristics.

Patients with -thalassemia intermedia exhibit similar stigmata but can survive without chronic hypertransfusion. Management is particularly challenging because a number of factors can aggravate the anemia, including infection, onset of puberty, and development of splenomegaly and hypersplenism. Some patients may eventually benefit from splenectomy. The expanded erythron can cause absorption of excessive dietary iron and hemosiderosis, even without transfusion.

-Thalassemia minor (i.e., thalassemia trait) usually presents as profound microcytosis and hypochromia with target cells, but only minimal or mild anemia. The mean corpuscular volume is rarely >75 fL; the hematocrit is rarely <30每33%. Hemoglobin analysis classically reveals an elevated HbA2 (3.5每7.5%), but some forms are associated with normal HbA2 and/or elevated HbF. Genetic counseling and patient education are essential. Patients with -thalassemia trait should be warned that their blood picture resembles iron deficiency and can be misdiagnosed. They should eschew empirical use of iron, yet iron deficiency can develop during pregnancy or from chronic bleeding.

Persons with -thalassemia trait may exhibit mild hypochromia and microcytosis usually without anemia. HbA2 and HbF levels are normal. Affected individuals usually require only genetic counseling. HbH disease resembles -thalassemia intermedia, with the added complication that the HbH molecule behaves like moderately unstable hemoglobin. Patients with HbH disease should undergo splenectomy if excessive anemia or a transfusion requirement develops. Oxidative drugs should be avoided. Iron overload leading to death can occur in more severely affected patients.

Prevention

Antenatal diagnosis of thalassemia syndromes is now widely available. DNA diagnosis is based on PCR amplification of fetal DNA, obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus biopsy followed by hybridization to allele-specific oligonucleotides probes or direct DNA sequencing.
 
Thalassemic Structural Variants

Thalassemic structural variants are characterized by both defective synthesis and abnormal structure.

Hemoglobin Lepore

Hb Lepore [2()2] arises by an unequal crossover and recombination event that fuses the proximal end of the -gene with the distal end of the closely linked -gene. It is common in the Mediterranean basin. The resulting chromosome contains only the fused  gene. The Lepore () globin is synthesized poorly because the fused gene is under the control of the weak -globin promoter. Hb Lepore alleles have a phenotype like  thalassemia, except for the added presence of 2每20% Hb Lepore. Compound heterozygotes for Hb Lepore and a classic -thalassemia allele may also have severe thalassemia.

Hemoglobin E

HbE (i.e., 2226GluLys) is extremely common in Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. The gene has become far more prevalent in the United States as a result of immigration of Asian persons, especially in California, where HbE is the most common variant detected. HbE is mildly unstable but not enough to affect RBC life span significantly. Heterozygotes resemble individuals with a mild -thalassemia trait. Homozygotes have somewhat more marked abnormalities but are asymptomatic. Compound heterozygotes for HbE and a -thalassemia gene can have -thalassemia intermedia or -thalassemia major, depending on the severity of the coinherited thalassemic gene.

The E allele contains a single base change in codon 26 that causes the amino acid substitution. However, this mutation activates a cryptic RNA splice site, generating a structurally abnormal globin mRNA that cannot be translated from about 50% of the initial pre-mRNA molecules. The remaining 40每50% are normally spliced and generate functional mRNA that is translated into E-globin because the mature mRNA carries the base change that alters codon 26.

Genetic counseling of the persons at risk for HbE should focus on the interaction of HbE with  thalassemia rather than HbE homozygosity, a condition associated with asymptomatic microcytosis, hypochromia, and hemoglobin levels rarely <100 g/L (<10 g/dL).

Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin

HPFH is characterized by continued synthesis of high levels of HbF in adult life. No deleterious effects are apparent, even when all of the hemoglobin produced is HbF. These rare patients demonstrate convincingly that prevention or reversal of the fetal to adult hemoglobin switch would provide effective therapy for sickle cell anemia and  thalassemia.

Acquired Hemoglobinopathies

The two most important acquired hemoglobinopathies are carbon monoxide poisoning and methemoglobinemia (see above). Carbon monoxide has a higher affinity for hemoglobin than does oxygen; it can replace oxygen and diminish O2 delivery. Chronic elevation of carboxyhemoglobin levels to 10 or 15%, as occurs in smokers, can lead to secondary polycythemia. Carboxyhemoglobin is cherry red in color and masks the development of cyanosis usually associated with poor O2 delivery to tissues.

Abnormalities of hemoglobin biosynthesis have also been described in blood dyscrasias. In some patients with myelodysplasia, erythroleukemia, or myeloproliferative disorders, elevated HbF or a mild form of HbH disease may also be seen. The abnormalities are not severe enough to alter the course of the underlying disease.

Treatment: Transfusional Hemosiderosis

Chronic blood transfusion can lead to bloodborne infection, alloimmunization, febrile reactions, and lethal iron overload (Chap. 113). A unit of packed RBCs contains 250每300 mg iron (1 mg/mL). The iron assimilated by a single transfusion of two units of packed RBCs is thus equal to a 1- to 2-year intake of iron. Iron accumulates in chronically transfused patients because no mechanisms exist for increasing iron excretion: an expanded erythron causes especially rapid development of iron overload because accelerated erythropoiesis promotes excessive absorption of dietary iron. Vitamin C should not be supplemented because it generates free radicals in iron excess states.

Patients who receive >100 units of packed RBCs usually develop hemosiderosis. The ferritin level rises, followed by early endocrine dysfunction (glucose intolerance and delayed puberty), cirrhosis, and cardiomyopathy. Liver biopsy shows both parenchymal and reticuloendothelial iron. The superconducting quantum-interference device (SQUID) is accurate at measuring hepatic iron but not widely available. Cardiac toxicity is often insidious. Early development of pericarditis is followed by dysrhythmia and pump failure. The onset of heart failure is ominous, often presaging death within a year (Chap. 357).

The decision to start long-term transfusion support should also prompt one to institute therapy with iron-chelating agents. Desferoxamine (Desferal) is for parenteral use. Its iron-binding kinetics require chronic slow infusion via a metering pump. The constant presence of the drug improves the efficiency of chelation and protects tissues from occasional releases of the most toxic fraction of iron〞low-molecular-weight iron〞which may not be sequestered by protective proteins.

Desferoxamine is relatively nontoxic. Occasional cataracts, deafness, and local skin reactions, including urticaria, occur. Skin reactions can usually be managed with antihistamines. Negative iron balance can be achieved, even in the face of a high transfusion requirement, but this alone does not prevent long-term morbidity and mortality in chronically transfused patients. Irreversible end-organ deterioration develops at relatively modest levels of iron overload, even if symptoms do not appear for many years thereafter. To enjoy a significant survival advantage, chelation must begin before 5每8 years of age in -thalassemia major.

Deferasirox is an oral iron-chelating agent. Single daily doses of 20 to 30 mg/kg deferasirox produced reductions in liver iron concentration comparable to desferoxamine in long-term transfused adult and pediatric patients. Deferasirox produces some elevations in liver enzymes and slight but persistent increases in serum creatinine, without apparent clinical consequence. Other toxicities are similar to those of desferoxamine. Its toxicity profile is acceptable, although long-term effects are still being evaluated.
 
Experimental Therapies

Bone Marrow Transplantation, Gene Therapy, and Manipulation of HBF

Bone marrow transplantation provides stem cells able to express normal hemoglobin; it has been used in a large number of patients with  thalassemia and a smaller number of patients with sickle cell anemia. Early in the course of disease, before end-organ damage occurs, transplantation is curative in 80每90% of patients. In highly experienced centers, the treatment-related mortality is <10%. Since survival into adult life is possible with conventional therapy, the decision to transplant is best made in consultation with specialized centers.

Gene therapy of thalassemia and sickle cell disease has proved to be an elusive goal. Uptake of gene vectors into the nondividing hematopoietic stem cells has been inefficient. Lentiviral-type vectors that can transduce nondividing cells may solve this problem.

Reestablishing high levels of fetal hemoglobin synthesis should ameliorate the symptoms of  chain hemoglobinopathies. Cytotoxic agents such as hydroxyurea and cytarabine promote high levels of HbF synthesis, probably by stimulating proliferation of the primitive HbF-producing progenitor cell population (i.e., F cell progenitors). Unfortunately, this regimen has not yet been effective in  thalassemia. Butyrates stimulate HbF production, but only transiently. Pulsed or intermittent administration has been found to sustain HbF induction in the majority of patients with sickle cell disease. It is unclear whether butyrates will have similar activity in patients with  thalassemia.
 
Aplastic and Hypoplastic Crisis in Patients with Hemoglobinopathies

Patients with hemolytic anemias sometimes exhibit an alarming decline in hematocrit during and immediately after acute illnesses. Bone marrow suppression occurs in almost everyone during acute inflammatory illnesses. In patients with short RBC life spans, suppression can affect RBC counts more dramatically. These hypoplastic crises are usually transient and self-correcting before intervention is required.

Aplastic crisis refers to a profound cessation of erythroid activity in patients with chronic hemolytic anemias. It is associated with a rapidly falling hematocrit. Episodes are usually self-limited. Aplastic crises are caused by infection with a particular strain of parvovirus, B19A. Children infected with this virus usually develop permanent immunity. Aplastic crises do not often recur and are rarely seen in adults. Management requires close monitoring of the hematocrit and reticulocyte count. If anemia becomes symptomatic, transfusion support is indicated. Most crises resolve spontaneously within 1每2 weeks.
 
Further Readings

Ataga KI, Orringa EP: Hypercoagulability in sickle cell disease: A curious paradox. Am J Med 115:721, 2003[PMID: 14693325] 

 
Desimone J et al: Maintenance of elevated fetal hemoglobin levels by decitabine during dose interval treatment of sickle cell anemia. Blood 99:3905, 2002[PMID: 12010787] 

 
Neufeld EJ: Oral chelators deferasirox and deferiprone for transfusional iron overload in thalassemia major: New data, new questions. Blood 107:3436, 2006[PMID: 16627763] 

 
Prabhakar H et al: Sickle cell disease in the United States: Looking back and forward at 100 years of progress in management and survival. Am J Hematol 85:346, 2010[PMID: 20425797] 

 
Quek L, Thein SL: Molecular therapies in beta-thalassaemia. Br J Haematol 136:353, 2007[PMID: 17129232] 

 
Smiers FJ et al: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for hemoglobinopathies: Current practice and emerging trends. Pediatr Clin North Am 57:181, 2010[PMID: 20307718] 

 
Steinberg MH: Pathophysiologically based drug treatment of sickle cell disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 27:204, 2006[PMID: 16530854] 

 
Switzer JA et al: Pathophysiology and treatment of stroke in sickle-cell disease: Present and future. Lancet Neurol 5:501, 2006[PMID: 16713922] 

 
Ware RE et al: Predictors of fetal hemoglobin response in children with sickle cell anemia receiving hydroxyurea therapy. Blood 99:10, 2002[PMID: 11756146] 

 
Weatherall DJ: The inherited diseases of hemoglobin are an emerging global health burden. Blood 115:4331, 2010[PMID: 20233970] 
 
 

^^
Megaloblastic Anemias: Introduction

The megaloblastic anemias are a group of disorders characterized by the presence of distinctive morphologic appearances of the developing red cells in the bone marrow. The marrow is usually cellular and the anemia is based on ineffective erythropoiesis. The cause is usually a deficiency of either cobalamin (vitamin B12) or folate, but megaloblastic anemia may occur because of genetic or acquired abnormalities that affect the metabolism of these vitamins or because of defects in DNA synthesis not related to cobalamin or folate (Table 105每1). Cobalamin and folate absorption and metabolism are described next, followed by the biochemical basis, clinical and laboratory features, causes, and treatment of megaloblastic anemia.

Table 105每1 Causes of Megaloblastic Anemia

 
 
Cobalamin deficiency or abnormalities of cobalamin metabolism (see Tables 105每3 and 105每4)

Folate deficiency or abnormalities of folate metabolism (see Table 105每5)

Therapy with antifolate drugs (e.g., methotrexate)

Independent of either cobalamin or folate deficiency and refractory to cobalamin and folate therapy:

   Some cases of acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplasia

   Therapy with drugs interfering with synthesis of DNA [e.g., cytosine arabinoside, hydroxyurea, 6-mercaptopurine, azidothymidine (AZT)]

   Orotic aciduria (responds to uridine)

   Thiamine-responsive
 
 

 
 
Cobalamin

Cobalamin (vitamin B12) exists in a number of different chemical forms. All have a cobalt atom at the center of a corrin ring. In nature, the vitamin is mainly in the 2-deoxyadenosyl (ado) form, which is located in mitochondria. It is the cofactor for the enzyme methylmalonyl coenzyme A (CoA) mutase. The other major natural cobalamin is methylcobalamin, the form in human plasma and in cell cytoplasm. It is the cofactor for methionine synthase. There are also minor amounts of hydroxocobalamin to which methyl- and adocobalamin are converted rapidly by exposure to light.

Dietary Sources and Requirements

Cobalamin is synthesized solely by microorganisms. Ruminants obtain cobalamin from the foregut, but the only source for humans is food of animal origin, e.g., meat, fish, and dairy products. Vegetables, fruits, and other foods of nonanimal origin are free from cobalamin unless they are contaminated by bacteria. A normal Western diet contains 5每30 g of cobalamin daily. Adult daily losses (mainly in the urine and feces) are 1每3 g (0.1% of body stores), and as the body does not have the ability to degrade cobalamin, daily requirements are also about 1每3 g. Body stores are of the order of 2每3 mg, sufficient for 3每4 years if supplies are completely cut off.

Absorption

Two mechanisms exist for cobalamin absorption. One is passive, occurring equally through buccal, duodenal, and ileal mucosa; it is rapid but extremely inefficient, with <1% of an oral dose being absorbed by this process. The normal physiologic mechanism is active; it occurs through the ileum and is efficient for small (a few micrograms) oral doses of cobalamin, and it is mediated by gastric intrinsic factor (IF). Dietary cobalamin is released from protein complexes by enzymes in the stomach, duodenum, and jejunum; it combines rapidly with a salivary glycoprotein that belongs to the family of cobalamin-binding proteins known as haptocorrins (HCs). In the intestine, the haptocorrin is digested by pancreatic trypsin and the cobalamin is transferred to IF.

IF (gene at chromosome 11q13 coding for 9 exons) is produced in the gastric parietal cells of the fundus and body of the stomach, and its secretion parallels that of hydrochloric acid. Normally, there is a vast excess of IF. The IF-cobalamin complex passes to the ileum, where IF attaches to a specific receptor (cubilin) on the microvillus membrane of the enterocytes. Cubilin also is present in yolk sac and renal proximal tubular epithelium. Cubulin appears to traffic by means of amnionless (AMN), an endocytic receptor protein that directs sublocalization and endocytosis of cubulin with its ligand IF-cobalamin complex. The cobalamin-IF complex enters the ileal cell, where IF is destroyed. After a delay of about 6 h, the cobalamin appears in portal blood attached to transcobalamin (TC) II.

Between 0.5 and 5 g of cobalamin enter the bile each day. This binds to IF, and a major portion of biliary cobalamin normally is reabsorbed together with cobalamin derived from sloughed intestinal cells. Because of the appreciable amount of cobalamin undergoing enterohepatic circulation, cobalamin deficiency develops more rapidly in individuals who malabsorb cobalamin than it does in vegans, in whom reabsorption of biliary cobalamin is intact.

Transport

Two main cobalamin transport proteins exist in human plasma; they both bind cobalamin〞one molecule for one molecule. One HC, known as TC I, is closely related to other cobalamin-binding HCs in milk, gastric juice, bile, saliva, and other fluids. The gene TCNL is at chromosome 11q11-q12.3 and has 9 exons. These HCs differ from each other only in the carbohydrate moiety of the molecule. TC I is derived primarily from the specific granules in neutrophils. Normally, it is about two-thirds saturated with cobalamin, which it binds tightly. TC I does not enhance cobalamin entry into tissues. Glycoprotein receptors on liver cells are involved in the removal of TC I from plasma, and TC I may play a role in the transport of cobalamin analogues (which it binds more effectively than IF) to the liver for excretion in bile.

The other major cobalamin transport protein in plasma is TC II. The gene is on chromosome 22q11-q13.1. As for IF and HC, there are 9 exons. The three proteins are likely to have a common ancestral origin. TC II is synthesized by liver and by other tissues, including macrophages, ileum, and vascular endothelium. It normally carries only 20每60 ng of cobalamin per liter of plasma and readily gives up cobalamin to marrow, placenta, and other tissues, which it enters by receptor-mediated endocytosis involving the TC II receptor and megalin (encoded by the LRP-2 gene). The TC II cobalamin is internalized by endocytosis via clathrin-coated pits; the complex is degraded, but the receptor probably is recycled to the cell membrane as is the case for transferrin. Export of "free" cobalamin is via the ATP-binding cassette drug transporter alias multidrug resistance protein 1.
 
Folate

Dietary Folate

Folic (pteroylglutamic) acid is a yellow, crystalline, water-soluble substance. It is the parent compound of a large family of natural folate compounds, which differ from it in three respects: (1) they are partly or completely reduced to di- or tetrahydrofolate (THF) derivatives, (2) they usually contain a single carbon unit (Table 105每2), and (3) 70每90% of natural folates are folate-polyglutamates.

Table 105每2 Biochemical Reactions of Folate Coenzymes

 
 
Reaction Coenzyme Form of Folate Involved Single Carbon Unit Transferred Importance 
Formate activation  THF 每CHO Generation of 10-formyl-THF 
Purine synthesis        
    Formation of glycinamide ribonucleotide

    Formylation of aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR)
 5,10-MethyleneTHF

10-Formyl (CHO)THF
 每CHO
 Formation of purines needed for DNA, RNA synthesis, but reactions probably not rate-limiting 
Pyrimidine synthesis        
    Methylation of deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to thymidine monophosphate (dTMP) 5,10-MethyleneTHF 每CH3
  Rate limiting in DNA synthesis

Oxidizes THF to DHF

Some breakdown of folate at the C-9每N-10 bond
 
Amino acid interconversion        
    Serine每glycine interconversion

    Homocysteine to methionine
 THF

5-Methyl(M)THF
 =CH2

每CH3
 Entry of single carbon units into active pool

Demethylation of 5-MTHF to THF; also requires cobalamin, flavine adenine dinucleotide, ATP, and adenosylmethionine
 
    Forminoglutamic acid to glutamic acid in histidine catabolism THF 每HN每CH=   
 


Abbreviations: DHF, dihydrofolate; THF, tetrahydrofolate.
 

Most foods contain some folate. The highest concentrations are found in liver, yeast, spinach, other greens, and nuts (>100 g/100 g). The total folate content of an average Western diet is 250 g daily, but the amount varies widely according to the type of food eaten and the method of cooking. Folate is easily destroyed by heating, particularly in large volumes of water. Total-body folate in the adult is 10 mg, with the liver containing the largest store. Daily adult requirements are 100 g, and so stores are sufficient for only 3每4 months in normal adults and severe folate deficiency may develop rapidly.

Absorption

Folates are absorbed rapidly from the upper small intestine. The absorption of folate polyglutamates is less efficient than that of monoglutamates; on average, 50% of food folate is absorbed. Polyglutamate forms are hydrolyzed to the monoglutamate derivatives either in the lumen of the intestine or within the mucosa. All dietary folates are converted to 5-methylTHF (5-MTHF) within the small-intestinal mucosa before entering portal plasma. The monoglutamates are actively transported across the enterocyte by a carrier-mediated mechanism. Pteroylglutamic acid at doses >400 g is absorbed largely unchanged and converted to natural folates in the liver. Lower doses are converted to 5-MTHF during absorption through the intestine.

About 60每90 g of folate enters the bile each day and is excreted into the small intestine. Loss of this folate, together with the folate of sloughed intestinal cells, accelerates the speed with which folate deficiency develops in malabsorption conditions.

Transport

Folate is transported in plasma; about one-third is loosely bound to albumin, and two-thirds is unbound. In all body fluids (plasma, cerebrospinal fluid, milk, bile) folate is largely, if not entirely, 5-MTHF in the monoglutamate form. Two types of folate-binding protein are involved in the entry of MTHF into cells. A high-affinity proton-coupled folate receptor (PCFT/HCPI) takes folate into cells by endocytosis and is internalized by clathrin-coated pits or in a vesicle (caveola), which is then acidified, releasing folate. It accounts for the bulk of folate absorption. Folate then is carried by the membrane folate transporter into the cytoplasm. The high-affinity receptor is attached to the outer surface of the cell membrane by glycosyl phosphatidylinositol linkages. It may be involved in transport of oxidized folates and folate breakdown products to the liver for excretion in bile. An independent low-affinity reduced-folate carrier also mediates uptake of physiologic folates into cells but also regulates the uptake of methotrexate.

Biochemical Functions

Folates (as the intracellular polyglutamate derivatives) act as coenzymes in the transfer of single-carbon units (Fig. 105-1 and Table 105每2). Two of these reactions are involved in purine synthesis and one in pyrimidine synthesis necessary for DNA and RNA replication. Folate is also a coenzyme for methionine synthesis, in which methylcobalamin is also involved and in which THF is regenerated. THF is the acceptor of single carbon units newly entering the active pool via conversion of serine to glycine. Methionine, the other product of the methionine synthase reaction, is the precursor for S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the universal methyl donor involved in >100 methyltransferase reactions (Fig. 105-1).

Figure 105-1

 
 
 
The role of folates in DNA synthesis and in formation of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), which is involved in numerous methylation reactions. [Reprinted from AV Hoffbrand et al (eds), Postgraduate Haematology, 5th ed, Oxford, UK, Blackwell Publishing, 2005; with permission.]
 
 

During thymidylate synthesis, 5,10-methylene-THF is oxidized to DHF (dihydrofolate). The enzyme DHF reductase converts this to THF. The drugs methotrexate, pyrimethamine, and (mainly in bacteria) trimethoprim inhibit DHF reductase and so prevent formation of active THF coenzymes from DHF. A small fraction of the folate coenzyme is not recycled during thymidylate synthesis but is degraded.
 
Biochemical Basis of Megaloblastic Anemia

The common feature of all megaloblastic anemias is a defect in DNA synthesis that affects rapidly dividing cells in the bone marrow. All conditions that give rise to megaloblastic changes have in common a disparity in the rate of synthesis or availability of the four immediate precursors of DNA: the deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs)〞dA(adenine)TP and dG(guanine)TP (purines), dT(thymine)TP and dC(cytosine)TP (pyrimidines). In deficiencies of either folate or cobalamin, there is failure to convert deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP), the precursor of dTTP (Fig. 105-1). This is the case because folate is needed as the coenzyme 5,10-methylene-THF polyglutamate for conversion of dUMP to dTMP; the availability of 5,10-methylene-THF is reduced in either cobalamin or folate deficiency. An alternative theory for megaloblastic anemia in cobal-amin or folate deficiency is misincorporation of uracil into DNA because of a buildup of deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP) at the DNA replication fork as a consequence of the block in conversion of dUMP to dTMP.

Cobalamin-Folate Relations

Folate is required for many reactions in mammalian tissues. Only two reactions in the body are known to require cobalamin. Methylmalonyl CoA isomerization requires adocobalamin, and the methylation of homocysteine to methionine requires both methylcobalamin and 5-MTHF (Fig. 105-1). This reaction is the first step in the pathway by which 5-MTHF, which enters bone marrow and other cells from plasma, is converted into all the intracellular folate coenzymes. The coenzymes are all polyglutamated (the larger size aiding retention in the cell), but the enzyme folate polyglutamate synthase can use only THF, not MTHF, as substrate. In cobalamin deficiency, MTHF accumulates in plasma, and intracellular folate concentrations fall due to failure of formation of THF, the substrate on which folate polyglutamates are built. This has been termed THF starvation, or the methylfolate trap.

This theory explains the abnormalities of folate metabolism that occur in cobalamin deficiency [high serum folate, low cell folate, positive purine precursor aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) excretion; Table 105每2] and also why the anemia of cobalamin deficiency responds to folic acid in large doses.
 
Clinical Features

Many symptomless patients are detected through the finding of a raised mean corpuscular volume (MCV) on a routine blood count. The main clinical features in more severe cases are those of anemia. Anorexia is usually marked, and there may be weight loss, diarrhea, or constipation. Glossitis, angular cheilosis, a mild fever in more severely anemic patients, jaundice (unconjugated), and reversible melanin skin hyperpigmentation also may occur with a deficiency of either folate or cobalamin. Thrombocytopenia sometimes leads to bruising, and this may be aggravated by vitamin C deficiency or alcohol in malnourished patients. The anemia and low leukocyte count may predispose to infections, particularly of the respiratory and urinary tracts. Cobalamin deficiency has also been associated with impaired bactericidal function of phagocytes.

General Tissue Effects of Cobalamin and Folate Deficiencies

Epithelial Surfaces

After the marrow, the next most frequently affected tissues are the epithelial cell surfaces of the mouth, stomach, and small intestine and the respiratory, urinary, and female genital tracts. The cells show macrocytosis, with increased numbers of multinucleate and dying cells. The deficiencies may cause cervical smear abnormalities.

Complications of Pregnancy

The gonads are also affected, and infertility is common in both men and women with either deficiency. Maternal folate deficiency has been implicated as a cause of prematurity, and both folate deficiency and cobalamin deficiency have been implicated in recurrent fetal loss and neural tube defects, as discussed below.

Neural Tube Defects

Folic acid supplements at the time of conception and in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy reduce by 70% the incidence of neural tube defects (NTDs) (anencephaly, meningomyelocele, encephalocele, and spina bifida) in the fetus. Most of this protective effect can be achieved by taking folic acid, 0.4 mg daily at the time of conception.

The incidence of cleft palate and harelip also can be reduced by prophylactic folic acid. There is no clear simple relationship between maternal folate status and these fetal abnormalities, although overall the lower the maternal folate, the greater the risk to the fetus. NTDs also can be caused by antifolate and antiepileptic drugs.

An underlying maternal folate metabolic abnormality has also been postulated. One abnormality has been identified: reduced activity of the enzyme 5,10-methylene-THF reductase (MTHFR) (Fig. 105-1) caused by a common C677T polymorphism in the MTHFR gene. In one study, the prevalence of this polymorphism was found to be higher in the parents of NTD fetuses and in the fetuses themselves: Homozygosity for the TT mutation was found in 13% compared with 5% in control subjects. The polymorphism codes for a thermolabile form of MTHFR. The homozygous state results in a lower mean serum and red cell folate level compared with control subjects, as well as significantly higher serum homocysteine levels. Tests for mutations in other enzymes possibly associated with NTDs, e.g., methionine synthase and serine每glycine hydroxymethylase, have been negative. Autoantibodies to folate receptors were suggested to be more common in mothers of NTD babies, but this has been disproved.

Cardiovascular Disease

Children with severe homocystinuria (blood levels 100 mol/L) due to deficiency of one of three enzymes, methionine synthase, MTHFR, or cystathionine synthase (Fig. 105-1), have vascular disease, e.g., ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or pulmonary embolus as teenagers or in young adulthood. Lesser degrees of raised serum homocysteine and low levels of serum folate and homozygous inherited mutations of MTHFR have been found to be associated with cerebrovascular, peripheral vascular, and coronary heart disease and with deep vein thrombosis. Prospective randomized trials of lowering homocysteine levels with supplements of folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 against placebo over a 5-year period in patients with vascular disease or diabetes have not, however, shown a reduction of major cardiovascular events, nor have these supplements reduced the risk of recurrent cardiovascular disease after an acute myocardial infarct. It is possible that these trials were not sufficiently powered to detect a small (e.g., 10%) benefit or that another underlying factor is responsible for both the vascular damage and the raised homocysteine. Alternatively, the beneficial effects of lowering homocysteine were offset in these trials by the vitamins stimulating endothelial cell proliferation. Meta-analysis has suggested that folic acid supplementation reduces the risk of stroke by 18%. The results of longer and larger trials are needed to resolve these uncertainties.

Malignancy

Prophylactic folic acid in pregnancy has been found in some but not all studies to reduce the subsequent incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in childhood. A significant negative association has also been found with the MTHFR C677T polymorphism and leukemias with mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) translocations, but a positive association with hyperdiploidy in infants with ALL or acute myeloid leukemia or with childhood ALL. A second polymorphism in the MTHFR gene, A1298C, is also strongly associated with hyperdiploid leukemia. There are various positive and negative associations between polymorphisms in folate-dependent enzymes and the incidence of adult ALL. The C677T polymorphism is thought to lead to increased thymidine pools and "better quality" of DNA synthesis by shunting 1-carbon groups toward thymidine and purine synthesis. This may explain its reported association with a lower risk for colorectal cancer. Most but not all studies suggest that prophylactic folic acid also protects against colon adenomas. Other tumors that have been associated with folate polymorphisms or status include follicular lymphoma, breast cancer, and gastric cancer. Because folic acid may "feed" tumors, it probably should be avoided in those with established tumors unless there is severe megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency.

Neurologic Manifestations

Cobalamin deficiency may cause a bilateral peripheral neuropathy or degeneration (demyelination) of the posterior and pyramidal tracts of the spinal cord and, less frequently, optic atrophy or cerebral symptoms.

The patient, more frequently male, presents with paresthesias, muscle weakness, or difficulty in walking and sometimes dementia, psychotic disturbances, or visual impairment. Long-term nutritional cobalamin deficiency in infancy leads to poor brain development and impaired intellectual development. Folate deficiency has been suggested to cause organic nervous disease, but this is uncertain, although methotrexate injected into the cerebrospinal fluid may cause brain or spinal cord damage.

An important clinical problem is the nonanemic patient with neurologic or psychiatric abnormalities and a low or borderline serum cobalamin level. In such patients, it is necessary to try to establish whether there is significant cobalamin deficiency, e.g., by careful examination of the blood film, tests for serum gastrin level and for antibodies to IF or parietal cells, along with serum methylmalonic acid (MMA) measurement if available. A trial of cobalamin therapy for at least 3 months will usually also be needed to determine whether the symptoms improve.

The biochemical basis for cobalamin neuropathy remains obscure. Its occurrence in the absence of methylmalonic aciduria in TC II deficiency suggests that the neuropathy is related to the defect in homocysteine-methionine conversion. Accumulation of S-adenosylhomocysteine in the brain, resulting in inhibition of transmethylation reactions, has been suggested.

Psychiatric disturbance is common in both folate and cobalamin deficiencies. This, like the neuropathy, has been attributed to a failure of the synthesis of SAM, which is needed in methylation of biogenic amines (e.g., dopamine) as well as that of proteins, phospholipids, and neurotransmitters in the brain (Fig. 105-1). Associations between lower serum folate or cobalamin levels and higher homocysteine levels and the development of decreased cognitive function and dementia in Alzheimer's disease have been reported. A 2-year double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial involving healthy subjects >65 years old given folate, cobalamin, and vitamin B6 supplements showed no benefit for cognitive performance, whereas a 3-year (FACIT) study did show benefit.
 
Hematologic Findings

Peripheral Blood

Oval macrocytes, usually with considerable anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, are the main feature (Fig. 105-2A). The MCV is usually >100 fL unless a cause of microcytosis (e.g., iron deficiency or thalassemia trait) is present. Some of the neutrophils are hypersegmented (more than five nuclear lobes). There may be leukopenia due to a reduction in granulocytes and lymphocytes, but this is usually >1.5 x 109/L; the platelet count may be moderately reduced, rarely to <40 x 109/L. The severity of all these changes parallels the degree of anemia. In a nonanemic patient, the presence of a few macrocytes and hypersegmented neutrophils in the peripheral blood may be the only indication of the underlying disorder.

Figure 105-2

 
 
 
 
A. The peripheral blood in severe megaloblastic anemia. B. The bone marrow in severe megaloblastic anemia. [Reprinted from AV Hoffbrand et al (eds), Postgraduate Haematology, 5th ed, Oxford, UK, Blackwell Publishing, 2005; with permission.]
 
 

Bone Marrow

In a severely anemic patient, the marrow is hypercellular with an accumulation of primitive cells due to selective death by apoptosis of more mature forms. The erythroblast nucleus maintains a primitive appearance despite maturation and hemoglobinization of the cytoplasm. The cells are larger than normoblasts, and an increased number of cells with eccentric lobulated nuclei or nuclear fragments may be present (Fig. 105-2B). Giant and abnormally shaped metamyelocytes and enlarged hyperpolyploid megakaryocytes are characteristic. In less anemic patients, the changes in the marrow may be difficult to recognize. The terms intermediate, mild, and early have been used. The term megaloblastoid does not mean mildly megaloblastic. It is used to describe cells with both immature-appearing nuclei and defective hemoglobinization and is usually seen in myelodysplasia.

Chromosomes

Bone marrow cells, transformed lymphocytes, and other proliferating cells in the body show a variety of changes, including random breaks, reduced contraction, spreading of the centromere, and exaggeration of secondary chromosomal constrictions and overprominent satellites. Similar abnormalities may be produced by antimetabolite drugs (e.g., cytosine arabinoside, hydroxyurea, and methotrexate) that interfere with either DNA replication or folate metabolism and that also cause megaloblastic appearances.

Ineffective Hematopoiesis

There is an accumulation of unconjugated bilirubin in plasma due to the death of nucleated red cells in the marrow (ineffective erythropoiesis). Other evidence for this includes raised urine urobilinogen, reduced haptoglobins and positive urine hemosiderin, and a raised serum lactate dehydrogenase. A weakly positive direct antiglobulin test due to complement can lead to a false diagnosis of autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
 
Causes of Cobalamin Deficiency

Cobalamin deficiency is usually due to malabsorption. The only other cause is inadequate dietary intake.

Inadequate Dietary Intake

Adults

Dietary cobalamin deficiency arises in vegans who omit meat, fish, eggs, cheese, and other animal products from their diet. The largest group in the world consists of Hindus, and it is likely that many millions of Indians are at risk of deficiency of cobalamin on a nutritional basis. Subnormal serum cobalamin levels are found in up to 50% of randomly selected, young, adult Indian vegans, but the deficiency usually does not progress to megaloblastic anemia since the diet of most vegans is not totally lacking in cobalamin and the enterohepatic circulation of cobalamin is intact. Dietary cobalamin deficiency may also arise rarely in nonvegetarian individuals who exist on grossly inadequate diets because of poverty or psychiatric disturbance.

Infants

Cobalamin deficiency has been described in infants born to severely cobalamin-deficient mothers. These infants develop megaloblastic anemia at about 3每6 months of age, presumably because they are born with low stores of cobalamin and because they are fed breast milk with low cobalamin content. The babies have also shown growth retardation, impaired psychomotor development, and other neurologic sequelae.

Gastric Causes of Cobalamin Malabsorption

See Tables 105每3 and 105每4.

Table 105每3 Causes of Cobalamin Deficiency Sufficiently Severe to Cause Megaloblastic Anemia

 
 
Nutritional Vegans 
Malabsorption Pernicious anemia 
Gastric causes Congenital absence of intrinsic factor or functional abnormality

Total or partial gastrectomy
 
Intestinal causes Intestinal stagnant loop syndrome: jejunal diverticulosis, ileocolic fistula, anatomic blind loop, intestinal stricture, etc.

Ileal resection and Crohn's disease

Selective malabsorption with proteinuria

Tropical sprue

Transcobalamin II deficiency

Fish tapeworm
 
 

 
Table 105每4 Malabsorption of Cobalamin May Occur in the Following Conditions But Is Not Usually Sufficiently Severe and Prolonged to Cause Megaloblastic Anemia

 
 
Gastric causes

   Simple atrophic gastritis (food cobalamin malabsorption)

   Zollinger每Ellison syndrome

   Gastric bypass surgery

   Use of proton pump inhibitors

Intestinal causes

   Gluten-induced enteropathy

   Severe pancreatitis

   HIV infection

   Radiotherapy

   Graft-versus-host disease

Deficiencies of cobalamin, folate, protein, ?riboflavin, ?nicotinic acid

Therapy with colchicine, para-aminosalicylate, neomycin, slow-release potassium chloride, anticonvulsant drugs, metformin, phenformin, cytotoxic drugs

Alcohol
 
 

 

Pernicious Anemia

Pernicious anemia (PA) may be defined as a severe lack of IF due to gastric atrophy. It is a common disease in north Europeans but occurs in all countries and ethnic groups. The overall incidence is about 120 per 100,000 population in the United Kingdom (UK). The ratio of incidence in men and women among whites is 1:1.6, and the peak age of onset is 60 years, with only 10% of patients being <40 years of age. However, in some ethnic groups, notably black individuals and Latin Americans, the age at onset of PA is generally lower. The disease occurs more commonly than by chance in close relatives and in persons with other organ-specific autoimmune diseases, e.g., thyroid diseases, vitiligo, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease. It is also associated with hypogammaglobulinemia, with premature graying or blue eyes, and persons of blood group A. An association with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 3 has been reported in some but not all series and, in those with endocrine disease, with HLA-B8, -B12, and -BW15. Life expectancy is normal in women once regular treatment has begun. Men have a slightly subnormal life expectancy as a result of a higher incidence of carcinoma of the stomach than in control subjects. Gastric output of hydrochloric acid, pepsin, and IF is severely reduced. The serum gastrin level is raised, and serum pepsinogen I levels are low.

Gastric Biopsy

This usually shows atrophy of all layers of the body and fundus, with loss of glandular elements, an absence of parietal and chief cells and replacement by mucous cells, a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate, and perhaps intestinal metaplasia. The infiltrate of plasma cells and lymphocytes contains an excess of CD4 cells. The antral mucosa is usually well preserved. Helicobacter pylori infection occurs infrequently in PA, but it has been suggested that H. pylori gastritis occurs at an early phase of atrophic gastritis and presents in younger patients as iron-deficiency anemia but in older patients as PA. H. pylori is suggested to stimulate an autoimmune process directed against parietal cells, with the H. pylori infection then being gradually replaced, in some individuals, by an autoimmune process.

Serum Antibodies

Two types of IF immunoglobulin G antibody may be found in the sera of patients with PA. One, the "blocking," or type I, antibody, prevents the combination of IF and cobalamin, whereas the "binding," or type II, antibody prevents attachment of IF to ileal mucosa. Type I occurs in the sera of 55% of patients, and type II in 35%. IF antibodies cross the placenta and may cause temporary IF deficiency in a newborn infant. Patients with PA also show cell-mediated immunity to IF. Type I antibody has been detected rarely in the sera of patients without PA but with thyrotoxicosis, myxedema, Hashimoto's disease, or diabetes mellitus and in relatives of PA patients. IF antibodies also have been detected in gastric juice in 80% of PA patients. These gastric antibodies may reduce absorption of dietary cobalamin by combining with small amounts of remaining IF.

Parietal cell antibody is present in the sera of almost 90% of adult patients with PA but is frequently present in other subjects. Thus, it occurs in as many as 16% of randomly selected female subjects age >60 years. The parietal cell antibody is directed against the  and  subunits of the gastric proton pump (H+,K+-ATPase).

Juvenile Pernicious Anemia

This usually occurs in older children and resembles PA of adults. Gastric atrophy, achlorhydria, and serum IF antibodies are all present, although parietal cell antibodies are usually absent. About one-half of these patients show an associated endocrinopathy such as autoimmune thyroiditis, Addison's disease, or hypoparathyroidism; in some, mucocutaneous candidiasis occurs.

Congenital Intrinsic Factor Deficiency or Functional Abnormality

An affected child usually presents with megaloblastic anemia in the first to third year of life; a few have presented as late as the second decade. The child usually has no demonstrable IF but has a normal gastric mucosa and normal secretion of acid. The inheritance is autosomal recessive. Parietal cell and IF antibodies are absent. Variants have been described in which the child is born with IF that can be detected immunologically but is unstable or functionally inactive, unable to bind cobalmin or to facilitate its uptake by ileal receptors.

Gastrectomy

After total gastrectomy, cobalamin deficiency is inevitable, and prophylactic cobalamin therapy should be commenced immediately after the operation. After partial gastrectomy, 10每15% of patients also develop this deficiency. The exact incidence and time of onset are most influenced by the size of the resection and the preexisting size of cobalamin body stores.

Food Cobalamin Malabsorption

Failure of release of cobalamin from binding proteins in food is believed to be responsible for this condition, which is more common in the elderly. It is associated with low serum cobalamin levels, with or without raised serum levels of MMA and homocysteine. Typically, these patients have normal cobalamin absorption, as measured with crystalline cobalamin, but show malabsorption when a modified test using food-bound cobalamin is used. The frequency of progression to severe cobalamin deficiency and the reasons for this progression are not clear.

Intestinal Causes of Cobalamin Malabsorption

Intestinal Stagnant Loop Syndrome

Malabsorption of cobalamin occurs in a variety of intestinal lesions in which there is colonization of the upper small intestine by fecal organisms. This may occur in patients with jejunal diverticulosis, enteroanastomosis, or an intestinal stricture or fistula or with an anatomic blind loop due to Crohn's disease, tuberculosis, or an operative procedure.

Ileal Resection

Removal of 1.2 m of terminal ileum causes malabsorption of cobalamin. In some patients after ileal resection, particularly if the ileocecal valve is incompetent, colonic bacteria may contribute further to the onset of cobalamin deficiency.

Selective Malabsorption of Cobalamin with Proteinuria (Imerslund Syndrome: Imerslund-Gr?sbeck Syndrome; Congenital Cobalamin Malabsorption; Autosomal Recessive Megaloblastic Anemia, MGA1)

This autosomally recessive disease is the most common cause of megaloblastic anemia due to cobalamin deficiency in infancy in Western countries. More than 200 cases have been reported, with familial clusters in Finland, Norway, the Middle East, and North Africa. The patients secrete normal amounts of IF and gastric acid but are unable to absorb cobalamin. In Finland, impaired synthesis, processing, or ligand binding of cubilin due to inherited mutations is found. In Norway, mutation of the gene for AMN has been reported. Other tests of intestinal absorption are normal. Over 90% of these patients show nonspecific proteinuria, but renal function is otherwise normal and renal biopsy has not shown any consistent renal defect. A few have shown aminoaciduria and congenital renal abnormalities, such as duplication of the renal pelvis.

Tropical Sprue

Nearly all patients with acute and subacute tropical sprue show malabsorption of cobalamin; this may persist as the principal abnormality in the chronic form of the disease, when the patient may present with megaloblastic anemia or neuropathy due to cobalamin deficiency. Absorption of cobalamin usually improves after antibiotic therapy and, in the early stages, folic acid therapy.

Fish Tapeworm Infestation

The fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum) lives in the small intestine of humans and accumulates cobalamin from food, rendering the cobalamin unavailable for absorption. Individuals acquire the worm by eating raw or partly cooked fish. Infestation is common around the lakes of Scandinavia, Germany, Japan, North America, and Russia. Megaloblastic anemia or cobalamin neuropathy occurs only in those with a heavy infestation.

Gluten-Induced Enteropathy

Malabsorption of cobalamin occurs in 30% of untreated patients (presumably those in whom the disease extends to the ileum). Cobalamin deficiency is not severe in these patients and is corrected with a gluten-free diet.

Severe Chronic Pancreatitis

In this condition, lack of trypsin is thought to cause dietary cobalamin attached to gastric non-IF (R) binder to be unavailable for absorption. It also has been proposed that in pancreatitis, the concentration of calcium ions in the ileum falls below the level needed to maintain normal cobalamin absorption.

HIV Infection

Serum cobalamin levels tend to fall in patients with HIV infection and are subnormal in 10每35% of those with AIDS. Malabsorption of cobalamin not corrected by IF has been shown in some, but not all, patients with subnormal serum cobalamin levels. Cobalamin deficiency sufficiently severe to cause megaloblastic anemia or neuropathy is rare.

Zollinger每Ellison Syndrome

Malabsorption of cobalamin has been reported in the Zollinger每Ellison syndrome. It is thought that there is a failure to release cobalamin from R-binding protein due to inactivation of pancreatic trypsin by high acidity, as well as interference with IF binding of cobalamin.

Radiotherapy

Both total-body irradiation and local radiotherapy to the ileum (e.g., as a complication of radiotherapy for carcinoma of the cervix) may cause malabsorption of cobalamin.

Graft-versus-Host Disease

This commonly affects the small intestine. Malabsorption of cobalamin due to abnormal gut flora, as well as damage to ileal mucosa, is common.

Drugs

The drugs that have been reported to cause malabsorption of cobalamin are listed in Table 105每4. Megaloblastic anemia due to these drugs is, however, rare.

Abnormalities of Cobalamin Metabolism

Congenital Transcobalamin II Deficiency or Abnormality

Infants with TC II deficiency usually present with megaloblastic anemia within a few weeks of birth. Serum cobalamin and folate levels are normal, but the anemia responds to massive (e.g., 1 mg three times weekly) injections of cobalamin. Some cases show neurologic complications. The protein may be present but functionally inert. Genetic abnormalities found include mutations of an intra-exonic cryptic splice site, extensive deletion, single nucleotide deletion, nonsense mutation, and an RNA editing defect. Malabsorption of cobalamin occurs in all cases, and serum immunoglobulins are usually reduced. Failure to institute adequate cobalamin therapy or treatment with folic acid may lead to neurologic damage.

Congenital Methylmalonic Acidemia and Aciduria

Infants with this abnormality are ill from birth with vomiting, failure to thrive, severe metabolic acidosis, ketosis, and mental retardation. Anemia, if present, is normocytic and normoblastic. The condition may be due to a functional defect in either mitochondrial methylmalonyl CoA mutase or its cofactor adocobalamin. Mutations in the methylmalonyl CoA mutase are not responsive, or only poorly responsive, to treatment with cobalamin. A proportion of infants with failure of adocobalamin synthesis respond to cobalamin in large doses. Some children have combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocy-stinuria due to defective formation of both cobalamin coenzymes. This usually presents in the first year of life with feeding difficulties, developmental delay, microcephaly, seizures, hypotonia, and megaloblastic anemia.

Acquired Abnormality of Cobalamin Metabolism: Nitrous Oxide Inhalation

Nitrous oxide irreversibly oxidizes methylcobalamin to an inactive precursor; this inactivates methionine synthase. Megaloblastic anemia has occurred in patients undergoing prolonged N2O anesthesia (e.g., in intensive care units). A neuropathy resembling cobalamin neuropathy has been described in dentists and anesthetists who are exposed repeatedly to N2O. Methylmalonic aciduria does not occur as adocobalamin is not inactivated by N2O.
 
Causes of Folate Deficiency

(Table 105每5)

Table 105每5 Causes of Folate Deficiency

 
 
Dietarya

   Particularly in: old age, infancy, poverty, alcoholism, chronic invalids, and the psychiatrically disturbed; may be associated with scurvy or kwashiorkor
 
Malabsorption

   Major causes of deficiency

      Tropical sprue, gluten-induced enteropathy in children and adults, and in association with dermatitis herpetiformis, specific malabsorption of folate, intestinal megaloblastosis caused by severe cobalamin or folate deficiency

   Minor causes of deficiency

      Extensive jejunal resection, Crohn's disease, partial gastrectomy, congestive heart failure, Whipple's disease, scleroderma, amyloid, diabetic enteropathy, systemic bacterial infection, lymphoma, salazopyrine
 
Excess utilization or loss

   Physiologic

      Pregnancy and lactation, prematurity

   Pathologic

      Hematologic diseases: chronic hemolytic anemias, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia major, myelofibrosis

      Malignant diseases: carcinoma, lymphoma, leukemia, myeloma

      Inflammatory diseases: tuberculosis, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, exfoliative dermatitis, malaria

      Metabolic disease: homocystinuria

      Excess urinary loss: congestive heart failure, active liver disease

      Hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis
 
Antifolate drugsb

   Anticonvulsant drugs (phenytoin, primidone, barbiturates), sulphasalazine

   Nitrofurantoin, tetracycline, antituberculosis (less well documented)
 
Mixed causes

   Liver diseases, alcoholism, intensive care units
 
 


aIn severely folate-deficient patients with causes other than those listed under Dietary, poor dietary intake is often present. bDrugs inhibiting dihydrofolate reductase are discussed in the text.
 

Nutritional

Dietary folate deficiency is common. Indeed, in most patients with folate deficiency a nutritional element is present. Certain individuals are particularly prone to have diets containing inadequate amounts of folate (Table 105每5). In the United States and other countries where fortification of the diet with folic acid has been adopted, the prevalence of folate deficiency has dropped dramatically and is now almost restricted to high-risk groups with increased folate needs. Nutritional folate deficiency occurs in kwashiorkor and scurvy and in infants with repeated infections or those who are fed solely on goats' milk, which has a low folate content.

Malabsorption

Malabsorption of dietary folate occurs in tropical sprue and in gluten-induced enteropathy. In the rare congenital syndrome of selective malabsorption of folate due to mutation of the protein-coupled folate transporter (PCFT), there is an associated defect of folate transport into the cerebrospinal fluid, and these patients show megaloblastic anemia, which responds to physiologic doses of folic acid given parenterally but not orally. They also show mental retardation, convulsions, and other central nervous system abnormalities. Minor degrees of malabsorption may also occur after jejunal resection or partial gastrectomy, in Crohn's disease, and in systemic infections, but in these conditions, if severe deficiency occurs, it is usually largely due to poor nutrition. Malabsorption of folate has been described in patients receiving salazopyrine, cholestyramine, and triamterene.

Excess Utilization or Loss

Pregnancy

Folate requirements are increased by 200每300 g to ~400 g daily in a normal pregnancy, partly because of transfer of the vitamin to the fetus but mainly because of increased folate catabolism due to cleavage of folate coenzymes in rapidly proliferating tissues. Megaloblastic anemia due to this deficiency is prevented by prophylactic folic acid therapy. It occurred in 0.5% of pregnancies in the UK and other Western countries before prophylaxis with folic acid, but the incidence is much higher in countries where the general nutritional status is poor.

Prematurity

A newborn infant, whether full term or premature, has higher serum and red cell folate concentrations than does an adult. However, a newborn infant's demand for folate has been estimated to be up to 10 times that of adults on a weight basis, and the neonatal folate level falls rapidly to the lowest values at about 6 weeks of age. The falls are steepest and are liable to reach subnormal levels in premature babies, a number of whom develop megaloblastic anemia responsive to folic acid at about 4每6 weeks of age. This occurs particularly in the smallest babies (<1500 g birth weight) and those who have feeding difficulties or infections or have undergone multiple exchange transfusions. In these babies, prophylactic folic acid should be given.

Hematologic Disorders

Folate deficiency frequently occurs in chronic hemolytic anemia, particularly in sickle cell disease, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and congenital spherocytosis. In these and other conditions of increased cell turnover (e.g., myelofibrosis, malignancies), folate deficiency arises because it is not completely reutilized after performing coenzyme functions.

Inflammatory Conditions

Chronic inflammatory diseases such as tuberculosis, rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, exfoliative dermatitis, bacterial endocarditis, and chronic bacterial infections cause deficiency by reducing the appetite and increasing the demand for folate. Systemic infections also may cause malabsorption of folate. Severe deficiency is virtually confined to the patients with the most active disease and the poorest diet.

Homocystinuria

This is a rare metabolic defect in the conversion of homocysteine to cystathionine. Folate deficiency occurring in most of these patients may be due to excessive utilization because of compensatory increased conversion of homocysteine to methionine.

Long-Term Dialysis

As folate is only loosely bound to plasma proteins, it is easily removed from plasma by dialysis. In patients with anorexia, vomiting, infections, and hemolysis, folate stores are particularly likely to become depleted. Routine folate prophylaxis is now given.

Congestive Heart Failure, Liver Disease

Excess urinary folate losses of >100 g per day may occur in some of these patients. The explanation appears to be release of folate from damaged liver cells.

Antifolate Drugs

A large number of epileptics who are receiving long-term therapy with phenytoin or primidone, with or without barbiturates, develop low serum and red cell folate levels. The exact mechanism is unclear. Alcohol may also be a folate antagonist, as patients who are drinking spirits may develop megaloblastic anemia that will respond to normal quantities of dietary folate or to physiologic doses of folic acid only if alcohol is withdrawn. Macrocytosis of red cells is associated with chronic alcohol intake even when folate levels are normal. Inadequate folate intake is the major factor in the development of deficiency in spirit-drinking alcoholics. Beer is relatively folate-rich in some countries, depending on the technique used for brewing.

The drugs that inhibit DHF reductase include methotrexate, pyrimethamine, and trimethoprim. Methotrexate has the most powerful action against the human enzyme, whereas trimethoprim is most active against the bacterial enzyme and is likely to cause megaloblastic anemia only when used in conjunction with sulphamethoxazole in patients with preexisting folate or cobalamin deficiency. The activity of pyrimethamine is intermediate. The antidote to these drugs is folinic acid (5-formyl-THF).

Congenital Abnormalities of Folate Metabolism

Some infants with congenital defects of folate enzymes (e.g., cyclohydrolase or methionine synthase) have had megaloblastic anemia.
 
Diagnosis of Cobalamin and Folate Deficiencies

The diagnosis of cobalamin or folate deficiency has traditionally depended on the recognition of the relevant abnormalities in the peripheral blood and analysis of the blood levels of the vitamins.

Serum Cobalamin

This is measured by an automated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Normal serum levels range from 118每148 pmol/L (160每200 ng/L) to 738 pmol/L (1000 ng/L). In patients with megaloblastic anemia due to cobalamin deficiency, the level is usually <74 pmol/L (100 ng/L). In general, the more severe the deficiency, the lower the serum cobalamin level. In patients with spinal cord damage due to the deficiency, levels are very low even in the absence of anemia. Values between 74 and 148 pmol/L (100 and 200 ng/L) are regarded as borderline. They may occur, for instance, in pregnancy, in patients with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency. They may also be due to heterozygous, homozygous, or compound heterozygous mutations of the gene TCN1 that codes for haptocorrin (transcobalamin I). There is no clinical or rematologic abnormality. The serum cobalamin level is sufficiently robust, cost-effective, and most convenient to rule out cobalamin deficiency in the vast majority of patients suspected of having this problem.

Serum Methylmalonate and Homocysteine

In patients with cobalamin deficiency sufficient to cause anemia or neuropathy, the serum MMA level is raised. Sensitive methods for measuring MMA and homocysteine in serum have been introduced and recommended for the early diagnosis of cobalamin deficiency, even in the absence of hematologic abnormalities or subnormal levels of serum cobalamin. Serum MMA levels fluctuate, however, in patients with renal failure. Mildly elevated serum MMA and/or homocysteine levels occur in up to 30% of apparently healthy volunteers, with serum cobalamin levels up to 258 pmol/L (350 ng/L) and normal serum folate levels; 15% of elderly subjects, even with cobalamin levels >258 pmol/L (>350 ng/L), have this pattern of raised metabolite levels. These findings bring into question the exact cutoff points for normal MMA and homocysteine levels. It is also unclear at present whether these mildly raised metabolite levels have clinical consequences.

Serum homocysteine is raised in both early cobalamin and folate deficiency but may be raised in other conditions, e.g., chronic renal disease, alcoholism, smoking, pyridoxine deficiency, hypothyroidism, and therapy with steroids, cyclosporine, and other drugs. Levels are also higher in serum than in plasma, in men than in premenopausal women, in women taking hormone replacement therapy or in oral contraceptive users, and in elderly persons and patients with several inborn errors of metabolism affecting enzymes in trans-sulfuration pathways of homocysteine metabolism. Thus, homocysteine levels are not used for diagnosis of cobalamin or folate deficiency.

Other Tests

Studies of cobalamin absorption once were widely used, but difficulty in obtaining radioactive cobalamin and ensuring that IF preparations are free of viruses has made these tests obsolete. Tests to diagnose PA include serum gastrin, which is raised, and serum pepsinogen I, which is low in PA (90每92%) but also in other conditions. Tests for IF and parietal cell antibodies are also used as well as tests for individual intestinal diseases.

Serum Folate

This is also measured by an ELISA technique. In most laboratories, the normal range is from 11 nmol/L (2 g/L) to 82 nmol/L (15 g/L). The serum folate level is low in all folate-deficient patients. It also reflects recent diet. Because of this, serum folate may be low before there is hematologic or biochemical evidence of deficiency. Serum folate rises in severe cobalamin deficiency because of the block in conversion of MTHF to THF inside cells; raised levels have also been reported in the intestinal stagnant loop syndrome due to absorption of bacterially synthesized folate.

Red Cell Folate

The red cell folate assay is a valuable test of body folate stores. It is less affected than the serum assay by recent diet and traces of hemolysis. In normal adults, concentrations range from 880每3520 mol/L (160每640 g/L) of packed red cells. Subnormal levels occur in patients with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency but also in nearly two-thirds of patients with severe cobalamin deficiency. False-normal results may occur if a folate-deficient patient has received a recent blood transfusion or if a patient has a raised reticulocyte count.

Treatment: Megaloblastic Anemia

It is usually possible to establish which of the two deficiencies, folate or cobalamin, is the cause of the anemia and to treat only with the appropriate vitamin. In patients who enter the hospital severely ill, however, it may be necessary to treat with both vitamins in large doses once blood samples have been taken for cobalamin and folate assays and a bone marrow biopsy has been performed (if deemed necessary). Transfusion is usually unnecessary and inadvisable. If it is essential, packed red cells should be given slowly, one or two units only, with the usual treatment for heart failure if present. Potassium supplements have been recommended to obviate the danger of the hypokalemia but are not necessary. Occasionally, an excessive rise in platelets occurs after 1每2 weeks of therapy. Antiplatelet therapy, e.g., aspirin, should be considered if the platelet count rises to >800 x 109/L.

Cobalamin Deficiency

It is usually necessary to treat patients who have developed cobalamin deficiency with lifelong regular cobalamin injections. In the UK, the form used is hydroxocobalamin; in the United States, cyanocobalamin. In a few instances, the underlying cause of cobalamin deficiency can be permanently corrected, e.g., fish tapeworm, tropical sprue, or an intestinal stagnant loop that is amenable to surgery. The indications for starting cobalamin therapy are a well-documented megaloblastic anemia or other hematologic abnormalities and neuropathy due to the deficiency. Patients with borderline serum cobalamin levels but no hematologic or other abnormality may be followed to make sure that the cobalamin deficiency does not progress (see below). If malabsorption of cobalamin or rises in serum MMA levels have been demonstrated, however, these patients also should be given regular maintenance cobalamin therapy. Cobalamin should be given routinely to all patients who have had a total gastrectomy or ileal resection. Patients who have undergone gastric reduction for control of obesity or who are receiving long-term treatment with proton pump inhibitors should be screened and, if necessary, given cobalamin replacement.

Replenishment of body stores should be complete with six 1000-g IM injections of hydroxocobalamin given at 3- to 7-day intervals. More frequent doses are usually used in patients with cobalamin neuropathy, but there is no evidence that they produce a better response. Allergic reactions are rare and may require desensitization or antihistamine or glucocorticoid cover. For maintenance therapy, 1000 g hydroxocobalamin IM once every 3 months is satisfactory. Because of the poorer retention of cyanocobalamin, protocols generally use higher and more frequent doses, e.g., 1000 g IM, monthly, for maintenance treatment.

Because a small fraction of cobalamin can be absorbed passively through mucous membranes even when there is complete failure of physiologic IF-dependent absorption, large daily oral doses (1000每2000 g) of cyanocobalamin have been used in PA for replacement and maintenance of normal cobalamin status in, e.g., food malabsorption of cobalamin. Sublingual therapy has also been proposed for those in whom injections are difficult because of a bleeding tendency and who may not tolerate oral therapy. If oral therapy is used, it is important to monitor compliance, particularly with elderly, forgetful patients.

For treatment of patients with subnormal serum B12 levels with a normal MCV and no hypersegmentation of neutrophils, a negative IF antibody test in the absence of tests of B12 absorption is problematic. Some (perhaps 15%) cases may be due to TC I (HC) deficiency. Homocysteine and/or MMA measurements may help, but in the absence of these tests and with otherwise normal gastrointestinal function, repeat serum B12 assay after 6每12 months may help one decide whether to start cobalamin therapy.

Folate Deficiency

Oral doses of 5每15 mg folic acid daily are satisfactory, as sufficient folate is absorbed from these extremely large doses even in patients with severe malabsorption. The length of time therapy must be continued depends on the underlying disease. It is customary to continue therapy for about 4 months, when all folate-deficient red cells will have been eliminated and replaced by new folate-replete populations.

Before large doses of folic acid are given, cobalamin deficiency must be excluded and, if present, corrected; otherwise cobalamin neuropathy may develop despite a response of the anemia of cobalamin deficiency to folate therapy. Studies in the United States, however, suggest that there is no increase in the proportion of individuals with low serum cobalamin levels and no anemia since food fortification with folic acid, but it is unknown if there has been a change in incidence of cobalamin neuropathy.

Long-term folic acid therapy is required when the underlying cause of the deficiency cannot be corrected and the deficiency is likely to recur, e.g., in chronic dialysis or hemolytic anemias. It may also be necessary in gluten-induced enteropathy that does not respond to a gluten-free diet. Where mild but chronic folate deficiency occurs, it is preferable to encourage improvement in the diet after correcting the deficiency with a short course of folic acid. In any patient receiving long-term folic acid therapy, it is important to measure the serum cobalamin level at regular (e.g., once-yearly) intervals to exclude the coincidental development of cobalamin deficiency.

Folinic Acid (5-Formyl-THF)

This is a stable form of fully reduced folate. It is given orally or parenterally to overcome the toxic effects of methotrexate or other DHF reductase inhibitors.

Prophylactic Folic Acid

In many countries, food is fortified with folic acid (in grain or flour) to prevent neural tube defects. It is also used in chronic dialysis patients and in parenteral feeds. Prophylactic folic acid has been used to reduce homocysteine levels to prevent cardiovascular disease, but further data are needed to assess the benefit for this and for cognitive function in the elderly.

Pregnancy

Folic acid, 400 g daily, should be given as a supplement before and throughout pregnancy. In women who have had a previous fetus with a neural tube defect, 5 mg daily is recommended when pregnancy is contemplated and throughout the subsequent pregnancy.

Infancy and Childhood

The incidence of folate deficiency is so high in the smallest premature babies during the first 6 weeks of life that folic acid (e.g., 1 mg daily) should be given routinely to those weighing <1500 g at birth and to larger premature babies who require exchange transfusions or develop feeding difficulties, infections, or vomiting and diarrhea.

The World Health Organization currently recommends routine supplementation with iron and folic acid in children in countries where iron deficiency is common and child mortality, largely due to infectious diseases, is high. However, some studies suggest that in areas where malaria rates are high, this approach may increase the incidence of severe illness and death. Even where malaria is rare, there appears to be no survival benefit.
 
Megaloblastic Anemia Not Due to Cobalamin or Folate Deficiency or Altered Metabolism

This may occur with many antimetabolic drugs (e.g., hydroxy-urea, cytosine arabinoside, 6-mercaptopurine) that inhibit DNA replication. Antiviral nucleoside analogues used in treatment of HIV infection may also cause macrocytosis and megaloblastic marrow changes. In the rare disease orotic aciduria, two consecutive enzymes in purine synthesis are defective. The condition responds to therapy with uridine, which bypasses the block. In thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia, there is a genetic defect in the high-affinity thiamine transport (SLC19A2) gene. This causes defective RNA ribose synthesis through impaired activity of trans-ketolase, a thiamine-dependent enzyme in the pentose cycle. This leads to reduced nucleic acid production. It may be associated with diabetes mellitus and deafness and the presence of many ringed sideroblasts in the marrow. The explanation is unclear for megaloblastic changes in the marrow in some patients with acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplasia.
 
Further Readings

Albert CM et al: Effect of folic acid and B vitamins on risk of cardiovascular events and total mortality among women at high risk for cardiovascular disease: A randomized trial. JAMA 299: 2027, 2008[PMID: 18460663] 

 
Carmel R: How I treat cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency. Blood 12:2214, 2008 

 
Dali-Youcef N et al: An update on cobalamin deficiency in adults. Q J Med 102:17, 2009[PMID: 18990719] 

 
Durga J et al: Effect of 3-year folic acid supplementation on cognitive function in older adults in the FACIT trial: A randomized double-blind, controlled trial. Lancet 369:208, 2007[PMID: 17240287] 

 
Lonn E et al: Homocysteine lowering with folic acid and B vitamins in vascular disease. N Engl J Med 354:1567, 2006[PMID: 16531613] 

 
McMahon JA et al: A controlled trial of homocysteine lowering and cognitive performance. N Engl J Med 354:2764, 2006[PMID: 16807413] 

 
Morris MS et al: Folate and vitamin B-12 status in relation to anemia, macrocytosis, and cognitive impairment in older Americans in the age of folic acid fortification. Am J Clin Nutr 85:193, 2007[PMID: 17209196] 

 
Quadros EV: Advances in the understanding of cobalamin assimilation and metabolism. Br J Haematol 148:195, 2010[PMID: 19832808] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: The protein and the gene encoding the receptor for the cellular uptake of transcobalamin-bound cobalamin. Blood 113:186, 2008 

 
Ulrich CM: Folate and cancer prevention〞where to next? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 17:2226, 2008[PMID: 18768487] 

 
 

^^
Hemolytic Anemias and Anemia Due to Acute Blood Loss: Introduction

Definitions

A finite life span is a distinct characteristic of red cells. Hence, a logical, time-honored classification of anemias is in three groups: (1) decreased production of red cells, (2) increased destruction of red cells, (3) acute blood loss. Decreased production is covered in Chaps. 103, 105, and 107; increased destruction and acute blood loss are covered in this chapter.

All patients who are anemic as a result of either increased destruction or acute blood loss have two important elements in common: the anemia results from overconsumption of red cells from the peripheral blood, yet the supply of cells from the bone marrow (in the absence of coexisting marrow disease) is usually increased, as reflected by a reticulocytosis. On the other hand, physical loss of red cells from the bloodstream〞which in most cases also means physical loss from the body〞is fundamentally different from destruction of red cells within the body. Therefore the clinical aspects and the pathophysiology of anemia in these two groups of patients are quite different, and they will be considered separately.
 
Hemolytic Anemias

With respect to primary etiology, anemias due to increased destruction of red cells, which we know as hemolytic anemias (HAs), may be inherited or acquired (Table 106每1). From the clinical point of view they may be more acute or more chronic, they may vary from mild to very severe, and the site of hemolysis may be predominantly intravascular or extravascular. With respect to mechanisms, HAs may be due to intracorpuscular causes or to extracorpuscular causes. But before reviewing the individual types of HA it is appropriate to consider what they have in common.

Table 106每1 Classification of Hemolytic Anemias*

 
 
  Intracorpuscular Defects Extracorpuscular Factors 
Hereditary Hemoglobinopathies

Enzymopathies

Membrane-cytoskeletal defects
 Familial (atypical) hemolytic uremic syndrome 
Acquired Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) Mechanical destruction (microangiopathic)

Toxic agents

Drugs

Infectious

Autoimmune
 
 


*Hereditary causes correlate with intracorpuscular defects because these defects are due to inherited mutations. The one exception is PNH because the defect is due to an acquired somatic mutation. Similarly, acquired causes correlate with extracorpuscular factors because mostly these factors are exogenous. The one exception is familial hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS; often referred to as atypical HUS) because here an inherited abnormality allows complement activation to be excessive, with bouts of production of membrane attack complex capable of destroying normal red cells.
 

General Clinical and Laboratory Features

The clinical presentation of a patient with anemia is greatly influenced in the first place by whether the onset is abrupt or gradual, and HAs are no exception. A patient with autoimmune HA or with favism may be a medical emergency, whereas a patient with mild hereditary spherocytosis or with cold agglutinin disease may be diagnosed after years. This is due in large measure to the remarkable ability of the body to adapt to anemia when it is slowly progressing (Chap. 57).

What differentiates HAs from other anemias is that the patient has signs and symptoms arising directly from hemolysis (Table 106每2). At the clinical level, the main sign is jaundice; in addition, the patient may report discoloration of the urine. In many cases of HA, the spleen is enlarged because it is a preferential site of hemolysis, and in some cases the liver may be enlarged as well. In all severe congenital forms of HA, there also may be skeletal changes due to overactivity of the bone marrow (although they are never as severe as they are in thalassemia).

Table 106每2 Some Common Features of Hemolytic Disorders

 
 
General examination  Jaundice, pallor 
Other physical findings  Spleen may be enlarged; bossing of skull in severe congenital cases 
Hemoglobin level  From normal to severely reduced 
MCV, MCH  Usually increased 
Reticulocytes  Increased 
Bilirubin  Increased (mostly unconjugated) 
LDH  Increased (up to 10x normal with intravascular hemolysis) 
Haptoglobin  Reduced to absent (if hemolysis is part intravascular) 
 


Abbreviations: LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MCH, mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCV, mean corpuscular volume.
 

The laboratory features of HA are related to hemolysis per se and the erythropoietic response of the bone marrow. Hemolysis regularly produces in the serum an increase in unconjugated bilirubin and aspartate transaminase (AST); urobilinogen will be increased in both urine and stool. If hemolysis is mainly intravascular, the telltale sign is hemoglobinuria (often associated with hemosiderinuria); in the serum there is increased hemoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is increased, and haptoglobin is reduced. In contrast, the bilirubin level may be normal or only mildly elevated. The main sign of the erythropoietic response by the bone marrow is an increase in reticulocytes (Table 106每2); a test all too often neglected in the initial workup of a patient with anemia. Usually the increase will be reflected in both the percentage of reticulocytes (the more commonly quoted figure) and the absolute reticulocyte count (the more definitive parameter). The increased number of reticulocytes is associated with an increased mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in the blood count. On the blood smear, this is reflected in the presence of macrocytes; there is also polychromasia and sometimes one sees nucleated red cells. In most cases, a bone marrow aspirate is not necessary in the diagnostic workup; if it is done, it will show erythroid hyperplasia. In practice, once a HA is suspected, specific tests will usually be required for a definitive diagnosis of a specific type of HA.
 
General Pathophysiology

The mature red cell is the product of a developmental pathway that brings the phenomenon of differentiation to an extreme. An orderly sequence of events produces synchronous changes whereby the gradual accumulation of a huge amount of hemoglobin in the cytoplasm (to a final level of 340 g/L, i.e. about 5 mM) goes hand in hand with the gradual loss of cellular organelles and of biosynthetic abilities. In the end, the erythroid cell undergoes a process that has features of apoptosis, including nuclear pyknosis and actual loss of the nucleus. However, the final result is more altruistic than suicidal; the cytoplasmic body, instead of disintegrating, is now able to provide oxygen to all cells in the human organism for some remaining 120 days of the red cell "life" span.

As a result of this unique process of differentiation and maturation, intermediary metabolism is drastically curtailed in mature red cells (Fig. 106-1); for instance, cytochrome-mediated oxidative phosphorylation has been lost with the loss of mitochondria (through a process of physiologic autophagy); therefore, there is no backup to anaerobic glycolysis for the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Also the capacity of making protein has been lost with the loss of ribosomes. This places the cell's limited metabolic apparatus at risk, because if any protein component deteriorates, it cannot be replaced, as it would be in most other cells, and in fact the activity of most enzymes gradually decreases as red cells age. Another consequence of the relative simplicity of red cells is that they have a very limited range of ways to manifest distress under hardship: in essence, any sort of metabolic failure will eventually lead either to structural damage to the membrane or to failure of the cation pump. In either case, the life span of the red cell is reduced, which is the definition of a hemolytic disorder. If the rate of red cell destruction exceeds the capacity of the bone marrow to produce more red cells, the hemolytic disorder will manifest as HA.

Figure 106-1

 
 
 
RBC metabolism. The Embden-Meyerhof pathway (glycolysis) generates ATP for energy and membrane maintenance. The generation of NADPH maintains hemoglobin in a reduced state. The hexose monophosphate shunt generates NADPH that is used to reduce glutathione, which protects the red cell against oxidant stress. Regulation of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate levels is a critical determinant of oxygen affinity of hemoglobin. Enzyme deficiency states in order of prevalence: glucose-6-phosphate -dehydrogenase (G6PD) > pyruvate kinase > glucose-6-phosphate isomerase > rare deficiencies of other enzymes in the pathway. The more common enzyme deficiencies are encircled.
 
 

Thus, the essential pathophysiologic process common to all HAs is an increased red cell turnover. The gold standard for proving that the life span of red cells is reduced (compared to the normal value of about 120 days) is a red cell survival study, which can be carried out by labeling the red cells with 51Cr and measuring residual radioactivity over several days or weeks; however, this classic test is now available in very few centers, and it is rarely necessary. If the hemolytic event is transient, it does not usually cause any long-term consequences, except for an increased requirement for erythropoietic factors, particularly folic acid. However, if hemolysis is recurrent or persistent, the increased bilirubin production favors the formation of gallstones. If a considerable proportion of hemolysis takes place in the spleen, as is often the case, splenomegaly may become increasingly a feature, and hypersplenism may develop, with consequent neutropenia and/or thrombocytopenia.

The increased red cell turnover also has metabolic consequences. In normal subjects, the iron from effete red cells is very efficiently recycled by the body; however, with chronic intravascular hemolysis the persistent hemoglobinuria will cause considerable iron loss, needing replacement. With chronic extravascular hemolysis the opposite problem, iron overload, is more common, especially if the patient needs frequent blood transfusions. Chronic iron overload will cause secondary hemochromatosis: this will cause damage particularly to the liver, eventually leading to cirrhosis, and to the heart muscle, eventually causing heart failure.

Compensated Hemolysis versus Ha

Red cell destruction is a potent stimulus for erythropoiesis, which is mediated by erythropoietin (EPO) produced by the kidney. This mechanism is so effective that in many cases the increased output of red cells from the bone marrow can fully balance an increased destruction of red cells. In such cases we say that hemolysis is compensated. The pathophysiology of compensated hemolysis is similar to what we have just described, except there is no anemia. This notion is important from the diagnostic point of view, because a patient with a hemolytic condition, even an inherited one, may present without anemia. It is also important from the point of view of management, because compensated hemolysis may become "decompensated"〞i.e., anemia may suddenly appear〞in certain circumstances, for instance pregnancy, folate deficiency, or renal failure, interfering with adequate EPO production. Another general feature of chronic HAs is seen when any intercurrent condition, for instance an acute infection, depresses erythropoiesis. When this happens, in view of the increased rate of red cell turnover, the effect will be predictably much more marked than in a person who does not have hemolysis. The most dramatic example is infection by parvovirus B19, which may cause a rather precipitous fall in hemoglobin; an occurrence sometimes referred to as aplastic crisis.

Inherited Hemolytic Anemias

There are three essential components in the red cell: (1) hemoglobin, (2) the membrane-cytoskeleton complex, and (3) the metabolic machinery necessary to keep (1) and (2) in working order. Diseases caused by abnormalities of hemoglobin, or hemoglobinopathies, are covered in Chap. 104. Here we will deal with diseases of the other two components.

Hemolytic Anemias Due to Abnormalities of the Membrane-Cytoskeleton Complex

The detailed architecture of the red cell membrane is complex, but its basic design is relatively simple (Fig. 106-2). The lipid bilayer incorporates phospholipids and cholesterol, and it is spanned by a number of proteins that have their hydrophobic transmembrane domains embedded in the membrane. Most of these proteins have hydrophilic domains extending toward both the outside and the inside of the cell. Other proteins are tethered to the membrane through a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, and they have only an extracellular domain. These proteins are arranged roughly perpendicular to or lying across the membrane: they include ion channels, receptors for complement components, receptors for other ligands, and some of unknown function. The most abundant of these proteins are glycophorins and the so-called band 3, an anion transporter. The extracellular domains of many of these proteins are heavily glycosylated, and they carry antigenic determinants that correspond to blood groups. Underneath the membrane, and tangential to it, is a network of other proteins that make up the cytoskeleton: the main cytoskeletal protein is spectrin, the basic unit of which is a dimer of -spectrin and -spectrin. The membrane is physically linked to the cytoskeleton by a third set of proteins (including ankyrin and the so-called band 4.1 and band 4.2), which thus make these two structures intimately connected to each other.

Figure 106-2

 
 
 
Diagram of red cell membrane-cytoskeleton. (For explanation see text.) (From N Young et al: Clinical Hematology. Copyright Elsevier, 2006; with permission.)
 
 

The membrane-cytoskeleton complex is indeed so integrated that, not surprisingly, an abnormality of almost any of its components will be disturbing or disruptive, causing structural failure, which results ultimately in hemolysis. These abnormalities are almost invariably inherited mutations; thus, diseases of the membrane-cytoskeleton complex belong to the category of inherited HAs. Before the red cells lyse, they often exhibit more or less specific morphologic changes that alter the normal biconcave disk shape. Thus, the majority of the diseases in this group have been known for over a century as hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary elliptocytosis.

Hereditary Spherocytosis (HS)

This is a relatively common type of HA, with an estimated frequency of at least 1 in 5000. Its identification is credited to Minkowksy and Chauffard, who at the end of the nineteenth century reported families in which HS was inherited as an autosomal dominant condition (Fig 106-3A). From this seminal work, HS came to be defined as an inherited form of HA associated with the presence of spherocytes in the peripheral blood. In addition, in vitro studies revealed that the red cells were abnormally susceptible to lysis in hypotonic media: indeed, the presence of osmotic fragility became the main diagnostic test for HS. Today we know that HS, thus defined, is genetically heterogeneous; i.e., it can arise from a variety of mutations in one of several genes (Table 106每3). Whereas classically the inheritance of HS is autosomal dominant (with the patients being heterozygous), some severe forms are instead autosomal recessive (with the patient being homozygous).

Figure 106-3

 
 
 
 
 
Peripheral blood smear from patients with membrane-cytoskeleton abnormalities.A. Hereditary spherocytosis. B. Hereditary elliptocytosis, heterozygote. C. Elliptocytosis, with both alleles of the -spectrin gene mutated.
 
 
Table 106每3 Inherited Diseases of the Red Cell Membrane-Cytoskeleton

 
 
Gene Chromosomal Location Protein Produced Disease(s) with Certain Mutations (Inheritance) Comments 
SPTA1  1q22-q23 -Spectrin HS (recessive) Rare 
      HE (dominant) Mutations of this gene account for about 65% of HE. More severe forms may be due to coexistence of an otherwise silent mutant allele 
SPTB  14q23-q24.1 -Spectrin HS (dominant) Rare 
      HE (dominant) Mutations of this gene account for about 30% of HE, including some severe forms 
ANK1  8p11.2 Ankyrin HS (dominant) May account for majority of HS 
SLC4A1  17q21 Band 3 (anion channel) HS (dominant) Mutations of this gene may account for about 25% of HS 
      Southeast Asia ovalocytosis (dominant) Polymorphic mutation (deletion of 9 amino acids); clinically asymptomatic; protective against Plasmodium falciparum  
      Stomatocytosis Certain specific missense mutations shift protein function from anion exchanger to cation conductance 
EPB41  1p33-p34.2 Band 4.1 HE (dominant) Mutations of this gene account for about 5% of HE: mostly with prominent morphology but no hemolysis in heterozygotes; severe hemolysis in homozygotes 
EPB42  15q15-q21 Band 4.2 HS (recessive) Mutations of this gene account for about 3% of HS. 
RHAG  6p21.1-p11 Rhesus antigen Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia Very rare; associated with total loss of all Rh antigens 
 


Abbreviations: HE, hereditary elliptocytosis; HS, hereditary spherocytosis.
 

Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis

The spectrum of clinical severity of HS is broad. Severe cases may present in infancy with severe anemia, whereas mild cases may present in young adults or even later in life. In women, HS is sometimes first diagnosed when anemia is investigated during pregnancy. The main clinical findings are jaundice, an enlarged spleen, and often gallstones; indeed, it is often the finding of gallstones in a young person that triggers diagnostic investigations.

The variability in clinical manifestations that is observed among patients with HS is largely due to the different underlying molecular lesions (Table 106每3). Not only are mutations of several genes involved, but individual mutations of the same gene can also give very different clinical manifestations. In milder cases hemolysis is often compensated (see above), and this may cause variation in time, even in the same patient, due to the fact that intercurrent conditions (e.g., infection) cause decompensation. The anemia is usually normocytic, with the characteristic morphology that gives the disease its name. A characteristic feature is an increase in mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC): this is almost the only condition in which an increased MCHC is seen.

When there is a family history (Fig. 106-3A) it is usually easy to suspect the diagnosis, but there may be no family history for at least two reasons. (1) The patient may have a de novo mutation, i.e., a mutation that has taken place in a germ cell of one of his or her parents or early after zygote formation. (2) The patient may have a recessive form of HS (Table 106每3). In most cases, the diagnosis can be made on the basis of red cell morphology and of a test for osmotic fragility, a modified version of which is called the "pink test." In some cases, a definitive diagnosis can be obtained only by molecular studies demonstrating a mutation in one of the genes underlying HS. This is usually carried out in laboratories with special expertise in this area.

Treatment: Hereditary Spherocytosis

We don't have a causal treatment for HS; i.e., no way has yet been found to correct the basic defect in the membrane-cytoskeleton structure. However, it has been apparent for a long time that the spleen plays a special role in HS through a dual mechanism. On one hand, like in many other HAs, the spleen itself is a major site of destruction; on the other hand, transit through the splenic circulation makes the defective red cells more spherocytic and therefore accelerates their demise, even though lysis may take place elsewhere. For these reasons, splenectomy has long been regarded as a prime, almost obligatory therapeutic measure in HS. Therefore, current guidelines (not evidence-based) are as follows. (1) Avoid splenectomy in mild cases. (2) Delay splenectomy until at least 4 years of age, after the risk of severe sepsis has peaked. (3) Antipneumococcal vaccination before splenectomy is imperative, whereas penicillin prophylaxis postsplenectomy is controversial. (4) There is no doubt that HS patients often may require cholecystectomy, in which case the practice has been to also carry out a splenectomy at the same time. Today the decision regarding this combined surgery should not be regarded as automatic: cholecystectomy is usually done via the laparoscopic approach and splenectomy should be carried out if clinically indicated.

Hereditary Elliptocytosis (He)

HE is at least as heterogeneous as HS, both from the genetic point of view (Table 106每3) and from the clinical point of view. Again it is the shape of the red cells that gives the name to these conditions, but there is no direct correlation between the elliptocytic morphology and clinical severity. In fact, some mild or even asymptomatic cases may have nearly 100% elliptocytes, whereas in severe cases it is all sorts of bizarre poikilocytes that predominate. Clinical features and recommended management are similar to those outlined above for HS. Although the spleen may not have the specific role it has in HS, in severe cases splenectomy may be beneficial. The prevalence of HE causing clinical disease is similar to that of HS. However, an asymptomatic form, referred to as Southeast Asia ovalocytosis, has a frequency of up to 7% in certain populations, presumably as a result of malaria selection.

Disorders of Cation Transport

These rare conditions with autosomal dominant inheritance are characterized by increased intracellular sodium in red cells, with concomitant loss of potassium: indeed, they are sometimes discovered through the incidental finding, in a blood test, of high serum K+ (pseudohyperkalemia). In patients from some families, the cation transport disturbance is associated with gain of water: as a result the red cells are overhydrated (low MCHC), and on a blood smear the normally round-shaped central pallor is replaced by a linear-shaped central pallor, which has earned this disorder the name stomatocytosis. In patients from other families, the red cells are instead dehydrated (high MCHC), and their consequent rigidity has earned this disorder the name xerocytosis. In these disorders, one would suspect that the primary defect may be in a cation transporter. In most cases this has not yet been demonstrated, but interestingly, certain missense mutations of the SLC4A1 gene encoding band 3 (Table 106每3) give stomatocytosis. Hemolysis can vary from relatively mild to quite severe. From the practical point of view it is important to know that splenectomy is contraindicated, as it has been followed in a majority of cases by severe thromboembolic complications.

Enzyme Abnormalities

When there is an important defect in the membrane or in the cytoskeleton, hemolysis is a direct consequence of the fact that the very structure of the red cell is abnormal. Instead, when one of the enzymes is defective, the consequences will depend on the precise role of that enzyme in the metabolic machinery of the red cell, which, in first approximation, has two important functions: (1) to provide energy in the form of ATP, and (2) to prevent oxidative damage to hemoglobin and to other proteins.

Abnormalities of the Glycolytic Pathway

Since red cells, in the course of their differentiation, have sacrificed not only their nucleus and their ribsomes but also their mitochondria, they rely exclusively on the anaerobic portion of the glycolytic pathway for producing energy in the form of ATP. Most of the ATP is required by the red cell for cation transport against a concentration gradient across the membrane. If this fails, due to a defect of any of the enzymes of the glycolytic pathway, the result will be hemolytic disease (Table 106每4).

Table 106每4 Red Cell Ezyme Abnormalities Causing Hemolysis

 
 
  Enzyme (Acronym) Chromosomal Location Prevalence of Enzyme Deficiency (Rank) Clinical Manifestations Extra-Red Cell Comments 
GLYCOLYTIC PATHWAY  Hexokinase (HK) 10q22 Very rare   Other isoenzymes known 
  Glucose 6-phosphate isomerase (G6PI) 19q31.1 Rare (4)*
  NM, CNS   
  Phosphofructokinase (PFK) 12q13 Very rare Myopathy   
  Aldolase 16q22-24 Very rare     
  Triose phosphate isomerase (TPI) 12p13 Very rare CNS (severe), NM   
  Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPD) 12p13.31-p13.1 Very rare Myopathy   
  Diphosphoglycerate mutase (DPGM) 7q31-q34 Very rare   Erythrocytosis rather than hemolysis 
  Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) Xq13 Very rare CNS, NM May benefit from splenectomy 
  Pyruvate kinase (PK) 1q21 Rare (2)*
    May benefit from splenectomy 
REDOX  Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) Xq28 Common (1)*
  Very rarely granulocytes In almost all cases only AHA from exogenous trigger 
  Glutathione synthase 20q11.2 Very rare CNS   
  -Glutamylcysteine synthase  6p12 Very rare CNS   
  Cytochrome b5 reductase 22q13.31-qter Rare CNS Methemoglobinemia rather than hemolysis 
NUCLEOTIDE  Adenylate kinase (AK) 9q34.1 Very rare CNS   
METABOLISM  Pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase (P5N) 3q11-q12 Rare (3)*
    May benefit from splenectomy 
 


*The numbers from (1) to (4) indicate the ranking order of these enzymopathies in terms of frequency.

Abbreviations: AHA, acquired hemolytic anemia; CNS, central nervous system.
 

Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency

Abnormalities of the glycolytic pathway are all inherited and all rare. Among them, deficiency of pyruvate kinase (PK) is the less rare, with an estimated prevalence of the order of 1:10,000. The clinical picture is that of an HA that often presents in the newborn with neonatal jaundice; the jaundice persists, and it is usually associated with a very high reticulocytosis. The anemia is of variable severity; sometimes it is so severe as to require regular blood transfusion treatment; sometimes it is mild, bordering on a nearly compensated hemolytic disorder. As a result, the diagnosis may be delayed, and in some cases it is made in young adults; for instance, in a woman, during her first pregnancy, when the anemia may get worse. In part, the delay in diagnosis is due to the fact that the anemia is remarkably well tolerated, because the metabolic block at the last step in glycolysis causes an increase in bisphosphoglycerate (or DPG), a major effector of the hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve; thus, the oxygen delivery to the tissues is enhanced.

Treatment: Pryuvate Kinase Deficiency

The management of PK deficiency is mainly supportive. In view of the marked increase in red cell turnover, oral folic acid supplements should be given constantly. Blood transfusion should be used as necessary, and iron chelation may have to be added if the blood transfusion requirement is high enough to cause iron overload. In these patients, who have more severe disease, splenectomy may be beneficial. There is a single case report of curative treatment of PK deficiency by bone marrow transplantation from an HLA-identical PK-normal sibling. This seems a viable option for severe cases when a sibling donor is available.

Other Glycolytic Enzyme Abnormalities

All of these defects are rare to very rare (Table 106每4), and all cause HA with varying degrees of severity. It is not unusual for the presentation to be in the guise of severe neonatal jaundice, which may require exchange transfusion. If the anemia is less severe, it may present later in life, or it may even remain asymptomatic and be detected incidentally when a blood count is done for unrelated reasons. The spleen is often enlarged. When other systemic manifestations occur, they involve the central nervous system, sometimes entailing severe mental retardation (particularly in the case of triose phosphate isomerase deficiency), or the neuromuscular system, or both. The diagnosis of HA is usually not difficult, thanks to the triad of normo-macrocytic anemia, reticulocytosis, and hyperbilirubinemia. Enzymopathies should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any chronic Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia. In most cases of glycolytic enzymopathies, the morphologic abnormalities of red cells characteristically seen in membrane disorders are conspicuous by their absence. A definitive diagnosis can be made only by demonstrating the deficiency of an individual enzyme by quantitative assays carried out in only a few specialized laboratories. If a particular molecular abnormality is already known in the family, then of course one could test directly for that at the DNA level, bypassing the need for enzyme assays.

Abnormalities of Redox Metabolism

G6PD Deficiency

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a housekeeping enzyme critical in the redox metabolism of all aerobic cells (Fig. 106-1). In red cells its role is even more critical, because it is the only source of NADPH that directly and via glutathione (GSH) defends these cells against oxidative stress. G6PD deficiency is a prime example of an HA due to interaction between an intracorpuscular cause and an extracorpuscular cause, because in the majority of cases, hemolysis is triggered by an exogenous agent. Although a decrease in G6PD activity is noted in most tissues of G6PD-deficient subjects, the decrease is less marked than in red cells, and it does not seem to have a clinical impact.

Genetic Considerations

The G6PD gene is X-linked, and this has important implications. First, as males have only one G6PD gene (i.e., they are hemizygous for this gene), they must be either normal or G6PD-deficient. By contrast, females, having two G6PD genes, can be either normal or deficient (homozygous), or intermediate (heterozygous). As a result of the phenomenon of X-chromosome inactivation, heterozygous females are genetic mosaics, with a highly variable ratio of G6PD-normal to G6PD-deficient cells and an equally variable degree of clinical expression: some heterozygotes can be just as affected as hemizygous males. The enzymatically active form of G6PD is either a dimer or a tetramer of a single protein subunit of 514 amino acids. G6PD- deficient subjects have been found invariably to have mutations in the coding region of the G6PD gene (Fig. 106-4). Almost all of some 150 different mutations known are single missense point mutations, entailing single amino acid replacements in the G6PD protein. In most cases, these mutations cause G6PD deficiency by decreasing the in vivo stability of the protein; thus, the physiologic decrease in G6PD activity that takes place with red cell aging is greatly accelerated. In some cases an amino acid replacement can also affect the catalytic function of the enzyme.

Figure 106-4

 
 
 
Diagram of redox metabolism in the red cell. G6P, glucose 6-phosphate; 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; G6PD, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase; GSH, reduced glutathione; GSSG, oxidized glutathione; Hb, hemoglobin; MetHb, methemoglobin; NADP, nicotinamide adenine -dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
 
 

Among these mutations, those underlying chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia (CNSHA; see "Clinical Manifestations," below) are a discrete subset. This much more severe clinical phenotype can be ascribed in some cases to adverse qualitative changes (for instance, a decreased affinity for the substrate, glucose 6-phosphate) or simply to the fact that the enzyme deficit is more extreme because of a more severe instability of the enzyme. For instance, a cluster of mutations map at or near the dimer interface, and clearly they compromise severely the formation of the dimer.


Epidemiology

G6PD deficiency is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical parts of the world (Africa, Southern Europe, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and Oceania) (Fig. 106-5) and wherever people from those areas have migrated. A conservative estimate is that at least 400 million people have a G6PD deficiency gene. In several of these areas the frequency of a G6PD deficiency gene may be as high as 20% or more. It would be quite extraordinary for a trait that causes significant pathology to spread widely and reach high frequencies in many populations without conferring some biologic advantage. Indeed, G6PD is one of the best characterized examples of genetic polymorphisms in the human species. Clinical field studies and in vitro experiments strongly support the view that G6PD deficiency has been selected by Plasmodium falciparum malaria, by virtue of the fact that it confers a relative resistance against this highly lethal infection. Whether this protective effect is exerted mainly in hemizygous males or in females heterozygous for G6PD deficiency is still not quite clear. Different G6PD variants underlie G6PD deficiency in different parts of the world. Some of the more widespread variants are G6PD Mediterranean on the shores of that sea, in the Middle East, and in India; G6PD A每in Africa and in Southern Europe; G6PD Vianchan and G6PD Mahidol in Southeast Asia; G6PD Canton in China; and G6PD Union worldwide. The heterogeneity of polymorphic G6PD variants is proof of their independent origin, and it supports the notion that they have been selected by a common environmental agent, in keeping with the concept of convergent evolution (Fig. 106-5).

Figure 106-5

 
 
 
Epidemiology of G6PD deficiency throughout the world. The different shadings indicate increasingly high levels of prevalence, up to about 20%; the different colored symbols indicate individual genetic variants of G6PD, each one having a different mutation. [From L Luzzatto et al, in C Scriver et al (eds): The Metabolic & Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001.]
 
 

Clinical Manifestations

The vast majority of people with G6PD deficiency remain clinically asymptomatic throughout their lifetime; however, all of them have an increased risk of developing neonatal jaundice (NNJ), and a risk of developing acute hemolytic anemia (AHA) when challenged by a number of oxidative agents. NNJ related to G6PD deficiency is very rarely present at birth. The peak incidence of clinical onset is between day 2 and day 3, and in most cases the anemia is not severe. However, NNJ can be very severe in some G6PD-deficient babies, especially in association with prematurity, infection, and/or environmental factors (such as naphthalene-camphor balls used in babies' bedding and clothing), and the risk of severe NNJ is also increased by the coexistence of a monoallelic or biallelic mutation in the uridyl transferase gene (UGT1A1; the same mutations are associated with the Gilbert syndrome). If inadequately managed, NNJ associated with G6PD deficiency can produce kernicterus and permanent neurologic damage.

AHA can develop as a result of three types of triggers: (1) fava beans, (2) infections, and (3) drugs (Table 106每5). Typically, a hemolytic attack starts with malaise, weakness, and abdominal or lumbar pain. After an interval of several hours to 2每3 days, the patient develops jaundice and often dark urine, due to hemoglobinuria. The onset can be extremely abrupt, especially with favism in children. The anemia is from moderate to extremely severe. It is usually normocytic and normochromic, and it is due partly to intravascular hemolysis. Hence, it is associated with hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, high LDH, and low or absent plasma haptoglobin. The blood film shows anisocytosis, polychromasia, and spherocytes (Fig. 106-6). The most typical feature is the presence of bizarre poikilocytes, with red cells that appear to have unevenly distributed hemoglobin ("hemighosts") and red cells that appear to have had parts of them bitten away ("bite cells" or "blister cells"). A classical test, now rarely carried out, is supravital staining with methyl violet that, if done promptly, reveals the presence of Heinz bodies, consisting of precipitates of denatured hemoglobin and regarded as a signature of oxidative damage to red cells (except for the rare occurrence of an unstable hemoglobin). LDH is high and so is the unconjugated bilirubin, indicating that there is also extravascular hemolysis. The most serious threat from AHA in adults is the development of acute renal failure (this is exceedingly rare in children). Once the threat of acute anemia is over, and in the absence of comorbidity, full recovery from AHA associated with G6PD deficiency is the rule.

Table 106每5 Drugs that Carry Risk of Clinical Hemolysis in Persons with G6PD Deficiency

 
 
  Definite Risk Possible Risk Doubtful Risk 
Antimalarials Primaquine Chloroquine Quinine 
  Dapsone/chlorproguanil*
      
Sulphonamides/sulphones Sulfamethoxazole Sulfasalazine Sulfisoxazole 
  Others Sulfadimidine Sulfadiazine 
  Dapsone     
Antibacterial/antibiotics Cotrimoxazole Ciprofloxacin Chloramphenicol 
  Nalidixic acid Norfloxacin p-Aminosalicylic acid 
  Nitrofurantoin     
  Niridazole     
Antipyretic/analgesics Acetanilide Acetylsalicylic acid high dose (>3 g/d) Acetylsalicylic acid (<3 g/d) 
  Phenazopyridine   Acetaminophen 
      Phenacetin 
Other Naphthalene Vitamin K analogues Doxorubicin 
  Methylene blue Ascorbic acid >1 g Probenecid 
    Rasburicase   
 


*Marketed as Lapdap from 2003 to 2008.
 
Figure 106-6

 
 
 
Peripheral blood smear from a 5-year-old G6PD-deficient boy with acute favism.
 
 

A very small minority of subjects with G6PD deficiency have chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia (CNSHA) of variable severity. The patient is always a male, usually with a history of NNJ, who may present with anemia, unexplained jaundice, or because of gallstones later in life. The spleen may be enlarged. The severity of anemia ranges in different patients from borderline to transfusion-dependent. The anemia is usually normo-macrocytic, with reticulocytosis. Bilirubin and LDH are increased. Although hemolysis is, by definition, chronic in these patients, they are also vulnerable to acute oxidative damage, and therefore the same agents that can cause acute HA in people with the ordinary type of G6PD deficiency will cause severe exacerbations in people with the severe form of G6PD deficiency. In some cases of CNSHA, the deficiency of G6PD is so severe in granulocytes that it becomes rate-limiting for their oxidative burst, with consequent increased susceptibility to some bacterial infections.

Laboratory Diagnosis

The suspicion of G6PD deficiency can be confirmed by semiquantitative methods often referred to as screening tests, which are suitable for population studies and can correctly classify male subjects, in the steady state, as G6PD-normal or G6PD- deficient. However, in clinical practice, a diagnostic test is usually needed when the patient has had a hemolytic attack. This implies that the oldest, most G6PD-deficient red cells have been selectively destroyed, and young red cells, having higher G6PD activity, are being released into the circulation. Under these conditions, only a quantitative test can give a definitive result. In males, this test will identify normal hemizygotes and G6PD-deficient hemizygotes; among females, some heterozygotes will be missed, but those who are at most risk of hemolysis will be identified.

Treatment: G6PD Deficiency

The acute hemolytic anemia of G6PD deficiency is largely preventable by avoiding exposure to triggering factors of previously screened subjects. Of course, the practicability and cost-effectiveness of screening depends on the prevalence of G6PD deficiency in each community. Favism is entirely preventable in G6PD-deficient subjects by not eating fava beans. Drug-induced hemolysis can be prevented by testing for G6PD deficiency before prescribing; in most cases, one can use alternative drugs. When AHA develops and once its cause is recognized, in most cases no specific treatment is needed. However, if the anemia is severe, it may be a medical emergency, especially in children, requiring immediate action, including blood transfusion. This has been the case with an antimalarial drug combination containing dapsone (called Lapdap, introduced as recently as 2003) that has caused severe acute hemolytic episodes in children with malaria in several African countries; after a few years, it was taken off the market. If there is acute renal failure, hemodialysis may be necessary, but if there is no previous kidney disease, recovery is the rule. The management of NNJ associated with G6PD deficiency is no different from that of NNJ due to other causes.

In cases with CNSHA, if the anemia is not severe, regular folic acid supplements and regular hematologic surveillance will suffice. It will be important to avoid exposure to potentially hemolytic drugs, and blood transfusion may be indicated when exacerbations occur, mostly in concomitance with intercurrent infection. In rare patients, regular blood transfusions may be required, in which case appropriate iron chelation should be instituted. Unlike in hereditary spherocytosis, there is no evidence of selective red cell destruction in the spleen; however, in practice, splenectomy has proven beneficial in severe cases.

Other Abnormalities of the Redox System

As mentioned above, GSH is a key player in the defense against oxidative stress. Inherited defects of GSH metabolism are exceedingly rare, but each one of them can give rise to chronic HA (Table 106每4). A rare, peculiar, usually self-limited severe HA of the first month of life, called infantile poikilocytosis, may be associated with deficiency of glutathione peroxidase (GSHPx) due not to an inherited abnormality but to transient nutritional deficiency of selenium, an element essential for the activity of GSHPx.

Pyrimidine 5'-Nucleotidase (P5N) Deficiency

P5N is a key enzyme in the catabolism of nucleotides arising from the degradation of nucleic acids that takes place in the final stages of erythroid cell maturation. How exactly its deficiency causes HA is not well understood, but a highly distinctive feature of this condition is a morphologic abnormality of the red cells known as basophilic stippling. The condition is rare, but it probably ranks third in frequency among red cell enzyme defects (after G6PD deficiency and PK deficiency). The anemia is lifelong, of variable severity, and may benefit from splenectomy.

Familial (Atypical) Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome (aHUS)

This phrase is used to designate a group of rare disorders, mostly affecting children, characterized by microangiopathic HA with presence of fragmented erythrocytes in the peripheral blood smear, thrombocytopenia (usually mild), and acute renal failure. (The word atypical is part of the phrase because it is the HUS caused by infection with Escherichia coli producing the Shiga toxin that is regarded as typical). The genetic basis of aHUS has been elucidated only recently. Studies of more than 100 families have revealed that those family members who have developed HUS have mutations in any one of several genes encoding complement regulatory proteins: complement factor H (CFH), CD46 or membrane cofactor protein (MCP), complement factor I (CFI), complement component C3, complement factor B (CFB), and thrombomodulin. Thus, whereas all other inherited HAs are due to intrinsic red cell abnormalities, this group is unique in that hemolysis results from an inherited defect external to red cells (Table 106每1). Because the regulation of the complement cascade has considerable redundancy, in the steady state any of the above abnormalities can be tolerated. However, when an intercurrent infection or some other trigger activates complement through the alternative pathway, the deficiency of one of the complement regulators becomes critical. Endothelial cells get damaged, especially in the kidney, and at the same time and partly as a result of this, there will be brisk hemolysis [thus, the more common Shiga toxin每related HUS (Chap. 149) can be regarded as a phenocopy of aHUS]. Atypical HUS is a severe disease with up to 15% mortality in the acute phase and up to 50% of cases progressing to end-stage renal disease. Atypical HUS often undergoes spontaneous remission, and the best tested form of treatment is plasma exchange, which supplies the deficient complement regulator. Because the basis of aHUS is an inherited abnormality, it is not surprising that given exposure to an appropriate trigger, the syndrome will tend to recur: when it does, the prognosis is always serious. In some cases, kidney (and liver) transplantation has been carried out, but the role of these procedures is controversial.

Acquired Hemolytic Anemia

Mechanical Destruction of Red Cells

Although red cells are characterized by the remarkable deformability that enables them to squeeze through capillaries narrower than themselves for thousands of times in their lifetime, there are at least two situations in which they succumb to shear, if not to wear and tear. The result is intravascular hemolysis, resulting in hemoglobinuria. One situation is acute and self-inflicted, march hemoglobinuria. Why sometimes a marathon runner may develop this complication, whereas on another occasion this does not happen, we don't know (perhaps her or his footwear needs attention). A similar syndrome may develop after prolonged barefoot ritual dancing. The other situation is chronic and iatrogenic (it has been called microangiopathic hemolytic anemia); it takes place in patients with prosthetic heart valves, especially when paraprosthetic regurgitation is present. If the hemolysis consequent to mechanical trauma to the red cells is mild, and provided the supply of iron is adequate, it may be largely compensated. If more than mild anemia develops, reintervention to correct regurgitation may be required.

Toxic Agents and Drugs

A number of chemicals with oxidative potential, whether medicinal or not, can cause hemolysis even in people who are not G6PD- deficient (see above). Examples are hyperbaric oxygen (or 100% oxygen), nitrates, chlorates, methylene blue, dapsone, cisplatin, and numerous aromatic (cyclic) compounds. Other chemicals may be hemolytic through a nonoxidative, largely unknown mechanism; examples are arsine, stibine, copper, and lead. The HA caused by lead poisoning is characterized by basophilic stippling. It is in fact a phenocopy of that seen in P5N deficiency (see above), suggesting it is mediated at least in part by lead inhibiting this enzyme.

In these cases, hemolysis appears to be mediated by a direct chemical action on red cells. But drugs can cause hemolysis through at least two other mechanisms. (1) A drug can behave as a hapten and induce antibody production. In rare subjects this happens, for instance, with penicillin. Upon a subsequent exposure, red cells are caught, as innocent bystanders, in the reaction between penicillin and antipenicillin antibodies. Hemolysis will subside as soon as penicillin administration is stopped. (2) A drug can trigger, perhaps through mimicry, the production of an antibody against a red cell antigen. The best known example is methyldopa, an antihypertensive agent no longer in use, which in a small fraction of patients stimulated the production of the Rhesus antibody anti-e. In patients who have this antigen the anti-e is a true autoantibody, which would then cause an autoimmune HA (see below). Usually this would gradually subside once methyldopa was discontinued.

Severe intravascular hemolysis can be caused by the venom of certain snakes (cobras and vipers); and HA can also follow spider bites.

Infection

By far, the most frequent infectious cause of HA, in endemic areas, is malaria (Chap. 210). In other parts of the world, the most frequent cause is probably Shiga toxin每producing Escherichia coli O157:H7, now recognized as the main etiologic agent of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome, more common in children than in adults (Chap. 149). Life-threatening intravascular hemolysis, due to a toxin with lecithinase activity, occurs with Clostridium perfringens sepsis, particularly following open wounds, septic abortion, or as a disastrous accident due to a contaminated blood unit. Occasionally, HA is seen, especially in children, with sepsis or endocarditis from a variety of organisms.

Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia (AIHA)

Except for countries where malaria is endemic, AIHA is the most common form of acquired hemolytic anemia. In fact, not quite appropriately, the two phrases are sometimes used as synonymous.

Pathophysiology

AIHA is caused by an autoantibody directed against a red cell antigen, i.e., a molecule present on the surface of red cells. The autoantibody binds to the red cells. Once a red cell is coated by antibody, it will be destroyed by one or more mechanisms. In most cases the Fc portion of the antibody will be recognized by the Fc receptor of macrophages, and this will trigger erythrophagocytosis (Fig. 106-7). Thus, destruction of red cells will take place wherever macrophages are abundant, i.e., in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. Because of the special anatomy of the spleen, it is particularly efficient in trapping antibody-coated red cells, and often this is the predominant site of red cell destruction. Although in severe cases even circulating monocytes can take part in this process, most of the phagocytosis-mediated red cell destruction takes place in the organs just mentioned, and it is therefore called extravascular hemolysis. In some cases, the nature of the antibody (usually an IgM antibody) is such that the antigen-antibody complex on the surface of red cells is able to activate complement (C). As a result, a large amount of membrane attack complex will form, and the red cells may be destroyed directly; this is known as intravascular hemolysis.

Figure 106-7

 
 
 
Mechanism of antibody-mediated immune destruction of red cells. (From N Young et al: Clinical Hematology. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2006; with permission.)
 
 

Clinical Features

The onset of AIHA is very often abrupt and can be dramatic. The hemoglobin level can drop, within days, to as low as 4 g/dL; the massive red cell removal will produce jaundice; and sometimes the spleen is enlarged. When this triad is present, the suspicion of AIHA must be high. When hemolysis is (in part) intravascular, the telltale sign will be hemoglobinuria, which the patient may report or for which the physician must inquire/test. The diagnostic test for AIHA is the antiglobulin test worked out in 1945 by R. R. A. Coombs and known since by his name. The beauty of this test is that it directly detects the pathogenetic mediator of the disease, i.e., the presence of antibody on the red cells themselves. When the test is positive, it clinches the diagnosis, and when it is negative, the diagnosis is unlikely. However, the sensitivity of the Coombs test varies depending on the technology that is used, and in doubtful cases a repeat in a specialized lab is advisable; the term "Coombs-negative AIHA" is a last resort. In some cases, the autoantibody has a defined identity: it may be specific for an antigen belonging to the Rhesus system (it is often anti-e). In many cases it is regarded as "unspecific" because it reacts with virtually all types of red cells.

As in autoimmune diseases in general, the real cause of AIHA remains obscure. However, from the clinical point of view, an important feature is that AIHA can appear to be isolated, or it can develop as part of a more general autoimmune disease, particularly systemic lupus erythematosus, of which sometimes it may be the first manifestation. Therefore, when AIHA is diagnosed, a full screen for autoimmune disease is imperative. In some cases, AIHA can be associated, on first presentation or subsequently, with autoimmune thrombocytopenia (Evans's syndrome).

Treatment: Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia

Severe acute AIHA can be a medical emergency. The immediate treatment almost invariably includes transfusion of red cells. This may pose a special problem because if the antibody involved is unspecific, all the blood units cross-matched will be incompatible. In these cases it is often correct, paradoxically, to transfuse incompatible blood, the rationale being that the transfused red cells will be destroyed no less but no more than the patient's own red cells, but in the meantime the patient stays alive. Clearly, this rather unique situation requires good liaison and understanding between the clinical unit treating the patient and the blood transfusion/serology lab. Apart from emergency blood transfusion, the first-line treatment of AIHA is by using corticosteroids. In at least one-half of the cases, prednisone (1 mg/kg per day) will produce a remission promptly. Whereas some patients are then apparently cured, relapses are not uncommon. Although unfortunately most of the management of AIHA is not evidence-based, for patients who do not respond and for those who have relapsed (or who require more than 15 mg/d of prednisone to prevent relapse), it is highly recommended to consider a second-line treatment option, which might be either splenectomy or rituximab (anti-CD20). Splenectomy, although it does not cure the disease, can produce significant benefit by removing a major site of hemolysis, thus improving the anemia and/or reducing the need for other therapies (e.g., the dose of prednisone). Rituximab has emerged as a significant alternative to splenectomy because it can produce remissions in up to 80% of patients and it can be used repeatedly, even though progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy is a dreaded if rare side effect. Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, and IV immunoglobulin have become third-line agents since the introduction of rituximab. In severe refractory cases, either auto- or allohematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been used, sometimes successfully.

Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria (PCH)

PCH is a rather rare form of AIHA occurring mostly in children, usually triggered by a viral infection, usually self-limited, and characterized by the involvement of the so-called Donath-Landsteiner antibody. In vitro this antibody has unique serologic features: it has anti-P specificity and it binds to red cells only at a low temperature (optimally at 4∼C), but when the temperature is shifted to 37∼C, lysis of red cells takes place in the presence of complement. Consequently, in vivo there is intravascular hemolysis, resulting in hemoglobinuria. Clinically, the differential diagnosis must include other causes of hemoglobinuria (Table 106每6), but the presence of the Donath-Landsteiner antibody will prove PCH. Active supportive treatment, including blood transfusion, is needed to control the anemia; subsequently, recovery is the rule.

Table 106每6 Diseases/Clinical Situations with Predominantly Intravascular Hemolysis

 
 
  Onset/Time Course Main Mechanism Appropriate Diagnostic Procedure Comments 
Mismatched blood transfusion Abrupt Nearly always ABO incompatibility Repeat cross-match   
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) Chronic with acute exacerbations Complement (C)-mediated destruction of CD59(每) red cells Flow cytometry to display a CD59(每) red cell population Exacerbations due to C activation through any pathway 
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH) Acute Immune lysis of normal red cells Test for Donath-Landsteiner antibody Often triggered by viral infection 
Septicemia Very acute Exotoxins produced by Clostridium perfringens  Blood cultures Other organisms may be responsible 
Microangiopathic Acute or chronic Red cell fragmentation Red cell morphology on blood smear Different causes ranging from endothelial damage to hemangioma to leaky prosthetic heart valve 
March hemoglobinuria Abrupt Mechanical destruction Targeted history taking   
Favism Acute Destruction of older fraction of G6PD-deficient red cells G6PD assay Triggered by ingestion of large dish of fava beans; but trigger can be infection or drug instead 
 

 

Cold Agglutinin Disease (CAD)

This designation is used for a form of chronic AIHA that usually affects the elderly and has special clinical and pathologic features. First, the term cold refers to the fact that the autoantibody involved reacts with red cells poorly or not at all at 37∼C, whereas it reacts strongly at lower temperatures.1 As a result, hemolysis is more prominent the more the body is exposed to the cold. The antibody is usually IgM with an anti-I specificity (the I antigen is present on the red cells of almost everybody), and it may have a very high titer (1:100,000 or more has been observed). Second, the antibody is produced by an expanded clone of B lymphocytes, and sometimes its concentration in the plasma is high enough to show up as a spike in plasma protein electrophoresis; i.e., as a monoclonal gammopathy. Third, since the antibody is IgM, CAD is related to Waldenstr?m macroglobulinemia (WM) (Chap. 111), although in most cases the other clinical features of this disease are not present. Thus, CAD must be regarded as a form of WM, i.e., as a low-grade mature B cell lymphoma that manifests at an earlier stage precisely because the unique biologic properties of the IgM that it produces give the clinical picture of chronic HA.

1 In the past this type of antibody was called a cold antibody, whereas the antibodies causing the more common form of AIHA were called warm antibodies.

In mild forms of CAD, avoidance of exposure to cold may be all that is needed to enable the patient to have a reasonably comfortable quality of life, but in more severe forms the management of CAD is not easy. Blood transfusion is not very effective because donor red cells are I-positive and will be rapidly removed. Immunosuppressive/cytotoxic treatment with azathioprine or cyclophosphamide can reduce the antibody titer, but clinical efficacy is limited and, in view of the chronic nature of the disease, the side effects may prove, in the long run, unacceptable. Unlike in AIHA, prednisone and splenectomy are ineffective. Plasma exchange is in theory a rational approach, but it is laborious and must be carried out at frequent intervals if it is to be beneficial. Since the advent of rituximab, the picture has changed significantly for those 60% of patients with CAD who respond to this agent. Given the long clinical course of CAD, it remains to be seen with what periodicity rituximab will need to be administered.

Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria (PNH)

PNH is an acquired chronic HA characterized by persistent intravascular hemolysis (Table 106每6) subject to recurrent exacerbations. In addition to hemolysis, there is often pancytopenia and a distinct tendency to venous thrombosis. This triad makes PNH a truly unique clinical condition. However, when not all of these three features are manifest on presentation, the diagnosis is often delayed, although it can be always made by appropriate laboratory investigations (see below).

PNH has about the same frequency in men and in women, and it is encountered in all populations throughout the world, but it is a rare disease. Its prevalence is estimated to be between 1 and 5 per million (it may be somewhat less rare in Southeast Asia and in the Far East). There is no evidence of inherited susceptibility. PNH has never been reported as a congenital disease, but it can present in small children or as late as in the seventies, although most patients are young adults.

Clinical Features

The patient may seek medical attention because, one morning, she or he has "passed blood instead of urine" (Fig. 106-8). This distressing or frightening event may be regarded as the classical presentation; however, more frequently, this symptom is not noticed or is suppressed. Indeed, the patient often presents simply as a problem in the differential diagnosis of anemia, whether symptomatic or discovered incidentally. Sometimes, the anemia is associated from the outset with neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia, or both, thus signaling an element of bone marrow failure (see below). Some patients may present with recurrent attacks of severe abdominal pain, defying a specific diagnosis and eventually found to be related to thrombosis. When thrombosis affects the hepatic veins, it may produce acute hepatomegaly and ascites, i.e., a full-fledged Budd-Chiari syndrome, which in the absence of liver disease ought to raise the suspicion of PNH.

Figure 106-8

 
 
 
Consecutive urine samples from a patient with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). The variation in the severity of hemoglobinuria within hours is probably unique to this condition.
 
 

The natural history of PNH can extend over decades. Without treatment, the median survival is estimated to be about 8每10 years. In the past, the most common cause of death has been venous thrombosis, followed by infection secondary to severe neutropenia and hemorrhage secondary to severe thrombocytopenia. PNH may evolve into aplastic anemia (AA), and PNH may manifest itself in patients who previously had AA. Rarely (estimated 1每2% of all cases), PNH may terminate in acute myeloid leukemia. On the other hand, full spontaneous recovery from PNH has been well documented, albeit rarely.

Laboratory Investigations and Diagnosis

The most consistent blood finding is anemia, which may range from mild to moderate to very severe. The anemia is usually normo-macrocytic, with unremarkable red cell morphology; if the MCV is high, it is usually largely accounted for by reticulocytosis, which may be quite marked (up to 20%, or up to 400,000/L). The anemia may become microcytic if the patient is allowed to become iron-deficient as a result of chronic urinary blood loss through hemoglobinuria. Unconjugated bilirubin is mildly or moderately elevated, LDH is typically markedly elevated (values in the thousands are common), and haptoglobin is usually undetectable. All these findings make the diagnosis of HA compelling. Hemoglobinuria, the telltale sign of intravascular hemolysis (Table 106每6), may be overt in a random urine sample. If it is not, it may be helpful to obtain serial urine samples, since hemoglobinuria can vary dramatically from day to day, and even from hour to hour (Fig. 106-8). The bone marrow is usually cellular, with marked to massive erythroid hyperplasia, often with mild to moderate dyserythropoietic features (these do not justify confusing PNH with myelodysplastic syndrome). At some stage of the disease, the marrow may become hypocellular or even frankly aplastic (see below).

The definitive diagnosis of PNH must be based on the demonstration that a substantial proportion of the patient's red cells have an increased susceptibility to complement (C), due to the deficiency on their surface of proteins (particularly CD59 and CD55) that normally protect the red cells from activated C. The sucrose hemolysis test is unreliable, and the acidified serum (Ham) test is carried out in few labs. The gold standard today is flow cytometry, which can be carried out on granulocytes as well as on red cells. A bimodal distribution of cells, with a discrete population that is CD59-, CD55-, is diagnostic of PNH. Usually this population is at least 5% of the total in the case of red cells and at least 20% of the total in the case of granulocytes.

Pathophysiology

Hemolysis in PNH is due to an intrinsic abnormality of the red cell, which makes it exquisitely sensitive to activated C, whether it is activated through the alternative pathway or through an antigen-antibody reaction (Fig. 106-9). The former mechanism is mainly responsible for intravascular hemolysis in PNH. The latter mechanism explains why the hemolysis can be dramatically exacerbated in the course of a viral or bacterial infection. Hypersusceptibility to C is due to deficiency of several protective membrane proteins, of which CD59 is the most important because it hinders the insertion into the membrane of C9 polymers. The molecular basis for the deficiency of these proteins has been pinpointed not to a defect in any of the respective genes, but rather to the shortage of a unique glycolipid molecule, glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol (GPI), which, through a peptide bond, anchors these proteins to the surface membrane of cells. The shortage of GPI is due in turn to a mutation in an X-linked gene, called PIG-A, required for an early step in GPI biosynthesis. In virtually each patient, the PIG-A mutation is different. This is not surprising, since these mutations are not inherited: rather, each one takes place de novo in a hematopoietic stem cell (i.e., they are somatic mutations). As a result, the patient's marrow is a mosaic of mutant and nonmutant cells, and the peripheral blood always contains both PNH cells and normal (non-PNH) cells. Thrombosis is one of the most immediately life-threatening complications of PNH and yet one of the least understood in its pathogenesis. It could be that deficiency of CD59 on the PNH platelet causes inappropriate platelet activation; however, other mechanisms are possible.

Figure 106-9

 
 
 
The complement cascade and the fate of red cells.A. Normal red cells are protected from complement activation and subsequent hemolysis by CD55 and CD59. These two proteins, being GPI-linked, are missing from the surface of PNH red cells as a result of a somatic mutation of the X-linked PIG-A gene that encodes a protein required for an early step of the GPI molecule biosynthesis. B. In the steady state, PNH erythrocytes suffer from spontaneous (tick-over) complement activation, with consequent intravascular hemolysis through formation of the membrane -attack complex (MAC); when extra complement is activated through the classical pathway, an exacerbation of hemolysis will result. C. On eculizumab, PNH erythrocytes are protected from hemolysis from the inhibition of C5 cleavage; however, upstream complement activation may lead to C3 opsonization and possible extravascular hemolysis. GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; PNH, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. (From L Luzzatto, et al: Haematologica 95:523, 2010.)
 
 

Bone Marrow Failure (BMF) and Relationship between PNH and Aplastic Anemia (AA)

It is not unusual that patients with firmly established PNH have a previous history of well-documented AA. On the other hand, sometimes a patient with PNH becomes less hemolytic and more pancytopenic and ultimately has the clinical picture of AA. Since AA is probably an organ-specific autoimmune disease, in which T cells cause damage to hematopoietic stem cells, the same may be true of PNH, with the specific proviso that the damage spares PNH stem cells. Skewing of the T cell repertoire in patients with PNH lends some support to this notion. In addition, there is evidence in mouse models that PNH stem cells do not expand when the rest of the bone marrow is normal, and by using high-sensitivity flow cytometry technology, very rare PNH cells harboring PIG-A mutations can be demonstrated in normal people. In view of these facts, it seems that an element of BMF in PNH is the rule rather than the exception. An extreme view is that PNH is a form of AA in which BMF is masked by the massive expansion of the PNH clone that populates the patient's bone marrow. The mechanism whereby PNH stem cells escape the damage suffered by non-PNH stem cells is not yet known.

Treatment: Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria

Unlike other acquired HAs, PNH may be a lifelong condition; standard care was formerly supportive treatment only, including transfusion of filtered red cells2 whenever necessary, which, for some patients, means quite frequently. Folic acid supplements (at least 3 mg/d) are mandatory, and the serum iron should be checked periodically and iron supplements administered as appropriate. Long-term glucocorticoids are not indicated because there is no evidence that they have any effect on chronic hemolysis: in fact they are contraindicated because of their many dangerous side effects. A major advance in the management of PNH has been the development of a humanized monoclonal antibody, eculizumab, directed against the complement component C5. In an international, multicenter, placebo-controlled randomized trial of 87 patients (so far the only controlled therapeutic trial in PNH) who had been selected on grounds of having severe hemolysis making them transfusion- dependent, eculizumab proved effective and was licensed in 2007 (Fig. 106-10). By blocking the complement cascade downstream of C5, eculizumab abrogates complement-dependent intravascular hemolysis in all PNH patients, which in itself significantly improves their quality of life. One would expect that, as a result, the need for blood transfusion would be also abrogated, and this indeed is the case in about one-half of the patients, in many of whom there is also a rise in hemoglobin levels. In the remaining patients, the anemia remains sufficiently severe to require blood transfusion, apparently because of ongoing extravascular hemolysis of red cells opsonized by complement (C3) fragments. Based on its half-life, eculizumab must be administered intravenously every 14 days. The only form of treatment that currently can provide a definitive cure for PNH is allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). When an HLA-identical sibling is available, BMT should be offered to any young patient with severe PNH; the availability of eculizumab has probably decreased significantly the proportion of those who take up this option.

Figure 106-10

 
 
 
Therapeutic efficacy of an anti-C5 antibody on the anemia of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. (From P Hillmen et al: N Engl J Med 355:1233, 2006; with permission.)
 
 

For patients with the PNH-AA syndrome, immunosuppressive treatment with antilymphocyte globulin (ALG or ATG) and cyclosporine A may be indicated. Although no formal trial has ever been conducted, this approach has helped particularly to relieve severe thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia in patients in whom these were the main problem(s). By contrast, there is often little immediate effect on hemolysis. Any patient who has had venous thrombosis or who has a genetically determined thrombophilic state in addition to PNH should be on regular anticoagulant prophylaxis.

2Now that filters with excellent retention of white cells are routinely used, the traditional washing of red cells, aiming to avoid white cell reactions triggering hemolysis, is no longer necessary and is wasteful.
 
Anemia Due to Acute Blood Loss

Blood loss causes anemia by two main mechanisms. First, by the direct loss of red cells, and second, because if the loss of blood is protracted, it will gradually deplete the iron stores, eventually resulting in iron deficiency. The latter type of anemia is covered in Chap. 103. Here we are concerned with the former type, i.e., the posthemorrhagic anemia, which follows acute blood loss. This can be external (as after trauma, or obstetric hemorrhage) or internal (e.g., from bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract, rupture of the spleen, rupture of an ectopic pregnancy, subarachnoid hemorrhage). In any of these cases, i.e., after the sudden loss of a large amount of blood, there are three clinical/pathophysiologic stages. First, the dominant feature is hypovolemia, which poses a threat particularly to organs that normally have a high blood supply, like the brain and the kidneys; therefore, loss of consciousness and acute renal failure are major threats. It is important to note that at this stage an ordinary blood count will not show anemia, as the hemoglobin concentration is not affected. Second, as an emergency response, baroreceptors and stretch receptors will cause release of vasopressin and other peptides, and the body will shift fluid from the extravascular to the intravascular compartment, producing hemodilution; thus, the hypovolemia gradually converts to anemia. The degree of anemia will reflect the amount of blood lost: if after 3 days the hemoglobin is, say 7 g/dL, it means that about half of the entire blood had been lost. Third, provided bleeding does not continue, the bone marrow response will gradually ameliorate the anemia.

The diagnosis of acute posthemorrhagic anemia (APHA) is usually straightforward; although sometimes internal bleeding episodes〞after a traumatic injury or otherwise〞may not be immediately obvious, even when large. Whenever an abrupt fall in hemoglobin has taken place, whatever history is given by the patient, APHA should be suspected: supplementary history may have to be obtained by asking the appropriate questions, and appropriate investigations (e.g., a sonogram or an endoscopy) may have to be carried out.

Treatment: Anemia Due to Acute Blood Loss

With respect to treatment, a two-pronged approach is imperative. (1) In many cases the blood lost needs to be replaced promptly. Unlike with many chronic anemias, when finding and correcting the cause of the anemia is the first priority and blood transfusion may not be even necessary because the body is adapted to the anemia, with acute blood loss the reverse is true; i.e., since the body is not adapted to the anemia, blood transfusion takes priority. (2) While the emergency is being confronted, it is imperative to stop the hemorrhage and to eliminate its source.

A special type of APHA is blood loss during and immediately after surgery, which can be substantial (for instance, up to 2 L in the case of a radical prostatectomy). Of course, with elective surgical procedures, the patient's own stored blood may be available (through preoperative autologous blood donation), and in any case blood loss is carefully monitored. Since this blood loss is iatrogenic, ever more effort should be invested in optimizing transfusion management.

A Holy Grail of emergency medicine has been for a long time the idea of a blood substitute that would be universally available, suitable for all recipients, easy to store and to transport, safe, and as effective as blood itself. Two main paths have been pursued: (1) fluorocarbon synthetic chemicals that bind oxygen reversibly, and (2) artificially modified hemoglobins, known as hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOC). Although there are numerous anecdotal reports of the use of both approaches in humans, and although HBOCs have reached the stage of phase II每III clinical trials, no "blood substitute" has yet become standard treatment.
 
Further Readings

Chen JY et al: A review of blood substitutes: Examining the history, clinical trial results, and ethics of hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 64:803, 2009[PMID: 19690667] 

 
Dacie J: The Haemolytic Anaemias. London, Churchill Livingstone, 1985每1995 

 
Grace RF, Lux SE: Disorders of the red cell membrane, in Nathan & Oski's Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 7th ed, S Orkin et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2009, pp. 659每837 

 
Heier HE et al: Transfusion vs. alternative treatment modalities in acute bleeding: A systematic review. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 509:20, 2006 

 
Hillmen P et al: The complement inhibitor eculizumab in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. N Engl J Med 355:1233, 2006[PMID: 16990386] 

 
Kaushansky K et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2010 

 
Lechner K, Jager U: How I treat autoimmune hemolytic anemias in adults. Blood 116:1831, 2010[PMID: 20548093] 

 
Luzzatto L: The rise and fall of the antimalarial Lapdap: A lesson in pharmacogenetics. Lancet 376:739, 2010[PMID: 20599264] 

 
Luzzatto L, Araten D: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, in Clinical Hematology, NS Young et al (eds). Philadelphia, Mosby, 2006, pp. 326每339 

 
Noris M, Remuzzi G: Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. N Engl J Med 361:1676, 2009[PMID: 19846853] 
 
 

^^
Aplastic Anemia, Myelodysplasia, and Related Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes: Introduction

The hypoproliferative anemias are normochromic, normocytic, or macrocytic and are characterized by a low reticulocyte count. Deficient production of red blood cells (RBCs) occurs with marrow damage and dysfunction, which may be secondary to infection, inflammation, and cancer. Hypoproliferative anemia is also a prominent feature of hematologic diseases that are described as bone marrow failure states; these include aplastic anemia, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), pure red cell aplasia (PRCA), and myelophthisis. Anemia in these disorders is often not a solitary or even the major hematologic finding. More frequent in bone marrow failure is pancytopenia: anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Low blood counts in the marrow failure diseases result from deficient hematopoiesis, as distinguished from blood count depression due to peripheral destruction of red cells (hemolytic anemias), platelets [idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) or due to splenomegaly], and granulocytes (as in the immune leukopenias).

Hematopoietic failure syndromes are classified by dominant morphologic features of the bone marrow (Table 107每1). Although practical distinction among these syndromes usually is clear, they can occur secondary to other diseases, and some processes are so closely related that the diagnosis may be complex. Patients may seem to suffer from two or three related diseases simultaneously, or one diagnosis may appear to evolve into another. Many of these syndromes share an immune-mediated mechanism of marrow destruction and some element of genomic instability resulting in a higher rate of malignant transformation.

Table 107每1 Differential Diagnosis of Pancytopenia

 
 
Pancytopenia with Hypocellular Bone Marrow  
Acquired aplastic anemia

Constitutional aplastic anemia (Fanconi's anemia, dyskeratosis congenita)

Some myelodysplasia

Rare aleukemic leukemia

Some acute lymphoid leukemia

Some lymphomas of bone marrow
 
Pancytopenia with Cellular Bone Marrow  
Primary bone marrow diseases

    Myelodysplasia

    Paroxysmal nocturnal

    hemoglobinuria

    Myelofibrosis

    Some aleukemic leukemia

    Myelophthisis

    Bone marrow lymphoma

    Hairy cell leukemia
 Secondary to systemic diseases

    Systemic lupus erythematosus

    Hypersplenism

    B12, folate deficiency

    Overwhelming infection

    Alcohol

    Brucellosis

    Sarcoidosis

    Tuberculosis

    Leishmaniasis
 
Hypocellular Bone Marrow ㊣ Cytopenia  
Q fever

Legionnaires' disease

Anorexia nervosa, starvation

Mycobacterium
 
 

 

It is important that the internist and general practitioner recognize the marrow failure syndromes, as their prognosis may be poor if the patient is untreated; effective therapies are often available but sufficiently complex in their choice and delivery so as to warrant the care of a hematologist or oncologist.
 
Aplastic Anemia

Definition

Aplastic anemia is pancytopenia with bone marrow hypocellularity. Acquired aplastic anemia is distinguished from iatrogenic marrow aplasia, marrow hypocellularity after intensive cytotoxic chemotherapy for cancer. Aplastic anemia can also be constitutional: The genetic diseases Fanconi's anemia and dyskeratosis congenita, although frequently associated with typical physical anomalies and the development of pancytopenia early in life, can also present as marrow failure in normal-appearing adults. Acquired aplastic anemia is often stereotypical in its manifestations, with the abrupt onset of low blood counts in a previously well young adult; seronegative hepatitis or a course of an incriminated medical drug may precede the onset. The diagnosis in these instances is uncomplicated. Sometimes blood count depression is moderate or incomplete, resulting in anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia in some combination. Aplastic anemia is related to both paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH; Chap. 106) and to MDS, and in some cases a clear distinction among these disorders may not be possible.

Epidemiology

The incidence of acquired aplastic anemia in Europe and Israel is two cases per million persons annually. In Thailand and China, rates of five to seven per million have been established. In general, men and women are affected with equal frequency, but the age distribution is biphasic, with the major peak in the teens and twenties and a second rise in older adults.

Etiology

The origins of aplastic anemia have been inferred from several recurring clinical associations (Table 107每2); unfortunately, these relationships are not reliable in an individual patient and may not be etiologic. In addition, although most cases of aplastic anemia are idiopathic, little other than history separates these cases from those with a presumed etiology such as a drug exposure.

Table 107每2 Classification of Aplastic Anemia and Single Cytopenias

 
 
Acquired Inherited 
Aplastic Anemia    
Secondary Fanconi's anemia 
  Radiation Dyskeratosis congenita 
  Drugs and chemicals Shwachman-Diamond syndrome 
    Regular effects Reticular dysgenesis 
    Idiosyncratic reactions Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia 
  Viruses Familial aplastic anemias 
    Epstein-Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis) Preleukemia (monosomy 7, etc.) 
    Hepatitis (non-A, non-B, non-C hepatitis) Nonhematologic syndrome (Down, Dubowitz, Seckel) 
    Parvovirus B19 (transient aplastic crisis, PRCA)   
    HIV-1 (AIDS)   
  Immune diseases   
    Eosinophilic fasciitis   
    Hyperimmunoglobulinemia   
    Thymoma/thymic carcinoma   
    Graft-versus-host disease in immunodeficiency   
  Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria   
  Pregnancy   
Idiopathic   
Cytopenias  
PRCA (see Table 107每4) Congenital PRCA (Diamond-Blackfan anemia) 
Neutropenia/agranulocytosis   
  Idiopathic Kostmann's syndrome 
  Drugs, toxins Shwachman-Diamond syndrome 
Pure white cell aplasia Reticular dysgenesis 
Thrombocytopenia   
  Drugs, toxins Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia 
Idiopathic amegakaryocytic Thrombocytopenia with absent radii 
 


Abbreviation: PRCA, pure red cell aplasia.
 

Radiation

Marrow aplasia is a major acute sequela of radiation. Radiation damages DNA; tissues dependent on active mitosis are particularly susceptible. Nuclear accidents can involve not only power plant workers but also employees of hospitals, laboratories, and industry (food sterilization, metal radiography, etc.), as well as innocents exposed to stolen, misplaced, or misused sources. Whereas the radiation dose can be approximated from the rate and degree of decline in blood counts, dosimetry by reconstruction of the exposure can help to estimate the patient's prognosis and also to protect medical personnel from contact with radioactive tissue and excreta. MDS and leukemia, but probably not aplastic anemia, are late effects of radiation.

Chemicals

Benzene is a notorious cause of bone marrow failure: epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory data link benzene to aplastic anemia, acute leukemia, and blood and marrow abnormalities. For leukemia, incidence is correlated with cumulative exposure, but susceptibility must also be important, as only a minority of even heavily exposed workers develop myelotoxicity. The employment history is important, especially in industries where benzene is used for a secondary purpose, usually as a solvent. Benzene-related blood diseases have declined with regulation of industrial exposure. Although benzene is no longer generally available as a household solvent, exposure to its metabolites occurs in the normal diet and in the environment. The association between marrow failure and other chemicals is much less well substantiated.

Drugs

(Table 107每3) Many chemotherapeutic drugs have marrow suppression as a major toxicity; effects are dose dependent and will occur in all recipients. In contrast, idiosyncratic reactions to a large and diverse group of drugs may lead to aplastic anemia without a clear dose-response relationship. These associations rested largely on accumulated case reports until a large international study in Europe in the 1980s quantitated drug relationships, especially for nonsteroidal analgesics, sulfonamides, thyrostatic drugs, some psychotropics, penicillamine, allopurinol, and gold. Association does not equal causation: A drug may have been used to treat the first symptoms of bone marrow failure (antibiotics for fever or the preceding viral illness) or provoked the first symptom of a preexisting disease (petechiae by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents administered to the thrombocytopenic patient). In the context of total drug use, idiosyncratic reactions, although individually devastating, are rare events. Risk estimates are usually lower when determined in population-based studies; furthermore, the low absolute risk is also made more obvious: even a ten- or twenty-fold increase in risk translates, in a rare disease, to but a handful of drug-induced aplastic anemia cases among hundreds of thousands of exposed persons.

Table 107每3 Some Drugs and Chemicals Associated with Aplastic Anemia

 
 
Agents that regularly produce marrow depression as major toxicity in commonly employed doses or normal exposures: 
  Cytotoxic drugs used in cancer chemotherapy: alkylating agents, antimetabolites, antimitotics, some antibiotics  
Agents that frequently but not inevitably produce marrow aplasia: 
  Benzene  
Agents associated with aplastic anemia but with a relatively low probability: 
  Chloramphenicol
 
  Insecticides
 
  Antiprotozoals: quinacrine and chloroquine, mepacrine
 
  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (including phenylbutazone,
 
  indomethacin, ibuprofen, sulindac, aspirin)
 
  Anticonvulsants (hydantoins, carbamazepine, phenacemide, felbamate)
 
  Heavy metals (gold, arsenic, bismuth, mercury)
 
  Sulfonamides: some antibiotics, antithyroid drugs (methimazole, methylthiouracil, propylthiouracil), antidiabetes drugs (tolbutamide, chlorpropamide), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (acetazolamide and methazolamide)
 
  Antihistamines (cimetidine, chlorpheniramine)
 
  d-Penicillamine
 
  Estrogens (in pregnancy and in high doses in animals)
 
Agents whose association with aplastic anemia is more tenuous: 
  Other antibiotics (streptomycin, tetracycline, methicillin,
 
  mebendazole, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, flucytosine)
 
  Sedatives and tranquilizers (chlorpromazine, prochlorperazine,
 
  piperacetazine, chlordiazepoxide, meprobamate, methyprylon)
 
  Allopurinol
 
  Methyldopa
 
  Quinidine
 
  Lithium
 
  Guanidine
 
  Potassium perchlorate
 
  Thiocyanate
 
  Carbimazole
 
 


Note: Terms set in italic show the most consistent association with aplastic anemia.
 

Infections

Hepatitis is the most common preceding infection, and posthepatitis marrow failure accounts for approximately 5% of etiologies in most series. Patients are usually young men who have recovered from a bout of liver inflammation 1 to 2 months earlier; the subsequent pancytopenia is very severe. The hepatitis is seronegative (non-A, non-B, non-C) and possibly due to an as yet undiscovered infectious agent. Fulminant liver failure in childhood also follows seronegative hepatitis, and marrow failure occurs at a high rate in these patients. Aplastic anemia can rarely follow infectious mononucleosis. Parvovirus B19, the cause of transient aplastic crisis in hemolytic anemias and of some PRCAs (see below), does not usually cause generalized bone marrow failure. Mild blood count depression is frequent in the course of many viral and bacterial infections but resolves with the infection.

Immunologic Diseases

Aplasia is a major consequence and the inevitable cause of death in transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) that can occur after infusion of nonirradiated blood products to an immunodeficient recipient. Aplastic anemia is strongly associated with the rare collagen vascular syndrome eosinophilic fasciitis that is characterized by painful induration of subcutaneous tissues (Chap. 323). Pancytopenia with marrow hypoplasia can also occur in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

Pregnancy

Aplastic anemia very rarely may occur and recur during pregnancy and resolve with delivery or with spontaneous or induced abortion.

Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria

An acquired mutation in the PIG-A gene in a hematopoietic stem cell is required for the development of PNH, but PIG-A mutations probably occur commonly in normal individuals. If the PIG-A mutant stem cell proliferates, the result is a clone of progeny deficient in glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked cell surface membrane proteins (Chap. 106). Small clones of deficient cells can be detected by sensitive flow cytometry tests in approximately one-half of patients with aplastic anemia at the time of presentation [and PNH cells are also seen in MDS (see below)]. Functional studies of bone marrow from PNH patients, even those with mainly hemolytic manifestations, show evidence of defective hematopoiesis. Patients with an initial clinical diagnosis of PNH, especially younger individuals, may later develop frank marrow aplasia and pancytopenia; patients with an initial diagnosis of aplastic anemia may suffer from hemolytic PNH years after recovery of blood counts.

Constitutional Disorders

Fanconi's anemia, an autosomal recessive disorder, manifests as congenital developmental anomalies, progressive pancytopenia, and an increased risk of malignancy. Chromosomes in Fanconi's anemia are peculiarly susceptible to DNA cross-linking agents, the basis for a diagnostic assay. Patients with Fanconi's anemia typically have short stature, caf谷 au lait spots, and anomalies involving the thumb, radius, and genitourinary tract. At least 12 different genetic defects (all but one with an identified gene) have been defined; the most common, type A Fanconi's anemia, is due to a mutation in FANCA. Most of the Fanconi's anemia gene products form a protein complex that activates FANCD2 by monoubiquitination to play a role in the cellular response to DNA damage and especially interstrand cross-linking.

Dyskeratosis congenita is characterized by mucous membrane leukoplasia, dystrophic nails, reticular hyperpigmentation, and the development of aplastic anemia in childhood. Dyskeratosis is due to mutations in genes of the telomere repair complex, which acts to maintain telomere length in replicating cells: The X-linked variety is due to mutations in the DKC1 (dyskerin) gene; the more unusual autosomal dominant type is due to mutation in TERC, which encodes an RNA template, and TERT, which encodes the catalytic reverse transcriptase, telomerase. Mutations in TNF2, a component of the shelterin, proteins that bind the telomere DNA, also occur in dyskeratosis.

In Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, marrow failure is seen with pancreatic insufficiency and malabsorption; most patients have compound heterozygous mutations in SBDS that may affect marrow stroma function. 

Mutations in TERT, TERC, TNF2, and SBDS also can occur in patients with apparently acquired aplastic anemia (TERT and TERC mutations also are etiologic in familial pulmonary fibrosis and in some hepatic cirrhosis).
 
Pathophysiology

Bone marrow failure results from severe damage to the hematopoietic cell compartment. In aplastic anemia, replacement of the bone marrow by fat is apparent in the morphology of the biopsy specimen (Fig. 107-1) and MRI of the spine. Cells bearing the CD34 antigen, a marker of early hematopoietic cells, are greatly diminished, and in functional studies, committed and primitive progenitor cells are virtually absent; in vitro assays have suggested that the stem cell pool is reduced to 1% of normal in severe disease at the time of presentation.

Figure 107-1

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Normal bone marrow biopsy. B. Normal bone marrow aspirate smear. The marrow is normally 30每70% cellular, and there is a heterogeneous mix of myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid cells. C. Aplastic anemia biopsy. D. Marrow smear in aplastic anemia. The marrow shows replacement of hematopoietic tissue by fat and only residual stromal and lymphoid cells.
 
 

An intrinsic stem cell defect exists for the constitutional aplastic anemias: Cells from patients with Fanconi's anemia exhibit chromosome damage and death on exposure to certain chemical agents. Telomeres are short in some patients with aplastic anemia, due to heterozygous mutations in genes of the telomere repair complex. Variable penetrance means that TERT and TERC mutations represent risk factors for marrow failure, as family members with the same mutations may have normal or only slight hematologic abnormalities but more subtle evidence of (compensated) hematopoietic insufficiency.

Drug Injury

Extrinsic damage to the marrow follows massive physical or chemical insults such as high doses of radiation and toxic chemicals. For the more common idiosyncratic reaction to modest doses of medical drugs, altered drug metabolism has been invoked as a likely mechanism. The metabolic pathways of many drugs and chemicals, especially if they are polar and have limited water solubility, involve enzymatic degradation to highly reactive electrophilic compounds; these intermediates are toxic because of their propensity to bind to cellular macromolecules. For example, derivative hydroquinones and quinolones are responsible for benzene-induced tissue injury. Excessive generation of toxic intermediates or failure to detoxify the intermediates may be genetically determined and apparent only on specific drug challenge; the complexity and specificity of the pathways imply multiple susceptibility loci and would provide an explanation for the rarity of idiosyncratic drug reactions.

Immune-Mediated Injury

The recovery of marrow function in some patients prepared for bone marrow transplantation with antilymphocyte globulin (ALO) first suggested that aplastic anemia might be immune mediated. Consistent with this hypothesis was the frequent failure of simple bone marrow transplantation from a syngeneic twin, without conditioning cytotoxic chemotherapy, which also argued both against simple stem cell absence as the cause and for the presence of a host factor producing marrow failure. Laboratory data support an important role for the immune system in aplastic anemia. Blood and bone marrow cells of patients can suppress normal hematopoietic progenitor cell growth, and removal of T cells from aplastic anemia bone marrow improves colony formation in vitro. Increased numbers of activated cytotoxic T cell clones are observed in aplastic anemia patients and usually decline with successful immunosuppressive therapy; cytokine measurements show a TH1 immune response [interferon  (IFN ) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)]. Interferon and induce Fas expression on CD34 cells, leading to apoptotic cell death; localization of activated T cells to bone marrow and local production of their soluble factors are probably important in stem cell destruction.

Early immune system events in aplastic anemia are not well understood. An oligoclonal, T cell response implies an antigenic stimulus. Many different exogenous antigens appear capable of initiating a pathologic immune response, but at least some of the T cells may recognize true self-antigens. The rarity of aplastic anemia despite common exposures (medicines, seronegative hepatitis) suggests that genetically determined features of the immune response can convert a normal physiologic response into a sustained abnormal autoimmune process, including polymorphisms in histocompatibility antigens, cytokinegenes, and genes that regulate T cell polarization and effector function.

Clinical Features

History

Aplastic anemia can appear with seeming abruptness or have a more insidious onset. Bleeding is the most common early symptom; a complaint of days to weeks of easy bruising, oozing from the gums, nose bleeds, heavy menstrual flow, and sometimes petechiae will have been noticed. With thrombocytopenia, massive hemorrhage is unusual, but small amounts of bleeding in the central nervous system can result in catastrophic intracranial or retinal hemorrhage. Symptoms of anemia are also frequent, including lassitude, weakness, shortness of breath, and a pounding sensation in the ears. Infection is an unusual first symptom in aplastic anemia (unlike in agranulocytosis, where pharyngitis, anorectal infection, or frank sepsis occur early). A striking feature of aplastic anemia is the restriction of symptoms to the hematologic system, and patients often feel and look remarkably well despite drastically reduced blood counts. Systemic complaints and weight loss should point to other etiologies of pancytopenia. Prior drug use, chemical exposure, and preceding viral illnesses must often be elicited with repeated questioning. A family history of hematologic diseases or blood abnormalities, and of pulmonary or liver fibrosis, may indicate a constitutional etiology of marrow failure.

Physical Examination

Petechiae and ecchymoses are typical, and retinal hemorrhages may be present. Pelvic and rectal examinations can often be deferred but, when performed, should be undertaken with great gentleness to avoid trauma; these will often show bleeding from the cervical os and blood in the stool. Pallor of the skin and mucous membranes is common except in the most acute cases or those already transfused. Infection on presentation is unusual but may occur if the patient has been symptomatic for a few weeks. Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are highly atypical of aplastic anemia. Caf谷 au lait spots and short stature suggest Fanconi's anemia; peculiar nails and leukoplakia suggest dyskeratosis congenita.

Laboratory Studies

Blood

The smear shows large erythrocytes and a paucity of platelets and granulocytes. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is commonly increased. Reticulocytes are absent or few, and lymphocyte numbers may be normal or reduced. The presence of immature myeloid forms suggests leukemia or MDS; nucleated RBCs suggest marrow fibrosis or tumor invasion; abnormal platelets suggest either peripheral destruction or MDS.

Bone Marrow

The bone marrow is usually readily aspirated but dilute on smear, and the fatty biopsy specimen may be grossly pale on withdrawal; a "dry tap" instead suggests fibrosis or myelophthisis. In severe aplasia the smear of the aspirated specimen shows only red cells, residual lymphocytes, and stromal cells; the biopsy (which should be >1 cm in length) is superior for determination of cellularity and shows mainly fat under the microscope, with hematopoietic cells occupying <25% of the marrow space; in the most serious cases the biopsy is virtually 100% fat. The correlation between marrow cellularity and disease severity is imperfect, in part because marrow cellularity declines physiologically with aging. Additionally, some patients with moderate disease by blood counts will have empty iliac crest biopsies, while "hot spots" of hematopoiesis may be seen in severe cases. If an iliac crest specimen is inadequate, cells may also be obtained by aspiration from the sternum. Residual hematopoietic cells should have normal morphology, except for mildly megaloblastic erythropoiesis; megakaryocytes are invariably greatly reduced and usually absent. Granulomas may indicate an infectious etiology of the marrow failure.

Ancillary Studies

Chromosome breakage studies of peripheral blood using diepoxybutane or mitomycin C should be performed on children and younger adults to exclude Fanconi's anemia. Very short telomere length (available commercially) strongly suggests the presence of a telomerase or shelterin mutation, which can be pursued by family studies and nucleotide sequencing. Chromosome studies of bone marrow cells are often revealing in MDS and should be negative in typical aplastic anemia. Flow cytometry offers a sensitive diagnostic test for PNH. Serologic studies may show evidence of viral infection, such as Epstein-Barr virus and HIV. Posthepatitis aplastic anemia is seronegative. The spleen size should be determined by CT scanning or ultrasound if the physical examination of the abdomen is unsatisfactory. MRI may be helpful to assess the fat content of a few vertebrae in order to distinguish aplasia from MDS.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of aplastic anemia is usually straightforward, based on the combination of pancytopenia with a fatty bone marrow. Aplastic anemia is a disease of the young and should be a leading diagnosis in the pancytopenic adolescent or young adult. When pancytopenia is secondary, the primary diagnosis is usually obvious from either history or physical examination: the massive spleen of alcoholic cirrhosis, the history of metastatic cancer or SLE, or miliary tuberculosis on chest radiograph (Table 107每1).

Diagnostic problems can occur with atypical presentations and among related hematologic diseases. Although pancytopenia is most common, some patients with bone marrow hypocellularity have depression of only one or two of three blood lines, with later progression to pancytopenia. The bone marrow in constitutional aplastic anemia is indistinguishable morphologically from the aspirate in acquired disease. The diagnosis can be suggested by family history, abnormal blood counts since childhood, or the presence of associated physical anomalies. Aplastic anemia may be difficult to distinguish from the hypocellular variety of MDS: MDS is favored by finding morphologic abnormalities, particularly of megakaryocytes and myeloid precursor cells, and typical cytogenetic abnormalities (see below).

Prognosis

The natural history of severe aplastic anemia is rapid deterioration and death. Provision first of RBC and later of platelet transfusions and effective antibiotics are of some benefit, but few patients show spontaneous recovery. The major prognostic determinant is the blood count. Historically, severe disease was defined by the presence of two of three parameters: absolute neutrophil count <500/L, platelet count <20,000/L, and corrected reticulocyte count <1% (or absolute reticulocyte count <60,000/L). In the era of effective immunosuppressive therapies, absolute numbers of reticulocytes (>25,000/uL) and lymphocytes (>1000/uL) may be a better predictor of response to treatment and long-term outcome.

Treatment: Aplastic Anemia

Severe acquired aplastic anemia can be cured by replacement of the absent hematopoietic cells (and the immune system) by stem cell transplant, or it can be ameliorated by suppression of the immune system to allow recovery of the patient's residual bone marrow function. Hematopoietic growth factors have limited usefulness, and glucocorticoids are of no value. Suspect exposures to drugs or chemicals should be discontinued; however, spontaneous recovery of severe blood count depression is rare, and a waiting period before beginning treatment may not be advisable unless the blood counts are only modestly depressed.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

This is the best therapy for the younger patient with a fully histocompatible sibling donor (Chap. 114). Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing should be ordered as soon as the diagnosis of aplastic anemia is established in a child or younger adult. In transplant candidates, transfusion of blood from family members should be avoided so as to prevent sensitization to histocompatibility antigens, but limited numbers of blood products probably do not greatly affect outcome. For allogeneic transplant from fully matched siblings, long-term survival rates for children are approximately 90%. Transplant morbidity and mortality are increased among adults, due mainly to the higher risk of chronic GVHD and serious infections.

Most patients do not have a suitable sibling donor. Occasionally, a full phenotypic match can be found within the family and serve as well. Far more available are other alternative donors, either unrelated but histocompatible volunteers or closely but not perfectly matched family members. High resolution matching at HLA, as well as more effective conditioning regimens and GVHD prophylaxis, have led to improving survival rates in those patients who do proceed to alternative donor transplant, in some series approximating results with conventional sibling donors. Patients will be at risk for late complications, especially a higher rate of cancer, if radiation is used as a component of conditioning.

Immunosuppression

The standard regimen of ATG in combination with cyclosporine induces hematologic recovery (independence from transfusion and a leukocyte count adequate to prevent infection) in 60每60% of patients. Children do especially well, while older adult patients often suffer complications due to the presence of comorbidities. An early robust hematologic response correlates with long-term survival. Improvement in granulocyte number is generally apparent within 2 months of treatment. Most recovered patients continue to have some degree of blood count depression, the MCV remains elevated, and the bone marrow cellularity returns toward normal very slowly if at all. Relapse (recurrent pancytopenia) is frequent, often occurring as cyclosporine is discontinued; most, but not all, patients respond to reinstitution of immunosuppression, but some responders become dependent on continued cyclosporine administration. Development of MDS, with typical marrow morphologic or cytogenetic abnormalities, occurs in approximately 15% of treated patients, usually but not invariably associated with a return of pancytopenia, and some patients develop leukemia. A laboratory diagnosis of PNH can generally be made at the time of presentation of aplastic anemia by flow cytometry; recovered patients may have frank hemolysis if the PNH clone expands. Bone marrow examinations should be performed if there is an unfavorable change in blood counts.

Horse ATG and rabbit antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) are administered as intravenous infusions over 4 or 5 days, respectively. ATG binds to peripheral blood cells; therefore, platelet and granulocyte numbers may decrease further during active treatment. Serum sickness, a flulike illness with a characteristic cutaneous eruption and arthralgia, often develops approximately 10 days after initiating treatment. Methylprednisolone, 1 mg/kg per d for 2 weeks, can ameliorate the immune consequences of heterologous protein infusion. Excessive or extended glucocorticoid therapy is associated with avascular joint necrosis. Cyclosporine is administered orally at an initial high dose, with subsequent adjustment according to blood levels obtained every 2 weeks, rough levels should be between 150 and 200 ng/mL. The most important side effects are nephrotoxicity, hypertension, seizures, and opportunistic infections, especially Pneumocystis carinii (prophylactic treatment with monthly inhaled pentamidine is recommended).

Most patients with aplastic anemia lack a suitable marrow donor, and immunosuppression is the treatment of choice. Overall survival is equivalent with transplantation and immunosuppression. However, successful transplant cures marrow failure, whereas patients who recover adequate blood counts after immunosuppression remain at risk of relapse and malignant evolution. Because of excellent results in children and younger adults, allogeneic transplant should be performed if a suitable sibling donor is available. Increasing age and the severity of neutropenia are the most important factors weighing in the decision between transplant and immunosuppression in adults who have a matched family donor: Older patients do better with ATG and cyclosporine, whereas transplant is preferred if granulocytopenia is profound. Some patients may prefer immunosuppression; transplant is used for failure to recover blood counts or occurrence of late complications.

Outcomes following both transplant and immunosuppression have improved with time. High doses of cyclophosphamide, without stem cell rescue, have been reported to produce durable hematologic recovery, without relapse or evolution to MDS, but this treatment can produce sustained severe fatal neutropenia, and response is often delayed.

Other Therapies

The effectiveness of androgens has not been verified in controlled trials, but occasional patients will respond or even demonstrate blood count dependence on continued therapy. Sex hormones upregulate telomerase gene activity in vitro, possibly also their mechanism of action in improving marrow function. For patients with moderate disease or those with severe pancytopenia in whom immunosuppression has failed, a 3每4-month trial is appropriate. Hematopoietic growth factors (HGFs) are not recommended as initial therapy for severe aplastic anemia, and even their roles as adjuncts to immunosuppression are not clear.

Supportive Care

Meticulous medical attention is required so that the patient may survive to benefit from definitive therapy or, having failed treatment, to maintain a reasonable existence in the face of pancytopenia. First and most important, infection in the presence of severe neutropenia must be aggressively treated by prompt institution of parenteral, broad-spectrum antibiotics, usually ceftazidime or a combination of an aminoglycoside, cephalosporin, and semisynthetic penicillin. Therapy is empirical and must not await results of culture, although specific foci of infection such as oropharyngeal or anorectal abscesses, pneumonia, sinusitis, and typhlitis (necrotizing colitis) should be sought on physical examination and with radiographic studies. When indwelling plastic catheters become contaminated, vancomycin should be added. Persistent or recrudescent fever implies fungal disease: Candida and Aspergillus are common, especially after several courses of antibacterial antibiotics. A major reason for the improved prognosis in aplastic anemia has been the development of better antifungal drugs and the timely institution of such therapy when infection is suspected. Granulocyte transfusions using granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)〞mobilized peripheral blood may be effective in the treatment of overwhelming or refractory infections. Hand washing, the single best method of preventing the spread of infection, remains a neglected practice. Nonabsorbed antibiotics for gut decontamination are poorly tolerated and not of proven value. Total reverse isolation does not reduce mortality from infections.

Both platelet and erythrocyte numbers can be maintained by transfusion. Alloimmunization historically limited the usefulness of platelet transfusions and is now minimized by several strategies, including use of single donors to reduce exposure and physical or chemical methods to diminish leukocytes in the product; HLA-matched platelets are often effective in patients refractory to random donor products. Inhibitors of fibrinolysis such as aminocaproic acid have not been shown to relieve mucosal oozing; the use of low-dose glucocorticoids to induce "vascular stability" is unproven and not recommended. Whether platelet transfusions are better used prophylactically or only as needed remains unclear. Any rational regimen of prophylaxis requires transfusions once or twice weekly to maintain the platelet count >10,000/L (oozing from the gut, and presumably also from other vascular beds, increases precipitously at counts <5000/L). Menstruation should be suppressed either by oral estrogens or nasal follicle-stimulating hormone/luteinizing hormone (FSH/LH) antagonists. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents inhibit platelet function and must be avoided.

Red blood cells should be transfused to maintain a normal level of activity, usually at a hemoglobin value of 70 g/L (90 g/L if there is underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease); a regimen of 2 units every 2 weeks will replace normal losses in a patient without a functioning bone marrow. In chronic anemia, the iron chelators, deferoxamine and deferasirox, should be added at approximately the fiftieth transfusion to avoid secondary hemochromatosis.
 
Pure Red Cell Aplasia

Other, more restricted forms of marrow failure occur, in which only a single circulating cell type is affected and the marrow shows corresponding absence or decreased numbers of specific precursor cells: aregenerative anemia as in PRCA (see below), thrombocytopenia with amegakaryocytosis (Chap. 115), and neutropenia without marrow myeloid cells in agranulocytosis (Chap. 60). In general, and in contrast to aplastic anemia and MDS, the unaffected lineages appear quantitatively and qualitatively normal. Agranulocytosis, the most frequent of these syndromes, is usually a complication of medical drug use (with agents similar to those related to aplastic anemia), either by a mechanism of direct chemical toxicity or by immune destruction. Agranulocytosis has an incidence similar to aplastic anemia but is especially frequent among older adults and in women. The syndrome should resolve with discontinuation of exposure, but significant mortality is attached to neutropenia in the older and often previously unwell patient. Both pure white cell aplasia (agranulocytosis without incriminating drug exposure) and amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia are exceedingly rare and, like PRCA, appear to be due to destructive antibodies or lymphocytes and can respond to immunosuppressive therapies. In all the single lineage failure syndromes, progression to pancytopenia or leukemia is unusual.

Definition and Differential Diagnosis

PRCA is characterized by anemia, reticulocytopenia, and absent or rare erythroid precursor cells in the bone marrow. The classification of PRCA is shown in Table 107每4. In adults, PRCA is acquired. An identical syndrome can occur constitutionally: Diamond-Blackfan anemia, or congenital PRCA, is diagnosed at birth or in early childhood and often responds to glucocorticoid treatment; mutations in ribosomal RNA processing genes are etiologic. Temporary red cell failure occurs in transient aplastic crisis of hemolytic anemias due to acute parvovirus infection (Chap. 184) and in transient erythroblastopenia of childhood, which affects normal children.

Table 107每4 Classification of Pure Red Cell Aplasia

 
 
Self-limited 
  Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood 
  Transient aplastic crisis of hemolysis (acute B19 parvovirus infection) 
Fetal red blood cell aplasia 
  Nonimmune hydrops fetalis (in utero B19 parvovirus infection) 
Hereditary pure red cell aplasia 
  Congenital pure red cell aplasia (Diamond-Blackfan syndrome) 
Acquired pure red cell aplasia 
  Thymoma and malignancy 
    Thymoma 
    Lymphoid malignancies (and more rarely other hematologic diseases) 
    Paraneoplastic to solid tumors 
  Connective tissue disorders with immunologic abnormalities 
    Systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis 
    Multiple endocrine gland insufficiency 
  Virus 
     Persistent B19 parvovirus, hepatitis, adult T cell leukemia virus, Epstein-Barr virus
 
  Pregnancy 
  Drugs 
    Especially phenytoin, azathioprine, chloramphenicol, procainamide, isoniazid 
    Erythropoietin 
Idiopathic 
 

 

Clinical Associations and Etiology

PRCA has important associations with immune system diseases. A small minority of cases occur with a thymoma. More frequently, red cell aplasia can be the major manifestation of large granular lymphocytosis or may occur in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Some patients may be hypogammaglobulinemic. Infrequently (compared to agranulocytosis), PRCA can be due to an idiosyncratic drug reaction. Subcutaneous administration of erythropoietin (EPO) has provoked PRCA mediated by neutralizing antibodies.

Like aplastic anemia, PRCA results from diverse mechanisms. Antibodies to RBC precursors are frequently present in the blood, but T cell inhibition is probably the more common immune mechanism. Cytotoxic lymphocyte activity restricted by histocompatibility locus or specific for human T cell leukemia/lymphoma virus I〞infected cells, as well as natural killer cell activity inhibitory of erythropoiesis, have been demonstrated in particularly well-studied individual cases.

Persistent Parvovirus B19 Infection

Chronic parvovirus infection is an important, treatable cause of PRCA. This common virus causes a benign exanthem of childhood (fifth disease) and a polyarthralgia/arthritis syndrome in adults. In patients with underlying hemolysis (or any condition that increases demand for RBC production), parvovirus infection can cause a transient aplastic crisis and an abrupt but temporary worsening of the anemia due to failed erythropoiesis. In normal individuals, acute infection is resolved by production of neutralizing antibodies to the virus, but in the setting of congenital, acquired, or iatrogenic immunodeficiency, persistent viral infection may occur. The bone marrow shows red cell aplasia and the presence of giant pronormoblasts (Fig. 107-2), which is the cytopathic sign of B19 parvovirus infection. Viral tropism for human erythroid progenitor cells is due to its use of erythrocyte P antigen as a cellular receptor for entry. Direct cytotoxicity of virus causes anemia if demands on erythrocyte production are high; in normal individuals, the temporary cessation of red cell production is not clinically apparent, and skin and joint symptoms are mediated by immune complex deposition.

Figure 107-2

 
 
 
 
 
 
Pathognomonic cells in marrow failure syndromes. A. Giant pronormoblast, the cytopathic effect of B19 parvovirus infection of the erythroid progenitor cell. B. Uninuclear megakaryocyte and microblastic erythroid precursors typical of the 5q每myelodysplasia syndrome. C. Ringed sideroblast showing perinuclear iron granules. D. Tumor cells present on a touch preparation made from the marrow biopsy of a patient with metastatic carcinoma.
 
 

Treatment: Pure Red Cell Aplasia

History, physical examination, and routine laboratory studies may disclose an underlying disease or a drug exposure. Thymoma should be sought by radiographic procedures. Tumor excision is indicated, but anemia does not necessarily improve with surgery. The diagnosis of parvovirus infection requires detection of viral DNA sequences in the blood (IgG and IgM antibodies are commonly absent). The presence of erythroid colonies has been considered predictive of response to immunosuppressive therapy in idiopathic PRCA. 

Red cell aplasia is compatible with long-term survival with supportive care alone: a combination of erythrocyte transfusions and iron chelation. For persistent B19 parvovirus infection, almost all patients respond to intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (e.g., 0.4 g/kg daily for 5 days), although relapse and retreatment may be expected, especially in patients with AIDS. The majority of patients with idiopathic PRCA respond favorably to immunosuppression. Most first receive a course of glucocorticoids. Also effective are cyclosporine, ATG, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and the monoclonal antibody daclizumab, an antibody to the high affinity IL-2 receptor. PRCA developing on EPO therapy should be treated with immunosuppression and withdrawal of EPO.
 
Myelodysplasia

Definition

Myelodysplasia or the MDSs are a heterogeneous group of hematologic disorders broadly characterized by cytopenias associated with a dysmorphic (or abnormal appearing) and usually cellular bone marrow, and by consequent ineffective blood cell production. A clinically useful nosology of these entities was first developed by the French-American-British Cooperative Group in 1983. Five entities were defined: refractory anemia (RA), refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation (RAEB-t), and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). The World Health Organization (WHO) classification (2002) recognized that the distinction between RAEB-t and acute myeloid leukemia is arbitrary and groups them together as acute leukemia, that CMML behaves as a myeloproliferative disease, and separated refractory anemias with dysmorphic change restricted to erythroid lineage from those with multilineage changes. In a revision, specific categories for unilineage dysplasias were added (Table 107每5).

Table 107每5 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Myelodysplastic Syndromes/Neoplasms

 
 
Name WHO Estimated Proportion of Patients with MDS Peripheral Blood: Key Features Bone Marrow: Key Features 
Refractory cytopenias with unilineage dysplasia (RCUD):        
  Refractory anemia (RA) 10-20% Anemia <1% of blasts Unilineage erythroid dysplasia (in 10% of cells) <5% blasts 
  Refractory neutropenia (RN) <1% Neutropenia <1% blasts Unilineage granulocytic dysplasia <5% blasts 
  Refractory thrombocytopenia (RT) <1% Thrombocytopenia <1% blasts Unilineage megakaryocytic dysplasia <5% blasts 
Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) 3-11% Anemia No blasts Unilineage erythroid dysplasia 15% of erythroid precursors are ring sideroblasts <5% blasts 
Refractory cytopenias with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD) 30% Cytopenia(s) <1% blasts No Auer rods Multilineage dysplasia ㊣ ring sideroblasts <5% blasts No Auer rods 
Refractory anemia with excess blasts, Type 1 (RAEB-1) 40% Cytopenia(s) <5% blasts No Auer rods Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia 
Refractory anemia with excess blasts, type 2 (RAEB-2)   Cytopenia(s) 5-19% blasts ㊣ Auer rods Unilineage or multilineage dysplasia 10-19% blasts ㊣ Auer rods 
MDS associated with isolated Del(5q) (Del(5q) Uncommon Anemia Normal or high platelet count <1% blasts Isolated 5q31 chromosome deletion Anemia; hypolobated megakaryocytes <5% blasts 
Childhood MDS, including refractory cytopenia of childhood (provisional?) (RCC)  <1 % Pancytopenia <5% marrow blasts for RCC

Marrow usually hypocellular
 
MDS, unclassifiable (MDS-U) ? Cytopenia

1% blasts
 Does not fit other categories

Dysplasia <5% blasts

If no dysplasia, MDS-associated karyotype
 
 


Note: If peripheral blood blasts are 2每4%, the diagnosis is RAEB-1 even if marrow blasts are less than 5%. If Auer rods are present, the WHO considers the diagnosis RAEB-2 if the blast proportion is less than 20% (even if less than 10%), AML if at least 20% blasts. For all subtypes, peripheral blood monocytes are less than 1 x 109/L. Bicytopenia may be observed in RCUD subtypes, but pancytopenia with unilineage marrow dysplasia should be classified as MDS-U. Therapy-related MDS (t-MDS), whether due to alkylating agents, topoisomerase II (t-MDS/t-AML) in the WHO classification of AML and precursor lesions. The listing in this table excludes MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasm overlap categories, such as chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, and the provisional entity RARS with thrombocytosis.

Abbreviation: MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.
 

The diagnosis of MDS may be a challenge, as sometimes subtle clinical and pathologic features must be distinguished in a usually older adult patient >70 years of age with comorbidities; furthermore, precise diagnostic categorization requires a hematopathologist knowledgeable in the latest classification scheme. Nonetheless, it is important that the internist and primary care physician be sufficiently familiar with MDS to expedite referral to a hematologist, both because many new therapies are now available to improve hematopoietic function and the judicious use of supportive care can improve the patient's quality of life.

Epidemiology

Idiopathic MDS is a disease of the older adult; the mean age at onset is older than 70 years. There is a slight male preponderance. MDS is a relatively common form of bone marrow failure, with reported incidence rates of 35 to >100 per million persons in the general population and 120 to >500 per million in the older adult. MDS is rare in children, but monocytic leukemia can be seen. Secondary or therapy-related MDS is not age related. Rates of MDS have increased over time, due to the recognition of the syndrome by physicians and the aging of the population.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

MDS is associated with environmental exposures such as radiation and benzene; other risk factors have been reported inconsistently. Secondary MDS occurs as a late toxicity of cancer treatment, usually with a combination of radiation and the radiomimetic alkylating agents such as busulfan, nitrosourea, or procarbazine (with a latent period of 5每7 years) or the DNA topoisomerase inhibitors (2 years). Both acquired aplastic anemia following immunosuppressive treatment and Fanconi's anemia can evolve into MDS.

MDS is a clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorder leading to impaired cell proliferation and differentiation. Cytogenetic abnormalities are found in approximately one-half of patients, and some of the same specific lesions are also seen in frank leukemia; aneuploidy is more frequent than translocations. Both presenting and evolving hematologic manifestations result from the accumulation of multiple genetic lesions: loss of tumor suppressor genes, activating oncogene mutations, or other harmful alterations. Cytogenetic abnormalities are not random (loss of all or part of 5, 7, and 20, trisomy of 8) and may be related to etiology (11q23 following topoisomerase II inhibitors); CMML is often associated with t(5;12) that creates a chimeric tel-PDGF gene. The type and number of cytogenetic abnormalities strongly correlate with the probability of leukemic transformation and survival. Mutations of N-ras (an oncogene), p53 and IRF-1 (tumor suppressor genes), Bcl-2 (an antiapoptotic gene), and others have been reported in some patients but likely occur late in the sequence leading to leukemic transformation. Apoptosis of marrow cells is increased in early stage and low-risk categories of MDS, presumably due to these acquired genetic alterations or possibly to an overlaid immune response. An immune pathophysiology has been suggested for trisomy 8 MDS, which often responds clinically to immunosuppressive therapy. Such patients have T cell activity directed to the cytogenetically aberrant clone. Sideroblastic anemia may be related to mutations in mitochondrial genes; ineffective erythropoiesis and disordered iron metabolism are the functional consequences of the genetic alterations.

Clinical Features

Anemia dominates the early course. Most symptomatic patients complain of the gradual onset of fatigue and weakness, dyspnea, and pallor, but at least one-half the patients are asymptomatic, and their MDS is discovered only incidentally on routine blood counts. Previous chemotherapy or radiation exposure is an important historic fact. Fever and weight loss should point to a myeloproliferative rather than myelodysplastic process. Children with Down syndrome are susceptible to MDS, and a family history may indicate a hereditary form of sideroblastic anemia or Fanconi's anemia.

The physical examination is remarkable for signs of anemia; approximately 20% of patients have splenomegaly. Some unusual skin lesions, including Sweet's syndrome (febrile neutrophilic dermatosis), occur with MDS. Autoimmune syndromes are not infrequent.

Laboratory Studies

Blood

Anemia is present in the majority of cases, either alone or as part of bi- or pancytopenia; isolated neutropenia or thrombocytopenia is more unusual. Macrocytosis is common, and the smear may be dimorphic with a distinctive population of large red blood cells. Platelets are also large and lack granules. In functional studies, they may show marked abnormalities, and patients may have bleeding symptoms despite seemingly adequate numbers. Neutrophils are hypogranulated; have hyposegmented, ringed, or abnormally segmented nuclei; contain D?hle bodies; and may be functionally deficient. Circulating myeloblasts usually correlate with marrow blast numbers, and their quantitation is important for classification and prognosis. The total white blood cell count (WBC) is usually normal or low, except in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. As in aplastic anemia, MDS can be associated with a clonal population of PNH cells.

Bone Marrow

The bone marrow is usually normal or hypercellular, but in 20% of cases it is sufficiently hypocellular to be confused with aplasia. No single characteristic feature of marrow morphology distinguishes MDS, but the following are commonly observed: dyserythropoietic changes (especially nuclear abnormalities) and ringed sideroblasts in the erythroid lineage; hypogranulation and hyposegmentation in granulocytic precursors, with an increase in myeloblasts; and megakaryocytes showing reduced numbers or disorganized nuclei. Megaloblastic nuclei associated with defective hemoglobinization in the erythroid lineage are common. Prognosis strongly correlates with the proportion of marrow blasts. Cytogenetic analysis and fluorescent in situ hybridization can identify chromosomal abnormalities.

Differential Diagnosis

Deficiencies of vitamin B12 or folate should be excluded by appropriate blood tests; vitamin B6 deficiency can be assessed by a therapeutic trial of pyridoxine if the bone marrow shows ringed sideroblasts. Marrow dysplasia can be observed in acute viral infections, drug reactions, or chemical toxicity but should be transient. More difficult are the distinctions between hypocellular MDS and aplasia or between refractory anemia with excess blasts and early acute leukemia. The WHO considers the presence of 20% blasts in the marrow as the criterion that separates acute myeloid leukemia (AML) from MDS.

Prognosis

The median survival varies greatly from years for patients with 5q〞or sideroblastic anemia to a few months in refractory anemia with excess blasts or severe pancytopenia associated with monosomy 7; an International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS; Table 107每6) assists in making predictions. Most patients die as a result of complications of pancytopenia and not due to leukemic transformation; perhaps one-third will succumb to other diseases unrelated to their MDS. Precipitous worsening of pancytopenia, acquisition of new chromosomal abnormalities on serial cytogenetic determination, increase in the number of blasts, and marrow fibrosis are all poor prognostic indicators. The outlook in therapy-related MDS, regardless of type, is extremely poor, and most patients will progress within a few months to refractory AML.

Table 107每6 International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS)

 
 
  Score Value 
Prognostic Variable 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 
Bone marrow blasts (%) <5% 5每10%   11每20% 21每30% 
Karyotypea  Good Intermediate Poor     
Cytopeniab (lineages affected)  0 or 1 2 or 3       
Risk Group Scores  Score          
  Low 0         
  Intermediate-1 0.5每1         
  Intermediate-2 1.5每2         
  High 2.5         
 


aGood, normal, -Y, del(5q), del (20q); poor, complex (3 abnormalities) or chromosome 7 abnormalities; intermediate, all other abnormalities.

bCytopenias defined as Hb <100 g/L, platelet count <100,000/L, absolute neutrophil count <1500/L.
 

Treatment: Myelodysplasia

Historically, the therapy of MDS has been unsatisfactory. Only stem cell transplantation offers cure. Survival rates of 50% at 3 years have been reported, but older patients are particularly prone to develop treatment-related mortality and morbidity. Results of transplant using matched unrelated donors are comparable, although most series contain younger and more highly selected cases. However, multiple new drugs have been approved for use in MDS. Several regimens appear to not only improve blood counts but to delay onset of leukemia and to improve survival. The choice of therapy and implementation of treatment are complicated and require hematologic expertise.

MDS has been regarded as particularly refractory to cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens but is probably no more resistant to effective treatment than AML in the older adult, in whom drug toxicity is often fatal and remissions, if achieved, are brief.

Low doses of cytotoxic drugs have been administered for their "differentiating" potential, and from this experience has emerged drug therapies based on pyrimidine analogues. Azacitidine is directly cytotoxic but also inhibits DNA methylation, thereby altering gene expression; however, demethylation status has not correlated well with clinical effects Azacitidine improves blood counts and also survival in a minority of MDS patients, compared to best supportive care. Azacitidine has been administered subcutaneously, daily for 7 days, at 4-week intervals, for at least four cycles before assessing for response. Decitabine is closely related to azacitidine and more potent. Similar to azacitidine, approximately 20% of patients show responses in blood counts, with a duration of response of almost a year. Activity may be higher in more advanced MDS subtypes. Decitabine is administered by continuous intravenous infusion, every 8 hours for 3 days, in repeating cycles. The optimal dose regimens for both azacitidine and decitabine are still being determined in clinical research protocols. The major toxicity of both azacitidine and decitabine is myelosuppression, leading to worsened blood counts. Other symptoms associated with cancer chemotherapy frequently occur.

Lenalidomide, a thalidomide derivative with a more favorable toxicity profile, is particularly effective in reversing anemia in MDS patients with 5q〞syndrome; not only do a high proportion of these patients become transfusion independent with normal or near-normal hemoglobin levels, but their cytogenetics also become normal. The drug has many biologic activities, and it is unclear which is critical for clinical efficacy. Lenalidomide is administered orally. Most patients will improve within 3 months of initiating therapy. Toxicities include myelosuppression (worsening thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, necessitating blood count monitoring) and an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

ATG and cyclosporine, as employed in aplastic anemia, also may produce sustained independence from transfusion and improve survival. Immunosuppression with ATG or, in more recent studies, the anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody Campath is especially effective in younger MDS patients (younger than age 60 years) with more favorable IPSS scores and who bear the histocompatability antigen HLA-DR15.

HGFs can improve blood counts but, as in most other marrow failure states, have been most beneficial to patients with the least severe pancytopenia. G-CSF treatment alone failed to improve survival in a controlled trial. EPO alone or in combination with G-CSF can improve hemoglobin levels, but mainly in those with low serum EPO levels who have no or only a modest need for transfusions, and retrospective analysis suggests improved survival with treatment

The same principles of supportive care described for aplastic anemia apply to MDS. Despite improvements in drug therapy, many patients will be anemic for years. RBC transfusion support should be accompanied by iron chelation to prevent secondary hemochromatosis.
 
Myelophthisic Anemias

Fibrosis of the bone marrow (see Fig. 103-2), usually accompanied by a characteristic blood smear picture called leukoerythroblastosis, can occur as a primary hematologic disease, called myelofibrosis or myeloid metaplasia (Chap. 108), and as a secondary process, called myelophthisis. Myelophthisis, or secondary myelofibrosis, is reactive. Fibrosis can be a response to invading tumor cells, usually an epithelial cancer of breast, lung, a prostate origin or neuroblastoma. Marrow fibrosis may occur with infection of mycobacteria (both Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M. avium), fungi, or HIV, and in sarcoidosis. Intracellular lipid deposition in Gaucher's disease and obliteration of the marrow space related to absence of osteoclast remodeling in congenital osteopetrosis also can produce fibrosis. Secondary myelofibrosis is a late consequence of radiation therapy or treatment with radiomimetic drugs. Usually the infectious or malignant underlying processes are obvious. Marrow fibrosis can also be a feature of a variety of hematologic syndromes, especially chronic myeloid leukemia, multiple myeloma, lymphomas, myeloma, and hairy cell leukemia.

The pathophysiology has three distinct features: proliferation of fibroblasts in the marrow space (myelofibrosis); the extension of hematopoiesis into the long bones and into extramedullary sites, usually the spleen, liver, and lymph nodes (myeloid metaplasia); and ineffective erythropoiesis. The etiology of the fibrosis is unknown but most likely involves dysregulated production of growth factors: Platelet-derived growth factor and transforming growth factor  have been implicated. Abnormal regulation of other hematopoietins would lead to localization of blood-producing cells in nonhematopoietic tissues and uncoupling of the usually balanced processes of stem cell proliferation and differentiation. Myelofibrosis is remarkable for pancytopenia despite very large numbers of circulating hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Anemia is dominant in secondary myelofibrosis, usually normocytic and normochromic. The diagnosis is suggested by the characteristic leukoerythroblastic smear (see Fig. 108-1). Erythrocyte morphology is highly abnormal, with circulating nucleated RBCs, teardrops, and shape distortions. WBC numbers are often elevated, sometimes mimicking a leukemoid reaction, with circulating myelocytes, promyelocytes, and myeloblasts. Platelets may be abundant and are often of giant size. Inability to aspirate the bone marrow, the characteristic "dry tap," can allow a presumptive diagnosis in the appropriate setting before the biopsy is decalcified.

The course of secondary myelofibrosis is determined by its etiology, usually a metastatic tumor or an advanced hematologicmalignancy. Treatable causes must be excluded, especially tuberculosis and fungus. Transfusion support can relieve symptoms.
 
Further Readings

Ades L et al: Efficacy and safety of lenalidomide in intermediate-2 or high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes with 5q deletion: Results of a phase 2 study. Blood 113:3947, 2009[PMID: 18987358] 

 
Bagby GC, Alter BP: Fanconi anemia. Semin Hematol 43:147, 2006[PMID: 16822457] 

 
Calado RT, Young NS: Telomere diseases. N Engl J Med 361:2353, 2009[PMID: 20007561] 

 
Estey E et al: Acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in older patients. J Clin Oncol 25:1908, 2007[PMID: 17488990] 

 
Fenaux P et al: Efficacy of azacitidine compared with that of standard care regimens in the treatment of higher-risk myelodysplastic syndromes: A randomized, open-label, phase III trial. Lancet Oncol 10:223, 2009[PMID: 19230772] 

 
Flygare J, Karlsson S: Diamond-Blackfan anemia: Erythropoiesis lost in translation. Blood 109:3152, 2007[PMID: 17164339] 

 
Jadersten M et al: Erythropoietin and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor treatment associated with improved survival in myelodysplastic syndromes. J Clin Oncol 26:3607, 2008[PMID: 18559873] 

 
Ma X et al: Myelodysplastic syndromes: Incidence and survival in the United States. Cancer 109:1536, 2007[PMID: 17345612] 

 
Young NS, Brown KE: Parvovirus B19. N Engl J Med 350:586, 2004[PMID: 14762186] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Current concepts in the pathophysiology and treatment of aplastic anemia. Blood 108:2509, 2006 
 
 

^^
Polycythemia Vera and Other Myeloproliferative Diseases: Introduction

The World Health Organization (WHO) classification of the chronic myeloproliferative diseases (MPDs) includes eight disorders, some of which are rare or poorly characterized (Table 108每1) but all of which share an origin in a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell; overproduction of one or more of the formed elements of the blood without significant dysplasia; a predilection to extramedullary hematopoiesis, myelofibrosis; and transformation at varying rates to acute leukemia. Within this broad classification, however, significant phenotypic heterogeneity exists. Some diseases such as chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL), and chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) express primarily a myeloid phenotype, while in others such as polycythemia vera (PV), primary myelofibrosis (PMF), and essential thrombocytosis (ET), erythroid or megakaryocytic hyperplasia predominates. The latter three disorders, in contrast to the former three, also appear capable of transforming into each other.

Table 108每1 WHO Classification of Chronic Myeloproliferative Disorders

 
 
Chronic myelogenous leukemia, bcr-abl每positive

Chronic neutrophilic leukemia

Chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise specified

Polycythemia vera

Primary myelofibrosis

Essential thrombocytosis

Mastocytosis

Myeloproliferative neoplasms, unclassifiable
 
 

 

Such phenotypic heterogeneity has a genetic basis; CML is the consequence of the balanced translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 [t(9;22)(q34;11)]; CNL has been associated with a t(15;19) translocation; and CEL occurs with a deletion or balanced translocations involving the PDGFR gene. By contrast, to a greater or lesser extent, PV, PMF, and ET are characterized by expression of a JAK2 mutation, V617F that causes constitutive activation of this tyrosine kinase that is essential for the function of the erythropoietin and thrombopoietin receptors but not the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor. This essential distinction is also reflected in the natural history of CML, CNL, and CEL, which is usually measured in years, and their high rate of transformation into acute leukemia. By contrast, the natural history of PV, PMF, and ET is usually measured in decades, and transformation to acute leukemia is uncommon in the absence of exposure to mutagenic agents. This chapter, therefore, will focus only on PV, PMF, and ET, because their clinical overlap is substantial but their clinical courses are distinctly different. 

Other chronic myeloproliferative disorders will be discussed in Chap. 109.
 
Polycythemia Vera

PV is a clonal disorder involving a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell in which phenotypically normal red cells, granulocytes, and platelets accumulate in the absence of a recognizable physiologic stimulus. The most common of the chronic myeloproliferative disorders, PV occurs in 2 per 100,000 persons, sparing no adult age group and increasing with age to rates as high as 18/100,000. Familial transmission occurs but is infrequent and women predominate among sporadic cases.

Etiology

The etiology of PV is unknown. Although nonrandom chromosome abnormalities such as 20q and trisomy 8 and 9 have been documented in up to 30% of untreated PV patients, unlike CML, no consistent cytogenetic abnormality has been associated with the disorder. However, a mutation in the autoinhibitory, pseudokinase domain of the tyrosine kinase JAK2〞that replaces valine with phenylalanine (V617F), causing constitutive activation of the kinase〞appears to have a central role in the pathogenesis of PV.

JAK2 is a member of an evolutionarily well-conserved, nonreceptor tyrosine kinase family and serves as the cognate tyrosine kinase for the erythropoietin and thrombopoietin receptors. It also functions as an obligate chaperone for these receptors in the Golgi apparatus and is responsible for their cell-surface expression. The conformational change induced in the erythropoietin and thrombopoietin receptors following binding to erythropoietin or thrombopoietin leads to JAK2 autophosphorylation, receptor phosphorylation, and phosphorylation of proteins involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, and resistance to apoptosis. Transgenic animals lacking JAK2 die as embryos from severe anemia. Constitutive activation of JAK2 can explain the erythropoietin-independent erythroid colony formation, and the hypersensitivity of PV erythroid progenitor cells to erythropoietin and other hematopoietic growth factors, their resistance to apoptosis in vitro in the absence of erythropoietin, their rapid terminal differentiation, and their increase in Bcl-XL expression, all of which are characteristic in PV.

Importantly, the JAK2 gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 9, and loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 9p, due to mitotic recombination is the most common cytogenetic abnormality in PV. The segment of 9p involved contains the JAK2 locus; loss of heterozygosity in this region leads to homozygosity for the mutant JAK2 V617F. More than 90% of PV patients express this mutation, as do approximately 50% of PMF and ET patients. Homozygosity for the mutation occurs in approximately 30% of PV patients and 60% of PMF patients; homozygosity is rare in ET. Over time, a portion of PV JAK2 V617F heterozygotes become homozygotes due to mitotic recombination, but usually not after 10 years of the disease. PV patients who do not express JAK2 V617F are not clinically different from those who do, nor do JAK2 V617F heterozygotes differ clinically from homozygotes. Interestingly, predisposition to acquire mutations in JAK2 appears to be associated with a specific JAK2 haplotype, GGCC. JAK2 V617F is the basis for many of the phenotypic and biochemical characteristics of PV such as elevation of the leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score; however, it cannot solely account for the entire PV phenotype and is probably not the initiating lesion in the three MPDs. First, some PV patients with the same phenotype and documented clonal disease lack this mutation. Second, ET and PMF patients have the same mutation but different clinical phenotypes. Third, familial PV can occur without the mutation, even when other members of the same family express it. Fourth, not all the cells of the malignant clone express JAK2 V617F. Fifth, JAK2 V617F has been observed in patients with long-standing idiopathic erythrocytosis. Sixth, in some patients, JAK2 V617F appears to be acquired after another mutation. Finally, in some JAK2 V617F-positive PV or ET patients, acute leukemia can occur in a JAK2 V617F-negative progenitor cell. However, while JAK2 V617F alone may not be sufficient to cause PV, it is essential for the transformation of ET to PV, though not for its transformation to PMF.

Clinical Features

Although splenomegaly may be the initial presenting sign in PV, most often the disorder is first recognized by the incidental discovery of a high hemoglobin or hematocrit. With the exception of aquagenic pruritus, no symptoms distinguish PV from other causes of erythrocytosis.

Uncontrolled erythrocytosis causes hyperviscosity, leading to neurologic symptoms such as vertigo, tinnitus, headache, visual disturbances, and transient ischemic attacks (TIAs). Systolic hypertension is also a feature of the red cell mass elevation. In some patients, venous or arterial thrombosis may be the presenting manifestation of PV. Any vessel can be affected; but cerebral, cardiac, or mesenteric vessels are most commonly involved. Intraabdominal venous thrombosis is particularly common in young women and may be catastrophic if a sudden and complete obstruction of the hepatic vein occurs. Indeed, PV should be suspected in any patient who develops hepatic vein thrombosis. Digital ischemia, easy bruising, epistaxis, acid-peptic disease, or gastrointestinal hemorrhage may occur due to vascular stasis or thrombocytosis. Erythema, burning, and pain in the extremities, a symptom complex known as erythromelalgia, is another complication of the thrombocytosis of PV due to increased platelet stickiness. Given the large turnover of hematopoietic cells, hyperuricemia with secondary gout, uric acid stones, and symptoms due to hypermetabolism can also complicate the disorder.

Diagnosis

When PV presents with erythrocytosis in combination with leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, or both, the diagnosis is apparent. However, when patients present with an elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit alone, or with thrombocytosis alone, the diagnostic evaluation is more complex because of the many diagnostic possibilities (Table 108每2). Furthermore, unless the hemoglobin level is ≡20 g/DL (hematocrit ≡60%), it is not possible to distinguish true erythrocytosis from disorders causing plasma volume contraction. Uniquely in PV, in contrast to other causes for true erythrocytosis, an expanded plasma volume can mask the elevated red cell mass; thus, red cell mass and plasma volume determinations are mandatory to establish the presence of an absolute erythrocytosis and to distinguish this from relative erythrocytosis due to a reduction in plasma volume alone (also known as stress or spurious erythrocytosis or Gaisb?ck's syndrome). This is true even with the finding of JAK2 V617F mutation, because not every patient with PV expresses this mutation, while patients without PV do. Figure 57-18 illustrates a diagnostic algorithm for the evaluation of suspected erythrocytosis.

Table 108每2 Causes of Erythrocytosis

 
 
Relative Erythrocytosis  
Hemoconcentration secondary to dehydration, diuretics, ethanol abuse, androgens or tobacco abuse 
Absolute Erythrocytosis  
Hypoxia

Carbon monoxide intoxication

High oxygen-affinity

hemoglobin

High altitude

Pulmonary disease

Right to left cardiac or

vascular shunts

Sleep apnea syndrome

Hepatopulmonary syndrome

Renal Disease

Renal artery stenosis

Focal sclerosing or membranous glomerulonephritis

Postrenal transplantation

Renal cysts

Bartter's syndrome
 Tumors

Hypernephroma

Hepatoma

Cerebellar hemangioblastoma

Uterine myoma

Adrenal tumors

Meningioma

Pheochromocytoma

Drugs

Androgens

Recombinant erythropoietin

Familial (with normal hemoglobin function)

Erythropoietin receptor mutation

VHL mutations (Chuvash polycythemia)

2,3-BPG mutation

Polycythemia vera
 
 


Abbreviations: 2,3-BPG, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate; VHL, von Hippel-Lindau.
 

Once absolute erythrocytosis has been established, its cause must be determined. An elevated plasma erythropoietin level suggests either a hypoxic cause for erythrocytosis or autonomous erythropoietin production, in which case assessment of pulmonary function and an abdominal CT scan to evaluate renal and hepatic anatomy are appropriate. A normal erythropoietin level, however, does not exclude a secondary cause for erythrocytosis or PV. In PV, in contrast to hypoxic erythrocytosis, the arterial oxygen saturation is normal. However, a normal oxygen saturation does not exclude a high-affinity hemoglobin as a cause for erythrocytosis; documentation of previous hemoglobin levels and a family study are important in this regard.

Other laboratory studies that may aid in diagnosis include the red cell count, mean corpuscular volume, and red cell distribution width (RDW). Only three situations cause microcytic erythrocytosis: -thalassemia trait, hypoxic erythrocytosis, and PV. With -thalassemia trait the RDW is normal, whereas with hypoxic erythrocytosis and PV, the RDW is usually elevated due to iron deficiency. Today, an assay for JAK2 V617F has superseded other tests for establishing the diagnosis of PV. Of course, in patients with associated acid-peptic disease, occult gastrointestinal bleeding may lead to presentation with hypochromic, microcytic anemia, masking the presence of PV.

A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy provide no specific diagnostic information since these may be normal or indistinguishable from ET or PMF, and unless there is a need to exclude some other disorder, these procedures need not be done. Although the presence of a cytogenetic abnormality such as trisomy 8 or 9 or 20q每 in the setting of an expanded red cell mass supports a clonal etiology, no specific cytogenetic abnormality is associated with PV, and the absence of a cytogenetic marker does not exclude the diagnosis.

Complications

Many of the clinical complications of PV relate directly to the increase in blood viscosity associated with red cell mass elevation and indirectly to the increased turnover of red cells, leukocytes, and platelets with the attendant increase in uric acid and cytokine production. The latter appears to be responsible for constitutional symptoms, while peptic ulcer disease may be due to Helicobacter pylori and the pruritus associated with this disorder may be a consequence of basophil activation by JAK2 V617F. A sudden increase in spleen size can be associated with splenic infarction. Myelofibrosis appears to be part of the natural history of the disease but is a reactive, reversible process that does not itself impede hematopoiesis and by itself has no prognostic significance. In some patients, however, the myelofibrosis is accompanied by significant extramedullary hematopoiesis, hepatosplenomegaly, and transfusion-dependent anemia, which are manifestations of stem cell failure. The organomegaly can cause significant mechanical discomfort, portal hypertension, and progressive cachexia. Although the incidence of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia is increased in PV, the incidence of acute leukemia in patients not exposed to chemotherapy or radiation is low, and the development of leukemia is related to the development of extramedullary hematopoiesis, hepatosplenomegaly, and transfusion-dependent anemia or exposure to chemotherapy. Importantly, chemotherapy alone, including hydroxyurea, has been associated with acute leukemia that develops in JAK2 V617F〞negative stem cells. Erythromelalgia is a curious syndrome of unknown etiology associated with thrombocytosis, primarily involving the lower extremities and usually manifested by erythema, warmth, and pain of the affected appendage and occasionally digital infarction. It occurs with a variable frequency in MPD patients and is usually responsive to salicylates. Some of the central nervous system symptoms observed in patients with PV such as ocular migraine, appear to represent a variant of erythromelalgia.

If left uncontrolled, erythrocytosis can lead to thrombosis involving vital organs such as the liver, heart, brain, or lungs. Patients with massive splenomegaly are particularly prone to thrombotic events because the associated increase in plasma volume masks the true extent of the red cell mass elevation as measured by the hematocrit or hemoglobin level. A "normal" hematocrit or hemoglobin level in a PV patient with massive splenomegaly should be considered indicative of an elevated red cell mass until proven otherwise.

Treatment: Polycythemia Vera

PV is generally an indolent disorder, the clinical course of which is measured in decades, and its management should reflect its tempo. Thrombosis due to erythrocytosis is the most significant complication, and maintenance of the hemoglobin level at 140 g/L (14 g/dL; hematocrit <45%) in men and 120 g/L (12 g/dL; hematocrit <42%) in women is mandatory to avoid thrombotic complications. Phlebotomy serves initially to reduce hyperviscosity by bringing the red cell mass into the normal range. Periodic phlebotomies thereafter serve to maintain the red cell mass within the normal range and to induce a state of iron deficiency that prevents an accelerated reexpansion of the red cell mass. In most PV patients, once an iron-deficient state is achieved, phlebotomy is usually only required at 3-month intervals. Neither phlebotomy nor iron deficiency increases the platelet count relative to the effect of the disease itself, and thrombocytosis is not correlated with thrombosis in PV, in contrast to the strong correlation between erythrocytosis and thrombosis in this disease. The use of salicylates as a tonic against thrombosis in PV patients is not only potentially harmful if the red cell mass is not controlled by phlebotomy, but also an unproven remedy. Anticoagulants are only indicated when a thrombosis has occurred and can be difficult to monitor owing to the artifactual imbalance between the test tube anticoagulant and plasma that occurs when blood from these patients is assayed for prothrombin or partial thromboplastin activity if the red cell mass is substantially elevated. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia (<10 mg%) requires no therapy, but allopurinol should be administered to avoid further elevation of the uric acid when chemotherapy is employed to reduce splenomegaly or leukocytosis or to treat pruritus. Generalized pruritus intractable to antihistamines or antidepressants such as doxepin can be a major problem in PV; interferon  (IFN-), psoralens with ultraviolet light in the A range (PUVA) therapy, and hydroxyurea are other methods of palliation. Asymptomatic thrombocytosis requires no therapy unless the platelet count is sufficiently high to cause an acquired form of von Willebrand's disease due to adsorption and proteolysis of high-molecular-weight von Willebrand factor (vWF) multimers by the expanded platelet mass. Symptomatic splenomegaly can be treated with IFN-, although the drug can be associated with significant side effects when used chronically. Pegylated IFN- produces complete remissions in PV patients, and its role in this disorder may be expanding. Anagrelide, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, can reduce the platelet count and, if tolerated, is preferable to hydroxyurea because it lacks marrow toxicity and actually is protective against venous thrombosis. A reduction in platelet number may be necessary for the treatment of erythromelalgia or ocular migraine if salicylates are not effective or if the platelet count is sufficiently high to cause a hemorrhagic diathesis but only to the degree that symptoms are alleviated. Alkylating agents and radioactive sodium phosphate (32P) are leukemogenic in PV, and their use should be avoided. If a cytotoxic agent must be used, hydroxyurea is preferred, but this drug does not prevent either thrombosis or myelofibrosis in this disorder, is itself leukemogenic, and should only be used for as short a time as possible. In some patients, massive splenomegaly unresponsive to reduction by therapy and associated with intractable weight loss will require splenectomy. In some patients with end-stage disease, pulmonary hypertension may develop due to fibrosis and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation may be curative in young patients. Several JAK2 inhibitors are undergoing clinical trial; to date, these agents have been demonstrated to alleviate constitutional symptoms and to rapidly reduce spleen size without significant effects on blood counts or the JAK2 V617F neutrophilallele burden, suggesting that they may at least have an important palliative role.

Most patients with PV can live long lives without functional impairment when their red cell mass is effectively managed with phlebotomy alone. Chemotherapy is never indicated to control the red cell mass unless venous access is inadequate.
 
Primary Myelofibrosis

Chronic PMF (other designations include idiopathic myelofibrosis, agnogenic myeloid metaplasia or myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia) is a clonal disorder of a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell of unknown etiology characterized by marrow fibrosis, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and splenomegaly. PMF is the least common chronic MPD, and establishing this diagnosis in the absence of a specific clonal marker is difficult because myelofibrosis and splenomegaly are also features of both PV and CML. Furthermore, myelofibrosis and splenomegaly also occur in a variety of benign and malignant disorders (Table 108每3), many of which are amenable to specific therapies not effective in PMF. In contrast to the other chronic MPDs and so-called acute or malignant myelofibrosis, which can occur at any age, PMF primarily afflicts men in their sixth decade or later.

Table 108每3 Disorders Causing Myelofibrosis

 
 
Malignant  Nonmalignant  
Acute leukemia (lymphocytic, myelogenous, megakaryocytic)

Chronic myelogenous leukemia

Hairy cell leukemia

Hodgkin's disease

Idiopathic myelofibrosis

Lymphoma

Multiple myeloma

Myelodysplasia

Metastatic carcinoma

Polycythemia vera

Systemic mastocytosis
 HIV infection

Hyperparathyroidism

Renal osteodystrophy

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Tuberculosis

Vitamin D deficiency

Thorium dioxide exposure

Gray platelet syndrome
 
 

 

Etiology

The etiology of PMF is unknown. Nonrandom chromosome abnormalities such as 9p, 20q每 13q每 trisomy 8 or 9, or partial trisomy 1q are common, but no cytogenetic abnormality specific to the disease has been identified. JAK2 V617F is present in approximately 50% of PMF patients and mutations in the thrombopoietin receptor Mpl occur in about 5%. The degree of myelofibrosis and the extent of extramedullary hematopoiesis are also not related. Fibrosis in this disorder is associated with overproduction of transforming growth factor  and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases, while osteosclerosis is associated with overproduction of osteoprotegerin, an osteoclast inhibitor. Marrow angiogenesis occurs due to increased production of vascular endothelial growth factor. Importantly, fibroblasts in PMF are polyclonal and not part of the neoplastic clone.

Clinical Features

No signs or symptoms are specific for PMF. Many patients are asymptomatic at presentation, and the disease is usually detected by the discovery of splenic enlargement and/or abnormal blood counts during a routine examination. However, in contrast to its companion MPDs, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss are common presenting complaints. A blood smear will show the characteristic features of extramedullary hematopoiesis: teardrop-shaped red cells, nucleated red cells, myelocytes, and promyelocytes; myeloblasts may also be present (Fig. 108-1). Anemia, usually mild initially, is the rule, while the leukocyte and platelet counts are either normal or increased, but either can be depressed. Mild hepatomegaly may accompany the splenomegaly but is unusual in the absence of splenic enlargement; isolated lymphadenopathy should suggest another diagnosis. Both serum lactate dehydrogenase and alkaline phosphatase levels can be elevated. The LAP score can be low, normal, or high. Marrow is usually inaspirable due to the myelofibrosis (Fig. 108-2), and bone x-rays may reveal osteosclerosis. Exuberant extramedullary hematopoiesis can cause ascites; portal, pulmonary, or intracranial hypertension; intestinal or ureteral obstruction; pericardial tamponade; spinal cord compression; or skin nodules. Splenic enlargement can be sufficiently rapid to cause splenic infarction with fever and pleuritic chest pain. Hyperuricemia and secondary gout may ensue.

Figure 108-1

 
 
 
Teardrop-shaped red blood cells indicative of membrane damage from passage through the spleen, a nucleated red blood cell, and immature myeloid cells indicative of extramedullary hematopoiesis are noted. This peripheral blood smear is related to any cause of extramedullary hematopoiesis.
 
 

Figure 108-2

 
 
 
This marrow section shows the marrow cavity replaced by fibrous tissue composed of reticulin fibers and collagen. When this fibrosis is due to a primary hematologic process, it is called myelofibrosis. When the fibrosis is secondary to a tumor or a granulomatous process, it is called myelophthisis.
 
 

Diagnosis

While the clinical picture described above is characteristic of PMF, all of the clinical features described can also be observed in PV or CML. Massive splenomegaly commonly masks erythrocytosis in PV, and reports of intraabdominal thromboses in PMF most likely represent instances of unrecognized PV. In some patients with PMF, erythrocytosis has developed during the course of the disease. Furthermore, since many other disorders have features that overlap with PMF but respond to distinctly different therapies, the diagnosis of PMF is one of exclusion, which requires that the disorders listed in Table 108每3 be ruled out. A diagnostic algorithm has been proposed but does not distinguish one disease causing myeloid metaplasia from another.

The presence of teardrop-shaped red cells, nucleated red cells, myelocytes, and promyelocytes establishes the presence of extramedullary hematopoiesis, while the presence of leukocytosis, thrombocytosis with large and bizarre platelets, and circulating myelocytes suggests the presence of an MPD as opposed to a secondary form of myelofibrosis (Table 108每3). Marrow is usually not aspirable due to increased marrow reticulin, but marrow biopsy will reveal a hypercellular marrow with trilineage hyperplasia and, in particular, increased numbers of megakaryocytes in clusters and with large, dysplastic nuclei. However, there are no characteristic morphologic abnormalities of the bone marrow that distinguish PMF from the other chronic MPDs. Splenomegaly due to extramedullary hematopoiesis may be sufficiently massive to cause portal hypertension and variceal formation. In some patients, exuberant extramedullary hematopoiesis can dominate the clinical picture. An intriguing feature of PMF is the occurrence of autoimmune abnormalities such as immune complexes, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, or a positive Coombs' test. Whether these represent a host reaction to the disorder or are involved in its pathogenesis is unknown. Cytogenetic analysis of blood is useful both to exclude CML and for prognostic purposes, because complex karyotype abnormalities portend a poor prognosis in PMF. For unknown reasons, the number of circulating CD34+ cells is markedly increased in PMF (>15,000/L) compared to the other chronic MPDs, unless they too develop myeloid metaplasia.

Importantly, approximately 50% of PMF patients, like patients with its companion myeloproliferative disorders PV and ET, express the JAK2 V617F mutation, often as homozygotes. Such patients had a poorer survival in one retrospective study but not in another, where they were found to be older and to have higher hematocrits than those patients who were JAK2 V617F〞negative. Those patients with an MPL mutation tend to be more anemic than those without this mutation.

Complications

Survival in PMF varies according to specific clinical features (Table 108每4) but is shorter than in patients with PV or ET. The natural history of PMF is one of increasing marrow failure with transfusion-dependent anemia and increasing organomegaly due to extramedullary hematopoiesis. As with CML, PMF can evolve from a chronic phase to an accelerated phase with constitutional symptoms and increasing marrow failure. About 10% of patients spontaneously transform to an aggressive form of acute leukemia for which therapy is usually ineffective. Important prognostic factors for disease acceleration include anemia, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, the presence of circulating myeloblasts, older age, the presence of complex cytogenetic abnormalities, and constitutional symptoms such as unexplained fever, night sweats, or weight loss.

Table 108每4 Risk Stratification for Primary Myelofibrosis

 
 
Risk Factors Frequency of Occurrence (%) 
Age >65 years 45 
Constitutional symptoms 26 
Hemoglobin <10 g/dL 35 
WBC >25 x 109/L 10 
Blood blasts >10% 36 
Risk Groups  No. of Factors  Proportion of Patients (%)  Median Survival (years)  
Low 0 22 11 
Intermediate-1 1 29 8 
Intermediate-2 2 28 4 
High 3 21 2 
 


Source: From F Cervantes et al: Blood 113:2895, 2009.
 

Treatment: Primary Myelofibrosis

No specific therapy exists for PMF. Anemia may be due to gastrointestinal blood loss, may be exacerbated by folic acid deficiency, and in rare instances, pyridoxine therapy has been effective. However, anemia is more often due to ineffective erythropoiesis uncompensated by extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen and liver. Neither recombinant erythropoietin nor androgens such as Danazol have proved consistently effective as therapy for the anemia. Erythropoietin may worsen splenomegaly and will be ineffective if the serum erythropoietin level is >125 mU/L. A red cell splenic sequestration study can establish the presence of hypersplenism, for which splenectomy is indicated. Splenectomy may also be necessary if splenomegaly impairs alimentation and should be performed before cachexia sets in. In this situation, splenectomy should not be avoided because of concern over rebound thrombocytosis, loss of hematopoietic capacity, or compensatory hepatomegaly. However, for unexplained reasons, splenectomy increases the risk of blastic transformation. Splenic irradiation is, at best, temporarily palliative and associated with a significant risk of neutropenia, infection, and operative hemorrhage. Allopurinol can control significant hyperuricemia, and hydroxyurea has proved useful for controlling organomegaly in some patients. The role of IFN- is still undefined; its side effects are more pronounced in the older individuals who are usually afflicted with this disorder and it should be used at lower doses. Glucocorticoids have been used to control constitutional symptoms and autoimmune complications and may ameliorate anemia alone, or in combination with low-dose thalidomide (50每100 mg/d); such therapy may also palliate splenomegaly. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is the only curative treatment and should be considered in younger patients; reduced-intensity conditioning regimens may permit hematopoietic cell transplantation to be extended to older individuals. JAK2 inhibitors have been effective in alleviating constitutional symptoms and splenomegaly in PMF patients and are currently used in phase III clinical trials. While their effects are reversible, these agents may offer a less toxic and more effective means of palliation in this disorder.
 
Essential Thrombocytosis

Essential thrombocytosis (other designations include essential thrombocythemia, idiopathic thrombocytosis, primary thrombocytosis, and hemorrhagic thrombocythemia) is a clonal disorder of unknown etiology involving a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell manifested clinically by overproduction of platelets without a definable cause. ET is an uncommon disorder, with an incidence of 1〞2/100,000 and a distinct female predominance. No clonal marker is available to consistently distinguish ET from the more common nonclonal, reactive forms of thrombocytosis (Table 108每5), making its diagnosis difficult. Once considered a disease of the elderly and responsible for significant morbidity due to hemorrhage or thrombosis, with the widespread use of electronic cell counters, it is now clear that ET can occur at any age in adults and often without symptoms or disturbances of hemostasis. There is an unexplained female predominance in contrast to PMF or the reactive forms of thrombocytosis where no sex difference exists. Because no specific clonal marker is available, clinical criteria have been proposed to distinguish ET from the other chronic MPDs, which may also present with thrombocytosis but have differing prognoses and therapies (Table 108每5). These criteria do not establish clonality; therefore, they are truly useful only in identifying disorders such as CML, PV, or myelodysplasia, which can masquerade as ET, as opposed to actually establishing the presence of ET. Furthermore, as with "idiopathic" erythrocytosis, nonclonal benign forms of thrombocytosis exist (such as hereditary overproduction of thrombopoietin) that are not widely recognized because we currently lack adequate diagnostic tools. Approximately 50% of ET patients carry the JAK2 V617F mutation but its absence does not exclude the disorder.

Table 108每5 Causes of Thrombocytosis

 
 
Tissue inflammation: collagen vascular disease, inflammatory bowel disease
 Hemorrhage 
Malignancy Iron deficiency anemia 
Infection Surgery 
Myeloproliferative disorders: polycythemia vera, primary myelofibrosis, essential thrombocytosis, chronic myelogenous leukemia
 Rebound: Correction of vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, post-ethanol abuse
 
Myelodysplastic disorders: 5q-syndrome, idiopathic refractory sideroblastic anemia Hemolysis 
Postsplenectomy or hyposplenism Familial: Thrombopoietin overproduction, constitutive Mpl activation
 
 

 

Etiology

Megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production depend upon thrombopoietin and its receptor Mpl. As in the case of early erythroid and myeloid progenitor cells, early megakaryocytic progenitors require the presence of interleukin 3 (IL-3) and stem cell factor for optimal proliferation in addition to thrombopoietin. Their subsequent development is also enhanced by the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1). However, megakaryocyte maturation requires thrombopoietin.

Megakaryocytes are unique among hematopoietic progenitor cells because reduplication of their genome is endomitotic rather than mitotic. In the absence of thrombopoietin, endomitotic megakaryocytic reduplication and, by extension, the cytoplasmic development necessary for platelet production are impaired. Like erythropoietin, thrombopoietin is produced in both the liver and the kidneys, and an inverse correlation exists between the platelet count and plasma thrombopoietic activity. Like erythropoietin levels, plasma levels of thrombopoietin are controlled largely by the size of its progenitor cell pool. In contrast to erythropoietin, but like its myeloid counterparts, granulocyte- and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors, thrombopoietin not only enhances the proliferation of its target cells but also enhances the reactivity of their end-stage product, the platelet. In addition to its role in thrombopoiesis, thrombopoietin also enhances the survival of multipotent hematopoietic stem cells.

The clonal nature of ET was established by analysis of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase isoenzyme expression in patients hemizygous for this gene, by analysis of X-linked DNA polymorphisms in informative female patients, and by the expression in patients of nonrandom, though variable, cytogenetic abnormalities. Although thrombocytosis is its principal manifestation, like the other chronic MPDs, a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell is involved in ET. Furthermore, a number of families have been described in which ET was inherited, in one instance as an autosomal dominant trait. In addition to ET, PMF and PV have also been observed in some kindreds.

Clinical Features

Clinically, ET is most often identified incidentally when a platelet count is obtained during the course of a routine medical evaluation. Occasionally, review of previous blood counts will reveal that an elevated platelet count was present but overlooked for manyyears. No symptoms or signs are specific for ET, but these patients can have hemorrhagic and thrombotic tendencies expressed as easy bruising for the former and microvascular occlusions for the latter such as erythromelalgia, ocular migraine, or TIAs. Physical examination is generally unremarkable except occasionally for mild splenomegaly. Massive splenomegaly is indicative of another MPD, in particular PV, PMF, or CML.

Anemia is unusual, but a mild neutrophilic leukocytosis is not. The blood smear is most remarkable for the number of platelets present, some of which may be very large. The large mass of circulating platelets may prevent the accurate measurement of serum potassium due to release of platelet potassium upon blood clotting. This type of hyperkalemia is a laboratory artifact and not associated with electrocardiographic abnormalities. Similarly, arterial oxygen measurements can be inaccurate unless thrombocythemic blood is collected on ice. The prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times are normal, while abnormalities of platelet function such as a prolonged bleeding time and impaired platelet aggregation can be present. However, in spite of much study, no platelet function abnormality is characteristic of ET, and no platelet function test predicts the risk of clinically significant bleeding or thrombosis.

The elevated platelet count may hinder marrow aspiration, but marrow biopsy usually reveals megakaryocyte hyperplasia and hypertrophy, as well as an overall increase in marrow cellularity. If marrow reticulin is increased, another diagnosis should be considered. The absence of stainable iron demands an explanation because iron deficiency alone can cause thrombocytosis, and absent marrow iron in the presence of marrow hypercellularity is a feature of PV. 

Nonrandom cytogenetic abnormalities occur in ET but are uncommon, and no specific or consistent abnormality is notable, even those involving chromosomes 3 and 1, where the genes for thrombopoietin and its receptor Mpl, respectively, are located.

Diagnosis

Thrombocytosis is encountered in a broad variety of clinical disorders (Table 108每5) in many of which production of cytokines is increased. The absolute level of the platelet count is not a useful diagnostic aid for distinguishing between benign and clonal causes of thrombocytosis. About 50% of ET patients express the JAK2 V617F mutation. When JAK2 V617F is absent, cytogenetic evaluation is mandatory to determine if the thrombocytosis is due to CML or a myelodysplastic disorder such as the 5q每 syndrome. Because the bcr-abl translocation can be present in the absence of the Ph chromosome, and because bcr-abl reverse transcriptasepolymerase chain reaction is associated with false-positive results, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis for bcr-abl is the preferred assay in patients with thrombocytosis in whom a cytogenetic study for the Ph chromosome is negative. Anemia and ringed sideroblasts are not features of ET, but they are features of idiopathic refractory sideroblastic anemia, and in some of these patients the thrombocytosis occurs in association with JAK2 V617F expression. Massive splenomegaly should suggest the presence of another MPD, and in this setting a red cell mass determination should be performed because splenomegaly can mask the presence of erythrocytosis. Importantly, what appears to be ET can evolve into PV or PMF after a period of many years, revealing the true nature of the underlying MPD. There is sufficient overlap of the JAK2 V617F neutrophilallele burden between ET and PV that this cannot be used as a distinguishing diagnostic feature; only a red cell mass and plasma volume determination can distinguish PV from ET and importantly in this regard, 64% of JAK2 V617F〞positive ET patients actually were found to have PV when red cell mass and plasma volume determinations were performed.

Complications

Perhaps no other condition in clinical medicine has caused otherwise astute physicians to intervene inappropriately more often than thrombocytosis, particularly if the platelet count is >1 x 106/L. It is commonly believed that a high platelet count causes intravascular stasis and thrombosis; however, no controlled clinical study has ever established this association, and in patients younger than age 60 years, the incidence of thrombosis was not greater in patients with thrombocytosis than in age-matched controls.

To the contrary, very high platelet counts are associated primarily with hemorrhage due to acquired von Willebrand disease. This is not meant to imply that an elevated platelet count cannot cause symptoms in an ET patient, but rather that the focus should be on the patient, not the platelet count. For example, some of the most dramatic neurologic problems in ET are migraine-related and respond only to lowering of the platelet count, while other symptoms such as erythromelalgia respond simply to platelet cyclooxygenase 1 inhibitors such as aspirin or ibuprofen, without a reduction in platelet number. Still others may represent an interaction between an atherosclerotic vascular system and a high platelet count, and others may have no relationship to the platelet count whatsoever. Recognition that PV can present with thrombocytosis alone as well as the discovery of previously unrecognized causes of hypercoagulability (Chap. 117) make the older literature on the complications of thrombocytosis unreliable.

Treatment: Essential Thrombocytosis

Survival of patients with ET is not different than for the general population. An elevated platelet count in an asymptomatic patient without cardiovascular risk factors requires no therapy. Indeed, before any therapy is initiated in a patient with thrombocytosis, the cause of symptoms must be clearly identified as due to the elevated platelet count. When the platelet count rises above 1 x 106/L, a substantial quantity of high-molecular-weight von Willebrand multimers are removed from the circulation and destroyed by the enlarged platelet mass, resulting in an acquired form of von Willebrand's disease. This can be identified by a reduction in ristocetin cofactor activity. In this situation, aspirin could promote hemorrhage. Bleeding in this situation usually responds to -aminocaproic acid, which can be given prophylactically before and after elective surgery. Plateletpheresis is at best a temporary and inefficient remedy that is rarely required. Importantly, ET patients treated with 32P or alkylating agents are at risk of developing acute leukemia without any proof of benefit; combining either therapy with hydroxyurea increases this risk. If platelet reduction is deemed necessary on the basis of symptoms refractory to salicylates alone, IFN-, the quinazoline derivative, anagrelide, or hydroxyurea can be used to reduce the platelet count, but none of these is uniformly effective nor without significant side effects. Hydroxyurea and aspirin are more effective than anagrelide and aspirin for prevention of TIAs but not more effective for the prevention of other types of arterial thrombosis and are actually less effective for venous thrombosis. The effectiveness of hydroxyurea in preventing TIAs is because it is an NO donor. Normalizing the platelet count also does not prevent either arterial or venous thrombosis. The risk of gastrointestinal bleeding is also higher when aspirin is combined with anagrelide. 

As more clinical experience is acquired, ET appears more benign than previously thought. Evolution to acute leukemia is more likely to be a consequence of therapy than of the disease itself. In managing patients with thrombocytosis, the physician's first obligation is to do no harm.
 
Further Readings

Alchalby H et al: Impact of JAK2V617F mutation status, allele burden, and clearance after allogeneic stem cell transplantation for myelofibrosis. Blood 116:3572, 2010[PMID: 20489052] 

 
Buss DH et al: The incidence of thrombotic and hemorrhagic disorders in association with extreme thrombocytosis: An analysis of 129 cases. Am J Hematol 20:365, 1985[PMID: 3865532] 

 
Cassinat B et al: Classification of myeloproliferative disorders in the JAK2 era: Is there a role for red cell mass? Leukemia 22:452, 2002 

 
Cervantes F et al: New prognostic scoring system for primary myelofibrosis based on a study of the International Working Group for Myelofibrosis Research and Treatment. Blood 113:2895, 2009[PMID: 18988864] 

 
Jones AV et al: JAK2 haplotype is a major risk factor for the development of myeloproliferative neoplasms. Nat Genet 41:446, 2009[PMID: 19363185] 

 
Kiladjian JJ et al: Pegylated interferon-alfa-2a induces complete hematologic and molecular responses with low toxicity in polycythemia vera. Blood 112:3065, 2008[PMID: 18650451] 

 
Reilly JT: Idiopathic myelofibrosis: Pathogenesis to treatment. Hematol Oncol 24:56, 2006[PMID: 16477581] 

 
Spivak JL: Polycythemia vera: Myths, mechanisms, and management. Blood 100:4272, 2002[PMID: 12393615] 

 
〞〞〞: Narrative review: Thrombocytosis, polycythemia vera, and JAK2 mutations: The phenotypic mimicry of chronic myeloproliferation. Ann Intern Med 152:300, 2010 

 
Verstovsek S et al: Safety and efficacy of INCB018424, a JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor, in myelofibrosis. N Engl J Med 363:1117, 2010[PMID: 20843246] 
 
 

^^
Acute and Chronic Myeloid Leukemia: Introduction

The myeloid leukemias are a heterogeneous group of diseases characterized by infiltration of the blood, bone marrow, and other tissues by neoplastic cells of the hematopoietic system. In 2010 the estimated number of new myeloid leukemia cases in the United States was 17,200. These leukemias comprise a spectrum of malignancies that, untreated, range from rapidly fatal to slowly growing. Based on their untreated course, the myeloid leukemias have traditionally been designated acute or chronic.
 
Acute Myeloid Leukemia

Incidence

The incidence of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is 3.5 per 100,000 people per year, and the age-adjusted incidence is higher in men than in women (4.3 vs 2.9). AML incidence increases with age; it is 1.7 in individuals aged <65 years and 15.9 in those aged >65 years. The median age at diagnosis is 67 years.

Etiology

Heredity, radiation, chemical and other occupational exposures, and drugs have been implicated in the development of AML. No direct evidence suggests a viral etiology.

Heredity

Certain syndromes with somatic cell chromosome aneuploidy, such as trisomy 21 noted in Down syndrome, are associated with an increased incidence of AML. Inherited diseases with defective DNA repair, e.g., Fanconi anemia, Bloom syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia, are also associated with AML. Congenital neutropenia (Kostmann syndrome) is a disease with mutations in the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) receptor and, often, neutrophil elastase that may evolve into AML. Myeloproliferative syndromes may also evolve into AML (Chap. 108). Germ-line mutations of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein  (CEBPA), runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), and tumor protein p53 (TP53) have also been associated with a higher predisposition to AML in some series.

Radiation

High-dose radiation, like that experienced by survivors of the atomic bombs in Japan or nuclear reactor accidents, increase the risk of myeloid leukemias that peak 5每7 years after exposure. Therapeutic radiation alone seems to add little risk of AML but can increase the risk in people also exposed to alkylating agents.

Chemical and Other Exposures

Exposure to benzene, a solvent used in the chemical, plastic, rubber, and pharmaceutical industries, is associated with an increased incidence of AML. Smoking and exposure to petroleum products, paint, embalming fluids, ethylene oxide, herbicides, and pesticides have also been associated with an increased risk of AML.

Drugs

Anticancer drugs are the leading cause of therapy-associated AML. Alkylating agent每associated leukemias occur on average 4每6 years after exposure, and affected individuals have aberrations in chromosomes 5 and 7. Topoisomerase II inhibitor每associated leukemias occur 1每3 years after exposure, and affected individuals often have aberrations involving chromosome 11q23. Chloramphenicol, phenylbutazone, and, less commonly, chloroquine and methoxypsoralen can result in bone marrow failure that may evolve into AML.

Classification

The current categorization of AML uses the World Health Organization (WHO) classification (Table 109每1), which includes different biologically distinct groups based on clinical features and cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities in addition to morphology. In contrast to the previously used French-American-British (FAB) schema, the WHO classification places limited reliance on cytochemistry. Since some of the recent literature and some ongoing studies use the FAB classification, a description of this system is also provided in Table 109每1. A major difference between the WHO and FAB systems is the blast cutoff for a diagnosis of AML as opposed to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS); it is 20% in the WHO classification and 30% in the FAB. AML with 20每30% blasts as defined by the WHO classification can benefit from therapies for MDS (such as decitabine or 5-azacytidine) that were approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) based on trials using the FAB criteria. Selected components of the WHO classification are outlined below.

Table 109每1 AML Classification Systems

 
 
World Health Organization Classificationa
  
AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities
 
  AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22);RUNX1-RUNX1T1b
 
  AML with inv(16)(pl3.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22);CBFB-MYH11b
 
  Acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(15;17)(q22;q12); PML-RARAb
 
  AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23); MLLT3-MLL
 
  AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34); DEK-NUP214
 
  AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21;q26.2); RPN1-EVI1
 
  AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13;q13); RBM15-MKL1

  Provisional entity: AML with mutated NPM1

  Provisional entity: AML with mutated CEBPA
 
AML with myelodysplasia-related changes
 
Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms
 
AML not otherwise specified
 
  AML with minimal differentiation
 
  AML without maturation
 
  AML with maturation
 
  Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
 
  Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia
 
  Acute erythroid leukemia
 
  Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
 
  Acute basophilic leukemia
 
  Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
 
Myeloid sarcoma
 
Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
 
  Transient abnormal myelopoiesis
 
  Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome
 
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
 
Acute leukemia of ambiguous lineage
 
  Acute undifferentiated leukemia
 
  Mixed phenotype acute leukemia with t(9;22)(q34;q11,20); BCR-ABL11
 
  Mixed phenotype acute leukemia with t(v;11q23); MLL rearranged
 
  Mixed phenotype acute leukemia, B/myeloid, NOS
 
  Mixed phenotype acute leukemia, T/myeloid, NOS
 
  Provisional entity: Natural killer (NK)-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
 
French-American-British (FAB) Classificationc
 
  MO: Minimally differentiated leukemia
 
  Ml: Myeloblastic leukemia without maturation
 
  M2: Myeloblastic leukemia with maturation
 
  M3: Hypergranular promyelocytic leukemia
 
  M4: Myelomonocytic leukemia
 
  M4Eo: Variant: Increase in abnormal marrow eosinophils
 
  M5: Monocytic leukemia
 
  M6: Erythroleukemia (DiGuglielmo's disease)
 
  M7: Megakaryoblastic leukemia
 
 


a From SH Swerdlow et al (eds): World Health Organization Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon, IARC Press, 2008.

b Diagnosis is AML regardless of blast count.

c From JM Bennett et al: Ann Intern Med 103:620, 1985.

Abbreviation: AML, acute myeloid leukemia.
 

Immunophenotype and Relevance to the WHO Classification

The immunophenotype of human leukemia cells can be studied by multiparameter flow cytometry after the cells are labeled with monoclonal antibodies to cell-surface antigens. This can be important for separating AML from acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and identifying some types of AML. For example, AML with minimal differentiation that is characterized by immature morphology and no lineage-specific cytochemical reactions may be diagnosed by flow-cytometric demonstration of the myeloid-specific antigens cluster designation (CD) 13 and/or 117. Similarly, acute megakaryoblastic leukemia can often be diagnosed only by expression of the platelet-specific antigens CD41 and/or CD61. While flow cytometry is useful, widely used, and in some cases essential for the diagnosis of AML, it is supportive only in establishing the different subtypes of AML through the WHO classification.

Clinical Features and Relevance to the WHO Classification

The WHO classification considers clinical features in subdividing AML. For example, it identifies therapy-related AML as a separate entity that develops following prior therapy (e.g., alkylating agents, topoisomerase II inhibitors, ionizing radiation). It also identifies AML with myelodysplasia-related changes based in part upon medical history of an antecedent MDS or myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm. The clinical features likely contribute to the prognosis of AML and have therefore been included in the classification.

Genetic Findings and Relevance to the WHO Classification

The WHO classification is the first AML classification to incorporate genetic (chromosomal and molecular) information. Indeed, AML is first subclassified based on the presence or absence of specific recurrent genetic abnormalities. For example, AML FAB M3 is now designated acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), based on the presence of either the t(15;17)(q22;q12) cytogenetic rearrangement or the PML-RARA fusion product of the translocation. A similar approach is taken with regard to core binding factor (CBF) AML that is now designated based on the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22) or inv(16)(p13q22) or the respective fusion products RUNX1-RUNX1T1 and CBFB-MYH11. Thus, the WHO classification separates recurrent cytogenetic and/or molecular types of AML and forces the clinician to take the appropriate steps to correctly identify the entity and thus tailor treatment(s) accordingly.

Chromosomal Analyses

Chromosomal analysis of the leukemic cell provides the most important pretreatment prognostic information in AML. The WHO classification incorporates cytogenetics in the AML classification by recognizing a category of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities and a category of AML with myelodysplasia-related changes (Table 109每1). The latter category is diagnosed in part by AML with selected myelodysplasia-related cytogenetic abnormalities (e.g., complex karyotypes and unbalanced and balanced changes involving among others, chromosomes 5, 7, and 11). Only one cytogenetic abnormality has been invariably associated with specific morphologic features: t(l5;17)(q22;q12) with APL. Other chromosomal abnormalities have been associated primarily with one morphologic/immunophenotypic group, including inv(16)(p13q22) with AML with abnormal bone marrow eosinophils; t(8;21)(q22;q22) with slender Auer rods, expression of CD19 and increased normal eosinophils; and t(9;11)(p22;q23), and other translocations involving 11q23, with monocytic features. Recurring chromosomal abnormalities in AML may also be associated with specific clinical characteristics. More commonly associated with younger age are t(8;21) and t(l5;17), and with older age, del(5q) and del(7q). Myeloid sarcomas (see below) are associated with t(8;21), and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with t(15;17).

Molecular Classification

Molecular study of many recurring cytogenetic abnormalities has revealed genes that may be involved in leukemogenesis; this information is increasingly being incorporated into the WHO classification. For instance, t(15;17) results in the fusion gene PML-RARA that encodes a chimeric protein, promyelocytic leukemia (Pml)每retinoic acid receptor  (Rar), which is formed by the fusion of the retinoic acid receptor  (RARA) gene from chromosome 17, and the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene from chromosome 15. The RARA gene encodes a member of the nuclear hormone receptor family of transcription factors. After binding retinoic acid, RARA can promote expression of a variety of genes. The 15;17 translocation juxtaposes PML with RARA in a head-to-tail configuration that is under the transcriptional control of PML. Three different breakpoints in the PML gene lead to various fusion protein isoforms. The Pml-Rar fusion protein tends to suppress gene transcription and blocks differentiation of the cells. Pharmacologic doses of the Rar ligand, all-trans-retinoic acid (tretinoin), relieve the block and promote hematopoietic cell differentiation (see below). Similar examples of molecular subtypes of the disease included in the category of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities are those characterized by the leukemogenic fusion genes RUNX1-RUNX1T1, CBFB-MYH11, MLLT3-MLL, and DEK-NUP214 resulting, respectively, from t(8;21), inv(16), t(9;11), and t(6;9)(p23;q34).

Two new provisional entities defined by the presence of gene mutations, rather than macroscopic chromosomal abnormalities, have been recently added to the category of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities: AML with mutated nucleophosmin (NPM1) and AML with mutatedCEBPA. AML with fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) mutations is not considered a distinct entity, although determining the presence of such mutations is recommended by WHO in patients with cytogenetically normal AML (CN-AML) because the relatively frequent FLT3-internal tandem duplication (ITD) carries a negative prognostic significance and therefore is clinically relevant (Table 109每2). FLT3 encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor important in the development of myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Activating mutations of FLT3 are present in 30% of adult AML patients due to ITD in the juxtamembrane domain or mutations of the activating loop of the kinase. Continuous activation of the FLT3-encoded protein provides increased proliferation and antiapoptotic signals to the myeloid progenitor cell. FLT3-ITD, the more common of the FLT3 mutations, occurs preferentially in patients with CN-AML. The importance of identifying FLT3-ITD at diagnosis relates to the fact that it not only is useful in prognostication but also may predict response to specific treatment such as the tyrosine kinase inhibitors that are being tested in clinical trials.

Table 109每2 Molecular Prognostic Markers in AML

 
 
Marker Marker Location Prognostic Impact 
NPM1 mutation  5q35 Favorable 
CEBPA mutation  19q13.1 Favorable 
FLT3-ITD  13q12 Adverse 
WT1 mutation  11p13 Adverse 
KIT mutation  4q11-q12 Adverse 
BAALC overexpression  8q22.3 Adverse 
ERG overexpression  21q22.3 Adverse 
MN1 overexpression  22q12.1 Adverse 
EVI1 overexpression  3q26 Adverse 
 


Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ITD, internal tandem duplication.
 

Other molecular prognostic factors (Table 109每2) in AML include v-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KIT) mutations that are found in 25每30% of t(8;21) or inv(16) patients. Others include Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) mutations found in 10每13% of CN-AML and overexpression of genes such as brain and acute leukemia, cytoplasmic (BAALC), ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue (avian) (erg), meningioma (disrupted in balanced translocation) 1 (MN1), and MDS1 and EVI1 complex locus (MECOM, also known as EVI1), which predict for poor outcome in CN-AML. The applicability of screening for these molecular aberrations to AML classification and clinical practice is being tested.

With progress in genomics technology including genomewide investigation of gene mutations and expression levels, additional aberrations are being discovered, underscoring the molecular heterogeneity of AML. The applicability of gene expression profiling to diagnosis and outcome prediction of cytogenetic and molecular subsets of AML patients and to clinical management of AML is under active investigation. MicroRNAs, naturally occurring noncoding RNAs, have been shown to regulate the expression of proteins involved in hematopoietic differentiation and survival pathways by degradation or translation inhibition of target coding RNAs. Deregulated expression levels of microRNAs have been shown to associate with specific cytogenetic and molecular subsets of AML and predict outcome in CN-AML. Finally, massive parallel sequencing of the whole genome from AML patients' blasts is revealing previously unrecognized mutations of genes that are involved in metabolic pathways that have not been previously hypothesized to be disrupted in AML, such as mutations in the isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (NADP+), soluble (IDH1) and isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 (NADP+), and mitochondrial (IDH2) genes.

It is likely that once the biologic and clinical significance of these emerging genetic aberrations is understood, AML will be primarily classified molecularly to define specific entities and stratify patients to a corresponding, optimal targeting therapy.

Clinical Presentation

Symptoms

Patients with AML most often present with nonspecific symptoms that begin gradually or abruptly and are the consequence of anemia, leukocytosis, leukopenia or leukocyte dysfunction, or thrombocytopenia. Nearly half have had symptoms for 3 months before the leukemia was diagnosed.

Half mention fatigue as the first symptom, but most complain of fatigue or weakness at the time of diagnosis. Anorexia and weight loss are common. Fever with or without an identifiable infection is the initial symptom in 10% of patients. Signs of abnormal hemostasis (bleeding, easy bruising) are noted first in 5% of patients. On occasion, bone pain, lymphadenopathy, nonspecific cough, headache, or diaphoresis is the presenting symptom.

Rarely patients may present with symptoms from a myeloid sarcoma that is a tumor mass consisting of myeloid blasts occurring at anatomic sites other than bone marrow. Sites involved are most commonly the skin, lymph node, gastrointestinal tract, soft tissue, and testis. This rare presentation, often characterized by chromosome aberrations [e.g., monosomy 7, trisomy 8, MLL rearrangement, inv(16), trisomy 4, t(8;21)] may precede or coincide with AML.

Physical Findings

Fever, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy, sternal tenderness, and evidence of infection and hemorrhage are often found at diagnosis. Significant gastrointestinal bleeding, intrapulmonary hemorrhage, or intracranial hemorrhage occur most often in APL. Bleeding associated with coagulopathy may also occur in monocytic AML and with extreme degrees of leukocytosis or thrombocytopenia in other morphologic subtypes. Retinal hemorrhages are detected in 15% of patients. Infiltration of the gingivae, skin, soft tissues, or the meninges with leukemic blasts at diagnosis is characteristic of the monocytic subtypes and those with 11q23 chromosomal abnormalities.

Hematologic Findings

Anemia is usually present at diagnosis and can be severe. The degree varies considerably, irrespective of other hematologic findings, splenomegaly, or duration of symptoms. The anemia is usually normocytic normochromic. Decreased erythropoiesis often results in a reduced reticulocyte count, and red blood cell (RBC) survival is decreased by accelerated destruction. Active blood loss also contributes to the anemia.

The median presenting leukocyte count is about 15,000/L. Between 25 and 40% of patients have counts <5000/L, and 20% have counts >100,000/L. Fewer than 5% have no detectable leukemic cells in the blood. The morphology of the malignant cell varies in different subsets. In AML, the cytoplasm often contains primary (nonspecific) granules, and the nucleus shows fine, lacy chromatin with one or more nucleoli characteristic of immature cells. Abnormal rod-shaped granules called Auer rods are not uniformly present, but when they are, myeloid lineage is virtually certain (Fig. 109-1). Poor neutrophil function may be noted functionally by impaired phagocytosis and migration and morphologically by abnormal lobulation and deficient granulation.

Figure 109-1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Morphology of AML cells. A. Uniform population of primitive myeloblasts with immature chromatin, nucleoli in some cells, and primary cytoplasmic granules. B. Leukemic myeloblast containing an Auer rod. C. Promyelocytic leukemia cells with prominent cytoplasmic primary granules. D. Peroxidase stain shows dark blue color characteristic of peroxidase in granules in AML.
 
 

Platelet counts <100,000/L are found at diagnosis in 75% of patients, and about 25% have counts <25,000/L. Both morphologic and functional platelet abnormalities can be observed, including large and bizarre shapes with abnormal granulation and inability of platelets to aggregate or adhere normally to one another.

Pretreatment Evaluation

Once the diagnosis of AML is suspected, a rapid evaluation and initiation of appropriate therapy should follow (Table 109每3). In addition to clarifying the subtype of leukemia, initial studies should evaluate the overall functional integrity of the major organ systems, including the cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, and renal systems. Factors that have prognostic significance, either for achieving complete remission (CR) or for predicting the duration of CR, should also be assessed before initiating treatment, including cytogenetics and molecular markers (at least NMP1 and CEBPA mutations and FLT3-ITD in CN-AML). Leukemic cells should be obtained from all patients and cryopreserved for future use as new tests and therapeutics become available. All patients should be evaluated for infection.

Table 109每3 Initial Diagnostic Evaluation and Management of Adult Patients with AML

 
 
History  
  Increasing fatigue or decreased exercise tolerance (anemia) 
  Excess bleeding or bleeding from unusual sites (DIC, thrombocytopenia) 
  Fevers or recurrent infections (granulocytopenia) 
  Headache, vision changes, nonfocal neurologic abnormalities (CNS leukemia or bleed) 
  Early satiety (splenomegaly) 
  Family history of AML (Fanconi, Bloom, or Kostmann syndromes or ataxia-telangiectasia) 
  History of cancer (exposure to alkylating agents, radiation, topoisomerase II inhibitors) 
  Occupational exposures (radiation, benzene, petroleum products, paint, smoking, pesticides) 
Physical Examination  
  Performance status (prognostic factor) 
  Ecchymosis and oozing from IV sites (DIC, possible acute promyelocytic leukemia) 
  Fever and tachycardia (signs of infection) 
  Papilledema, retinal infiltrates, cranial nerve abnormalities (CNS leukemia) 
  Poor dentition, dental abscesses 
  Gum hypertrophy (leukemic infiltration, most common in monocytic leukemia) 
  Skin infiltration or nodules (leukemia infiltration, most common in monocytic leukemia) 
  Lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly 
  Back pain, lower extremity weakness [spinal granulocytic sarcoma, most likely in t(8;21) patients] 
Laboratory and Radiologic Studies  
  CBC with manual differential cell count 
  Chemistry tests (electrolytes, creatinine, BUN, calcium, phosphorus, uric acid, hepatic enzymes, bilirubin, LDH, amylase, lipase) 
  Clotting studies (prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen, D-dimer) 
  Viral serologies (CMV, HSV-1, varicella-zoster) 
  RBC type and screen 
  HLA typing for potential allogeneic HSCT 
  Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy (morphology, cytogenetics, flow cytometry, molecular studies for NPM1 and CEBPA mutations and FLT3-ITD)  
  Cryopreservation of viable leukemia cells 
  Echocardiogram or heart scan 
  PA and lateral chest radiograph 
  Placement of central venous access device 
Interventions for Specific Patients  
  Dental evaluation (for those with poor dentition) 
  Lumbar puncture (for those with symptoms of CNS involvement) 
  Screening spine MRI (for patients with back pain, lower extremity weakness, paresthesias) 
  Social work referral for patient and family psychosocial support 
  Counseling for All Patients  
  Provide patient with information regarding their disease, financial counseling, and support group contacts. 
 


Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplant; HSV, herpes simplex virus; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PA, posteroanterior; RBC, red blood (cell) count.
 

Most patients are anemic and thrombocytopenic at presentation. Replacement of the appropriate blood components, if necessary, should begin promptly. Because qualitative platelet dysfunction or the presence of an infection may increase the likelihood of bleeding, evidence of hemorrhage justifies the immediate use of platelet transfusion, even if the platelet count is only moderately decreased.

About 50% of patients have a mild to moderate elevation of serum uric acid at presentation. Only 10% have marked elevations, but renal precipitation of uric acid and the nephropathy that may result is a serious but uncommon complication. The initiation of chemotherapy may aggravate hyperuricemia, and patients are usually started immediately on allopurinol and hydration at diagnosis. Rasburicase (recombinant uric oxidase) is also useful for treating uric acid nephropathy and often can normalize the serum uric acid level within hours with a single dose of treatment. The presence of high concentrations of lysozyme, a marker for monocytic differentiation, may be etiologic in renal tubular dysfunction, which could worsen other renal problems that arise during the initial phases of therapy.

Prognostic Factors

Many factors influence the likelihood of entering CR, the length of CR, and the curability of AML. CR is defined after examination of both blood and bone marrow. The blood neutrophil count must be 1000/L and the platelet count 100,000/L. Hemoglobin concentration is not considered in determining CR. Circulating blasts should be absent. While rare blasts may be detected in the blood during marrow regeneration, they should disappear on successive studies. The bone marrow should contain <5% blasts, and Auer rods should be absent. Extramedullary leukemia should not be present.

For patients in morphologic CR, immunophenotyping to detect minute populations of blasts, reverse transcriptasepolymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to detect AML-associated molecular abnormalities, and either metaphase cytogenetics or interphase cytogenetics by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to detect AML-associated cytogenetic aberrations are currently being investigated to assess whether residual disease that has clinical significance is present following treatment. Detection of minimal residual disease may become a reliable discriminator between patients in CR who do or do not require additional and/or alternative therapies. In APL, detection of the PML-RARA fusion gene transcript by RT-PCR in bone marrow and/or blood during CR predicts relapse, and this assay is being routinely used in the clinic to anticipate clinical relapse and initiate timely salvage treatment. In other types of AML, the clinical relevance of minimal residual disease requires further investigation.

Age at diagnosis is among the most important risk factors. Advancing age is associated with a poorer prognosis, in part because of its influence on the patient's ability to survive induction therapy. Age also influences outcome because AML in older patients differs biologically. The leukemic cells in elderly patients more commonly express the multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) efflux pump that conveys resistance to natural product每derived agents such as the anthracyclines (see below). With each successive decade of age, a greater proportion of patients have more resistant disease. Chronic and intercurrent diseases impair tolerance to rigorous therapy; acute medical problems at diagnosis reduce the likelihood of survival. Performance status, independent of age, also influences ability to survive induction therapy and thus respond to treatment.

A prolonged symptomatic interval with cytopenias preceding diagnosis or a history of an antecedent hematologic disorder is another pretreatment clinical feature associated with a lower CR rate and shorter survival time. The CR rate is lower in patients who have had anemia, leukopenia, and/or thrombocytopenia for >3 months before the diagnosis of AML when compared to those without such a history. Responsiveness to chemotherapy declines as the duration of the antecedent disorder(s) increases. AML developing after treatment with cytotoxic agents for other malignancies is usually difficult to treat successfully.

A high presenting leukocyte count in some series is an independent prognostic factor for attaining a CR. Among patients with hyperleukocytosis (>100,000/L), early central nervous system bleeding and pulmonary leukostasis contribute to poor outcome with initial therapy.

Chromosome findings at diagnosis are currently the most important independent prognostic factor. Patients with t(15;17) have a very good prognosis (approximately 85% cured), and those with t(8;21) and inv(16) a good prognosis (approximately 55% cured), while those with no cytogenetic abnormality have a moderately favorable outcome (approximately 40% cured). Patients with a complex karyotype, t(6;9), inv(3), or -7 have a very poor prognosis.

For those patients lacking prognostic cytogenetic abnormalities, such as those with CN-AML, outcome prediction utilizes molecular genetic abnormalities. NPM1 mutations without concurrent presence of FLT3-ITD, and CEBPA mutations, especially if concurrently present in two different alleles, have been shown to predict favorable outcome, whereas FLT3-ITD predicts poor outcome. Given the prognostic importance of NPM1 and CEBPA mutations and FLT3-ITD, molecular assessment of these genes at diagnosis have been incorporated in AML management guidelines by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the European Leukemia Net (ELN). Other molecular aberrations (Table 109每2) may in the future be utilized for prognostication.

In addition to pretreatment variables such as age, leukocyte count, and cytogenetics and/or molecular genetic aberrations, several treatment factors correlate with prognosis in AML, including, most importantly, achievement of CR. In addition, patients who achieve CR after one induction cycle have longer CR durations than those requiring multiple cycles.

Treatment: Acute Myeloid Leukemia

Treatment of the newly diagnosed patient with AML is usually divided into two phases, induction and postremission management (Fig. 109-2). The initial goal is to quickly induce CR. Once CR is obtained, further therapy must be used to prolong survival and achieve cure. The initial induction treatment and subsequent postremission therapy are often chosen based on the patient's age. Intensifying therapy with traditional chemotherapy agents such as cytarabine and anthracyclines in younger patients (<60 years) appears to increase the cure rate of AML. In older patients the benefit of intensive therapy is controversial; novel therapies are being pursued.

Figure 109-2

 
 
 
Flow chart for the therapy of newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia. For all forms of AML except acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), standard therapy includes a 7-day continuous infusion of cytarabine (100每200 mg/m2 per day) and a 3-day course of daunorubicin (60每90 mg/m2per day) with or without 3 days of etoposide (only with daunorubicin 60 mg/m2 per day) or novel therapies based on their predicted risk of relapse (i.e., risk-stratified therapy). Idarubicin (12每13 mg/m2 per day) could be used in place of daunorubicin (not shown). Patients who achieve complete -remission undergo postremission consolidation therapy, including sequential courses of high-dose cytarabine, autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), allogeneic HSCT, or novel therapies, based on their predicted risk of relapse (i.e., risk-stratified therapy). Patients with APL (see text for treatment) -usually receive tretinoin together with anthracycline-based chemotherapy for remission induction and then arsenic trioxide followed by consolidation with anthracycline-based chemotherapy and possibly maintenance with tretinoin. The role of cytarabine in APL induction and consolidation is controversial.
 
 

Induction Chemotherapy

The most commonly used CR induction regimens (for patients other than those with APL) consist of combination chemotherapy with cytarabine and an anthracycline. Cytarabine is a cell cycle S-phase每specific antimetabolite that becomes phosphorylated intracellularly to an active triphosphate form that interferes with DNA synthesis. Anthracyclines are DNA intercalators. Their primary mode of action is thought to be inhibition of topoisomerase II, leading to DNA breaks. Cytarabine is usually administered as a continuous intravenous infusion for 7 days. Anthracycline therapy generally consists of daunorubicin intravenously on days 1, 2, and 3 (the 7 and 3 regimen). Treatment with idarubicin for 3 days in conjunction with cytarabine by 7-day continuous infusion is at least as effective as daunorubicin in younger patients. The addition of etoposide may improve the CR duration. When combined with cytarabine in a 7 and 3 regimen, a higher dose of anthracycline (i.e., daunorubicin 90 mg/m2) improves outcome compared with a lower dose (i.e., daunorubicin 45 mg/m2).

After induction chemotherapy, if persistence of leukemia is documented, the patient is usually re-treated with cytarabine and an anthracycline in doses similar to those given initially, but for 5 and 2 days, respectively. Our recommendation, however, is to consider changing therapy in this setting.

With the 7 and 3 cytarabine/daunorubicin regimen outlined above, 65每75% of adults with de novo AML younger than age 60 years achieve CR. Two-thirds achieve CR after a single course of therapy, and one-third require two courses. About 50% of patients who do not achieve CR have a drug-resistant leukemia, and 50% do not achieve CR because of fatal complications of bone marrow aplasia or impaired recovery of normal stem cells. Higher induction treatment每related mortality rate and frequency of resistant disease have been observed with increasing age and in patients with prior hematologic disorders (MDS or myeloproliferative syndromes) or chemotherapy treatment for another malignancy.

Patients who fail to attain CR after two induction courses should be treated with an allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) if an appropriate donor exists. Whether achievement of cytoreduction of disease burden with a salvage treatment should be attempted before a patient with refractory disease after two induction courses can proceed to HSCT is controversial.

High-dose cytarabine-based regimens have high CR rates after a single cycle of therapy. When given in high doses, more cytarabine may enter the cells, saturate the cytarabine-inactivating enzymes, and increase the intracellular levels of 1--D-arabinofuranylcytosine-triphosphate, the active metabolite incorporated into DNA. Thus, higher doses of cytarabine may increase the inhibition of DNA synthesis and thereby overcome resistance to standard-dose cytarabine. In two randomized studies, high-dose cytarabine with an anthracycline produced CR rates similar to those achieved with standard 7 and 3 regimens. However, the CR duration was longer after high-dose cytarabine than after standard-dose cytarabine.

The hematologic toxicity of high-dose cytarabine-based induction regimens has typically been greater than that associated with 7 and 3 regimens. Toxicity with high-dose cytarabine includes myelosuppression, pulmonary toxicity, and significant and occasionally irreversible cerebellar toxicity. All patients treated with high-dose cytarabine must be closely monitored for cerebellar toxicity. Full cerebellar testing should be performed before each dose, and further high-dose cytarabine should be withheld if evidence of cerebellar toxicity develops. This toxicity occurs more commonly in patients with renal impairment and in those older than age 60 years. The increased toxicity observed with high-dose cytarabine has limited the use of this therapy in elderly AML patients.

Because of the negative impact of age on outcome when treatment with conventional chemotherapy is administered, clinical trials in elderly patients have focused upon new agents or alternative approaches such as reduced-intensity allogeneic HSCT. Among these, one promising therapy is decitabine, a nucleoside analogue that inhibits DNA methyltransferase, reverses aberrant DNA methylation, and subsequently induces transcription of otherwise silenced tumor suppressor genes in AML cells. Interestingly, this effect on inhibiting DNA methyltransferase occurs at a much lower dose than previously used with this agent to produce a cytotoxic effect in AML. Low-dose decitabine yields complete responses in older patients with AML, including those with unfavorable karyotypes. Other agents with relatively favorable toxicity profiles such as clofarabine have activity in older patients with AML.

Supportive Care

Measures geared to supporting patients through several weeks of granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia are critical to the success of AML therapy. Patients with AML should be treated in centers expert in providing supportive measures.

Multilumen right atrial catheters should be inserted as soon as patients with newly diagnosed AML have been stabilized. They should be used thereafter for administration of intravenous medications and transfusions, as well as for blood drawing.

Adequate and prompt blood bank support is critical to therapy of AML. Platelet transfusions should be given as needed to maintain a platelet count 10,000/L. The platelet count should be kept at higher levels in febrile patients and during episodes of active bleeding or DIC. Patients with poor posttransfusion platelet count increments may benefit from administration of platelets from human leukocyte antigen (HLA)每matched donors. RBC transfusions should be administered to keep the hemoglobin level >80 g/L (8 g/dL) in the absence of active bleeding, DIC, or congestive heart failure which require higher hemoglobin levels. Blood products leukodepleted by filtration should be used to avert or delay alloimmunization as well as febrile reactions. Blood products should also be irradiated to prevent transfusion associated graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-negative blood products should be used for CMV-seronegative patients who are potential candidates for allogeneic HSCT. Leukodepleted products are also effective for these patients if CMV-negative products are not available.

Infectious complications remain the major cause of morbidity and death during induction and postremission chemotherapy for AML. Antibacterial (i.e., quinolones) and antifungal (e.g, fluconazole, posaconazole) prophylaxis in the absence of fever is likely to be beneficial. For patients who are herpes simplex virus每or varicella zoster每seropositive, antiviral prophylaxis should be initiated.

Fever develops in most patients with AML, but infections are documented in only half of febrile patients. Early initiation of empirical broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal antibiotics has significantly reduced the number of patients dying of infectious complications (Chap. 86). An antibiotic regimen adequate to treat gram-negative organisms should be instituted at the onset of fever in a granulocytopenic patient after clinical evaluation, including a detailed physical examination with inspection of the indwelling catheter exit site and a perirectal examination, as well as procurement of cultures and radiographs aimed at documenting the source of fever. Specific antibiotic regimens should be based on antibiotic sensitivity data obtained from the institution at which the patient is being treated. Acceptable regimens for empiric antibiotic therapy include monotherapy with imipenem-cilastin, meropenem, piperacillin/tazobactam, or an extended-spectrum antipseudomonal cephalosporin (cefepime or ceftazidime); an aminoglycoside in combination with an antipseudomonal penicillin (e.g., piperacillin); an aminoglycoside in combination with an extended-spectrum antipseudomonal cephalosporin; and ciprofloxacin in combination with an antipseudomonal penicillin. Aminoglycosides should be avoided if possible in patients with renal insufficiency. Empirical vancomycin should be initiated in neutropenic patients with catheter-related infections, blood cultures positive for gram-positive bacteria before final identification and susceptibility testing, hypotension or shock, and increased risk for viridans group streptococcal bacteremia.

Caspofungin (or similar echinocandin) or liposomal amphotericin B should be considered for antifungal treatment if fever persists 4每7 days following initiation of empiric antibiotic therapy in a patient who has received fluconazole prophylaxis. Voriconazole has also been shown to be equivalent in efficacy and less toxic than amphotericin B. Antibacterial and antifungal antibiotics should be continued until patients are no longer neutropenic, regardless of whether a specific source has been found for the fever.

Recombinant hematopoietic growth factors have been incorporated into clinical trials in AML. These trials have been designed to lower the infection rate after chemotherapy. Both G-CSF and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) have reduced the median time to neutrophil recovery. This accelerated rate of neutrophil recovery, however, has not generally translated into significant reductions in infection rates or shortened hospitalizations. In most randomized studies, both G-CSF and GM-CSF have failed to improve the CR rate, disease-free survival, or overall survival. Although receptors for both G-CSF and GM-CSF are present on AML blasts, therapeutic efficacy is neither enhanced nor inhibited by these agents. The use of growth factors as supportive care for AML patients is controversial. We favor their use in elderly patients with complicated courses, those receiving intensive postremission regimens, patients with uncontrolled infections, or those participating in clinical trials.

Treatment of Promyelocytic Leukemia

Tretinoin is an oral drug that induces the differentiation of leukemic cells bearing the t(15;17). APL is responsive to cytarabine and daunorubicin, but about 10% of patients treated with these drugs die from DIC induced by the release of granule components by dying tumor cells. Tretinoin does not produce DIC but produces another complication called the APL differentiation syndrome. Occurring within the first 3 weeks of treatment, it is characterized by fever, fluid retention, dyspnea, chest pain, pulmonary infiltrates, pleural and pericardial effusions, and hypoxemia. The syndrome is related to adhesion of differentiated neoplastic cells to the pulmonary vasculature endothelium. Glucocorticoids, chemotherapy, and/or supportive measures can be effective for management of the APL differentiation syndrome. Temporary discontinuation of tretinoin is necessary in cases of severe APL differentiation syndrome (i.e., patients developing renal failure or requiring admission to the intensive care unit due to respiratory distress). The mortality rate of this syndrome is about 10%.

Tretinoin (45 mg/m2 per day orally until remission is documented) plus concurrent anthracycline-based chemotherapy appears to be among the most effective treatments for APL leading to CR rates of 90每95%. The addition of cytarabine, although not demonstrated to increase the CR rate, seemingly decreases the risk for relapse. Following achievement of CR, patients should receive at least two cycles of anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

Given the progress made in APL resulting in high cure rates, the goals are to identify patients with very low risk of relapse where attempts are being made to decrease the amount of therapy administered and to identify patients at greatest risk of relapse in order to develop new approaches to increase cure.

Arsenic trioxide has significant antileukemic activity and is being explored as part of initial treatment in clinical trials of APL. In a randomized trial, arsenic trioxide improved outcome if utilized after achievement of CR and before consolidation therapy with anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Additionally, studies combining arsenic trioxide with tretinoin in the absence of chemotherapy are ongoing and preliminarily have shown promise in those patients "unfit" to receive chemotherapy. Furthermore, combinations of arsenic trioxide, tretinoin, and/or chemotherapy and/or gemtuzumab ozogamicin, a monoclonal CD33 antibody linked to the cytotoxic agent calicheamicin, have shown favorable response in high-risk APL patients (i.e., those presenting with a leukocyte count 10,000/L) at diagnosis. Patients receiving arsenic trioxide are at risk of APL differentiation syndrome, especially when it is administered during induction or salvage treatment after disease relapse. In addition, arsenic trioxide may prolong the QT interval, increasing the risk of cardiac arrhythmias.

Assessment of residual disease by RT-PCR amplification of the t(l5;17) chimeric gene product PML-RARA following the final cycle of chemotherapy is an important step in the management of APL patients. Disappearance of the signal is associated with long-term disease-free survival; its persistence documented by two consecutive tests performed 2 weeks apart invariably predicts relapse. Sequential monitoring of RT-PCR for t(15;17) is now considered standard for postremission monitoring of APL.

Patients who continue in molecular remission may benefit from maintenance therapy with tretinoin. Patients in molecular, cytogenetic, or clinical relapse should be salvaged with arsenic trioxide; it produces meaningful responses in up to 85% of patients and can be followed by HSCT.

Postremission Therapy

Induction of a durable first CR is critical to long-term disease-free survival in AML. However, without further therapy, virtually all patients experience relapse. Once relapse has occurred, AML is generally curable only by HSCT.

Postremission therapy is designed to eradicate residual leukemic cells to prevent relapse and prolong survival. Postremission therapy in AML is often based on age (younger than ages 55每65 years and older than ages 55每65 years). For younger patients, most studies include intensive chemotherapy and allogeneic or autologous HSCT. High-dose cytarabine is more effective than standard-dose cytarabine. The Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB), for example, compared the duration of CR in patients randomly assigned postremission to four cycles of high (3 g/m2, every 12 hours on days 1, 3, and 5), intermediate (400 mg/m2 for 5 days by continuous infusion), or standard (100 mg/m2 per day for 5 days by continuous infusion) doses of cytarabine. A dose-response effect for cytarabine in patients with AML who were aged 60 years was demonstrated. High-dose cytarabine significantly prolonged CR and increased the fraction cured in patients with favorable [t(8;21) and inv(16)] and normal cytogenetics, but it had no significant effect on patients with other abnormal karyotypes. For older patients, exploration of attenuated intensive therapy that includes either chemotherapy or reduced-intensity allogeneic HSCT has been pursued. Postremission therapy is a setting for introduction of new agents (Table 109每4).

Table 109每4 Selected New Agents under Study for the Treatment of Adults with AML

 
 
Class of Drugs Examples of Agents in Class 
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors PKC412, MLN518, SU11248, CHIR-258, imatinib (STI571, Gleevec), dasatinib, AMN107 
Demethylating agents Decitabine, 5-azacytidine 
Histone deacetylase inhibitors Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), MS275, LBH589, valproic acid 
Heavy metals Arsenic trioxide 
Farnesyl transferase inhibitors R115777, SCH66336 
HSP-90 antagonists 17-allylaminogeldanamycin (17-AAG), DMAG, or derivatives 
Cell cycle inhibitors Flavopiridol, CYC202 (R-Roscovitine), SNS-032 
Nucleoside analogues Clofarabine, troxacitabine 
Humanized antibodies Anti-CD33 (SGN33), anti-KIR 
Toxin-conjugated antibodies Gemtuzumab ozogamicin 
Proteasome inhibitors Bortezomib 
Aurora inhibitors AZD1152, MLN-8237, AT9283 
Immunomodulatory Lenalidomide, IL-2, histamine dihydrochloride 
 


Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; IL-2, interleukin.
 

Allogeneic HSCT is used in patients ages <70每75 years with an HLA-compatible donor who have high-risk cytogenetics. In patients with CN-AML and high-risk molecular features such as FLT3-ITD, allogeneic HSCT is best applied in the context of clinical trials, as the impact of aggressive therapy on outcome is unknown. Relapse following allogeneic HSCT occurs in only a small fraction of patients, but treatment-related toxicity is relatively high; complications include venoocclusive disease, GVHD, and infections. Autologous HSCT can be administered in young and older patients and uses the same preparative regimens. Patients subsequently receive their own stem cells collected while in remission. The toxicity is relatively low with autologous HSCT (5% mortality rate), but the relapse rate is higher than with allogeneic HSCT, due to the absence of the graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effect seen with allogeneic HSCT and possible contamination of the autologous stem cells with residual tumor cells. Purging tumor from the autologous stem cells has not lowered the relapse rate with autologous HSCT.

Randomized trials comparing intensive chemotherapy and autologous and allogeneic HSCT have shown improved duration of remission with allogeneic HSCT compared to autologous HSCT or chemotherapy alone. However, overall survival is generally not different; the improved disease control with allogeneic HSCT is erased by the increase in fatal toxicity. While stem cells were previously harvested from the bone marrow, virtually all efforts currently collect these from the blood following mobilization regimens. Prognostic factors may help select patients in first CR for whom transplant is most effective.

Our approach includes allogeneic HSCT if feasible in first CR for patients with high-risk karyotypes (Fig. 109-2). Patients with CN-AML who have other poor risk factors (e.g., an antecedent hematologic disorder, or failure to attain remission with a single induction course) and patients lacking a favorable genotype (e.g., patients who do not have CEBPA mutations or NPM1 mutations without FLT3-ITD) are also potential candidates. If a suitable HLA donor does not exist, investigational therapeutic approaches are considered. As FLT3-ITD can be targeted with emerging novel inhibitors, patients with this molecular abnormality should be considered for clinical trials with these agents whenever possible. New transplant strategies, including reduced-intensity HSCT, are being explored for consolidation of high-risk AML patients (Chap. 114). Patients with t(8;21) and inv(16) are treated with repetitive doses of high-dose cytarabine, which offers a high frequency of cure without the morbidity of transplant. In AML patients with t(8;21) and inv(16), those with KIT mutations, who have a worse prognosis, may be considered for novel investigational studies.

Autologous HSCT is generally applied to AML patients only in the context of a clinical trial or when the risk of repetitive intensive chemotherapy represents a higher risk than the autologous HSCT (e.g., in patients with severe platelet alloimmunization).

Relapse

Once relapse occurs, patients are rarely cured with further standard-dose chemotherapy. Patients eligible for allogeneic HSCT should receive transplants expeditiously at the first sign of relapse. Long-term disease-free survival is approximately the same (30每50%) with allogeneic HSCT in first relapse or in second remission. Autologous HSCT rescues about 20% of relapsed patients with AML who have chemosensitive disease. The most important factors predicting response at relapse are the length of the previous CR, whether initial CR was achieved with one or two courses of chemotherapy, and the type of postremission therapy.

Because of the poor outcome of patients in early first relapse (<12 months), it is justified (for patients without HLA-compatible donors) to explore innovative approaches, such as new drugs or immunotherapies (Table 109每4). Patients with longer first CR (>12 months) generally relapse with drug-sensitive disease and have a higher chance of attaining a CR. However, cure is uncommon, and treatment with novel approaches should be considered if allogeneic HSCT is not possible. New agents that may have clinical activity in AML are needed and many are being tested in clinical trials (Table 109每4).

For elderly patients (age >60 years) for whom clinical trials are not available, gemtuzumab ozogamicin is another alternative. The CR rate with this agent is 30%. However, its effectiveness in early relapsing (<6 months) or refractory AML patients is limited, possibly due to calicheamicin being a potent MDR1 substrate. Toxicity, including myelosuppression, infusion toxicity, and venoocclusive disease, can be observed with gemtuzumab ozogamicin. Pretreatment with glucocorticoids can diminish many of the associated infusion reactions. Studies are examining this treatment in combination with chemotherapy for both young and older patients with previously untreated AML. This agent has been withdrawn from the U.S. market at the request of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration due to concerns about the product's safety and clinical benefit as shown in trials subsequent to those leading to its accelerated approval.
 
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia

Incidence

The incidence of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is 1.5 per 100,000 people per year, and the age-adjusted incidence is higher in men than in women (1.9 vs 1.1). The incidence of CML increases slowly with age until the middle forties, when it starts to rise rapidly. The incidence of CML for females decreased slightly (1.8%) between 1994 and 2006 as compared to 1975每1994.

Definition

The diagnosis of CML is established by identifying a clonal expansion of a hematopoietic stem cell possessing a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22. This translocation results in the head-to-tail fusion of the breakpoint cluster region (BCR) gene on chromosome 22q11 with the ABL1 (named after the abelson murine leukemia virus) gene located on chromosome 9q34. Untreated, the disease is characterized by the inevitable transition from a chronic phase to an accelerated phase and on to blast crisis in a median time of 4 years.

Etiology

No clear correlation with exposure to cytotoxic drugs has been found, and no evidence suggests a viral etiology. In the pre-imatinib era, cigarette smoking accelerated the progression to blast crisis and therefore adversely affected survival in CML. Atomic bomb survivors had an increased incidence; the development of a CML cell mass of 10,000/L took 6.3 years. No increase in CML incidence was found in the survivors of the Chernobyl accident, suggesting that only large doses of radiation can induce CML.

Pathophysiology

The product of the fusion gene resulting from the t(9;22) plays a central role in the development of CML. This chimeric gene is transcribed into a hybrid BCR-ABL1 mRNA in which exon 1 of ABL1 is replaced by variable numbers of 5' BCR exons. Bcr-Abl fusion proteins, p210BCR-ABL1, are produced that contain NH2-terminal domains of Bcr and the COOH-terminal domains of Abl. A rare breakpoint, occurring within the 3' region of the BCR gene, yields a fusion protein of 230 kDa, p230BCR-ABL1. Bcr-Abl fusion proteins can transform hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro. Furthermore, reconstituting lethally irradiated mice with bone marrow cells infected with retrovirus carrying the gene encoding the p210BCR-ABL1 leads to the development of a myeloproliferative syndrome resembling CML in 50% of the mice. Specific antisense oligomers to the BCR-ABL1 junction inhibit the growth of t(9;22)-positive leukemic cells without affecting normal colony formation.

The mechanism(s) by which p210BCR-ABL1 promotes the transition from the benign state to the fully malignant one is still unclear. Messenger RNA for BCR-ABL1 can occasionally be detected in normal individuals. However, attachment of the BCR sequences to ABL1 results in three critical functional changes: (1) the Abl protein becomes constitutively active as a tyrosine kinase (TK) enzyme, activating downstream kinases that prevent apoptosis; (2) the DNA-protein-binding activity of Abl is attenuated; and (3) the binding of Abl to cytoskeletal actin microfilaments is enhanced.

Disease Progression

The events associated with transition to the acute phase, a common occurrence in the pre-imatinib era, were extensively studied. Chromosomal instability of the malignant clone resulting, for example, in the acquisition of an additional t(9;22), trisomy 8, or 17p- (TP53 loss) is a basic feature of CML. Acquisition of these additional genetic and/or molecular abnormalities is critical to the phenotypic transformation. Heterogeneous structural alterations of the TP53 gene, as well as structural alterations and lack of protein production of the retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) gene and the catalytic component of telomerase, have been associated with disease progression in a subset of patients. Rare patients show alterations in the rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (RAS). Sporadic reports also document the presence of an altered v-myc myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homologue (avian) (MYC) gene. Progressive de novo DNA methylation at the BCR-ABL1 locus and hypomethylation of the LINE-1 retrotransposon promoter herald blastic transformation. Further, interleukin 1 may be involved in the progression of CML to the blastic phase. In addition, functional inactivation of the tumor suppressor protein phosphatase A2 may be required for blastic transformation. Finally, CML that develops resistance to imatinib is at an increased risk of progressing to accelerated/blast crisis. Multiple pathways to disease transformation exist, but the exact timing and relevance of each remain unclear.

Clinical Presentation

Symptoms

The clinical onset of the chronic phase is generally insidious. Accordingly, some patients are diagnosed, while still asymptomatic, during health-screening tests; other patients present with fatigue, malaise, and weight loss or have symptoms resulting from splenic enlargement, such as early satiety and left upper quadrant pain or mass. Less common are features related to granulocyte or platelet dysfunction, such as infections, thrombosis, or bleeding. Occasionally, patients present with leukostatic manifestations due to severe leukocytosis or thrombosis such as vasoocclusive disease, cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial infarction, venous thrombosis, priapism, visual disturbances, and pulmonary insufficiency. Patients with p230BCR-ABL1-positive CML have a more indolent course.

Progression of CML is associated with worsening symptoms. Unexplained fever, significant weight loss, increasing dose requirement of the drugs controlling the disease, bone and joint pain, bleeding, thrombosis, and infections suggest transformation into accelerated or blastic phases. Less than 10每15% of newly diagnosed patients present with accelerated disease or with de novo blastic phase CML.

Physical Findings

Minimal to moderate splenomegaly is the most common physical finding; mild hepatomegaly is found occasionally. Persistent splenomegaly despite continued therapy is a sign of disease acceleration. Lymphadenopathy and myeloid sarcomas are unusual except late in the course of the disease; when they are present, the prognosis is poor.

Hematologic Findings

Elevated white blood (cell) counts (WBCs), with increases in both immature and mature granulocytes, are present at diagnosis. Usually <5% circulating blasts and <10% blasts and promyelocytes are noted, with the majority of cells being myelocytes, metamyelocytes, and band forms. Cycling of the counts may be observed in patients followed without treatment. Platelet counts are almost always elevated at diagnosis, and a mild degree of normocytic normochromic anemia is present. Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase is low in CML cells. Phagocytic functions are usually normal at diagnosis and remain normal during the chronic phase. Histamine production secondary to basophilia is increased in later stages, causing pruritus, diarrhea, and flushing.

At diagnosis, bone marrow cellularity is increased, with an increased myeloid-to-erythroid ratio. The marrow blast percentage is generally normal or slightly elevated. Marrow or blood basophilia, eosinophilia, and monocytosis may be present. While collagenfibrosis in the marrow is unusual at presentation, significant degrees of reticulin stain每measured fibrosis are noted in about half of the patients.

Disease acceleration is defined by the development of increasing degrees of anemia unaccounted for by bleeding or therapy; cytogenetic clonal evolution; or blood or marrow blasts between 10 and 20%, blood or marrow basophils 20%, or platelet count <100,000/L. Blast crisis is defined as acute leukemia, with blood or marrow blasts 20%. Hyposegmented neutrophils may appear (Pelger-Hu?t anomaly). Blast cells can be classified as myeloid, lymphoid, erythroid, or undifferentiated, based on morphologic, cytochemical, and immunologic features. Occurrence of de novo blast crisis or following imatinib therapy is rare.

Chromosomal Findings

The cytogenetic hallmark of CML, found in 90每95% of patients, is the t(9;22)(q34;q11.2). Originally, this was recognized by the presence of a shortened chromosome 22 (22q-), designated as the Philadelphia chromosome, that arises from the reciprocal t(9;22). Some patients may have complex translocations (designated as variant translocations) involving three, four, or five chromosomes (usually including chromosomes 9 and 22). However, the molecular consequences of these changes are similar to those resulting from the typical t(9;22). All patients should have evidence of the translocation molecularly or by cytogenetics or FISH to make a diagnosis of CML.

Prognostic Factors

The clinical outcome of patients with CML is variable. Before imatinib mesylate, death was expected in 10% of patients within 2 years and in about 20% yearly thereafter, and the median survival time was 4 years. Therefore, several prognostic models that identify different risk groups in CML were developed. The most commonly used staging systems have been derived from multivariate analyses of prognostic factors. The Sokal index identified percentage of circulating blasts, spleen size, platelet count, age, and cytogenetic clonal evolution as the most important prognostic indicators. This system was developed based on chemotherapy-treated patients. The Hasford system was developed based on interferon (IFN) 每treated patients. It identified percentage of circulating blasts, spleen size, platelet count, age, and percentage of eosinophils and basophils as the most important prognostic indicators. This system differs from the Sokal index by ignoring clonal evolution and incorporating percentage of eosinophils and basophils. When applied to a data set of 272 patients treated with IFN-, the Hasford system was better than the Sokal score for predicting survival time; it identified more low-risk patients but left only a small number of cases in the high-risk group. Preliminary results suggest that both the Sokal and the Hasford systems are applicable to imatinib-treated patients.

Treatment: Chronic Myeloid Leukemia

The therapy of CML is changing rapidly because we have a proven curative treatment (allogeneic transplantation) that has significant toxicity and a new targeted treatment (imatinib) with outstanding outcome based on 8-year follow-up data. We recommend starting with TK inhibitors and reserving allogeneic transplantation for those who develop imatinib resistance.

At present, the goal of therapy in CML is to achieve prolonged, durable, nonneoplastic, nonclonal hematopoiesis, which entails the eradication of any residual cells containing the BCR-ABL1 transcript. Hence, the goal is complete molecular remission and cure. A proposed imatinibtreatment algorithm for the newly diagnosed CML patient is presented in Table 109每5.

Table 109每5 Imatinib Treatment Milestones for Newly Diagnosed CML Patients

 
 
  NCCNa  ELNb  
Time Months Expectedc  Failured  Suboptimale  Failured  
3 Complete hematologicremissionf  No complete hematologic remission Minor cytogenetic remission No cytogenetic remission; new mutations 
6 Any cytogenetic remission No cytogenetic remission Partial cytogenetic remission Minimal cytogenetic remissiong; new mutations  
12 Completeh or partiali cytogenetic remission  Minorj or no cytogenetic remission  Less than major molecular response Less than partial cytogenetic remission; new mutations 
18 Complete cytogenetic remission Partial, minor, or no cytogenetic remission     
Anytime Loss of previously achieved hematologic, cytogenetic, or molecular remission; new mutationsd  
 


aNational Comprehensive Cancer Network.

bEuropean Leukemia Net.

cDenotes that at the indicated milestone, patients should stay on the same dose.

dDenotes that at the indicated milestones, for patients on 400 mg/d, one can either increase the dose to a maximum of 600每800 mg, as tolerated, or probably switch to another TK inhibitor.

eDenotes that the patients may still have substantial long-term benefit from continuing a specific treatment, but chances are reduced and therefore these patients may be eligible for alternative treatments.

fComplete hematologicremission, white blood cell count <10,000/L, normal morphology, hemoglobin and platelet counts, and disappearance of splenomegaly.

gMinimal cytogenetic remission, 66每95% bone marrow metaphases with t(9;22).

hComplete cytogenetic remission, no bone marrow metaphases with t(9;22).

iPartial cytogenetic remission, 1每35% bone marrow metaphases with t(9;22).

jMinor cytogenetic remission, 36每85% bone marrow metaphases with t(9;22).

Abbreviation: CML, chronic myeloid leukemia.
 

Imatinib Mesylate

Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) functions through competitive inhibition at the ATP-binding site of the Abl kinase in the inactive conformation, which leads to inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins involved in Bcr-Abl signal transduction. It shows specificity for Bcr-Abl, the receptor for platelet-derived growth factor, and Kit TK. Imatinib induces apoptosis in cells expressing Bcr-Abl.

In newly diagnosed CML, imatinib (400 mg/d) is more effective than IFN- and cytarabine. The complete hematologicremission rate of patients treated with imatinib was 95% compared to 56% in patients treated with IFN- and cytarabine. Similarly, the complete cytogenetic remission rate at 18 months was 76% with imatinib compared to 15% with IFN- and cytarabine. The rate of complete cytogenetic remission in imatinib-treated patients differed by Sokal score: the rate in those with low-risk disease was 89% compared with 82% for patients with intermediate-risk disease and 69% for those with high-risk disease.

All imatinib-treated patients who achieved major molecular remission (26%), defined as 3 log reduction in BCR-ABL1 transcript level at 18 months compared to pretreatment level, were progression-free at 5 years. The progression-free survival (PFS) at 5 years for patients achieving complete cytogenetic remission but less pronounced molecular remission is 98%. The 5-year PFS for patients not achieving complete cytogenetic remission at 18 months was 87%. These results have led to a consensus that molecular responses can be used as a treatment goal in CML. Specific milestones have been developed for chronic-phase CML patients (Table 109每5). They differ between the Americans (NCCN) and the Europeans (ELN), with more strict milestones by the latter. For example, in the NCCN milestones, chronic-phase CML patients who do not achieve any cytogenetic remission following 6 months of imatinib should be offered other treatment approaches while in the ELN milestones, the same recommendation is offered following 3 months of imatinib treatment. We favor the ELN approach and expect the NCCN milestones to align with the ELN ones in the very near future.

Progression to accelerated/blastic phases of the disease was noted in 3% of patients treated with imatinib as compared to 8.5% of patients treated with IFN- and cytarabine during the first year. Over time, the annual incidence of disease progression on imatinib decreased gradually to <1% during the fourth year and beyond, and no patient who achieved major molecular response by 12 months progressed to the accelerated/blastic phases of the disease.

Treatment is currently recommended for life unless patients are enrolled in a clinical trial with a specific question of treatment discontinuation. An early trial evaluating the effect of imatinib discontinuation after at least 2 years of complete molecular remission revealed molecular relapse in 6 of 12 patients. Interestingly, 6 of 10 patients who were treated with IFN- before imatinib maintained molecular remission, while both patients who were not exposed to IFN- relapsed. These results raised the hypothesis that IFN- may have a protective effect against relapse, possibly by eradicating the leukemia-initiating cells. This hypothesis is supported by the randomized trial comparing imatinib to imatinib plus IFN-; preliminary results from this trial revealed better major molecular response for the combination although a significant number of patients discontinued IFN- treatment during the first year due to toxicity. Finally, a recent IFN- maintenance study, following imatinib discontinuation, demonstrated maintained molecular remission in 15 (75%) of 20 patients. IFN's mechanism of action in this situation is unclear.

Imatinib is administered orally. The main side effects are fluid retention, nausea, muscle cramps, diarrhea, and skin rashes. The management of these side effects is usually supportive. Myelosuppression is the most common hematologic side effect. Myelosuppression, while rare, may require holding drug and/or growth factor support. Doses <300 mg/d seem ineffective and may lead to development of resistance.

Four mechanisms of resistance to imatinib have been described to date. These are (1) gene amplification, (2) mutations at the kinase site, (3) enhanced expression of multidrug exporter proteins, and (4) alternative signaling pathways functionally compensating for the imatinib-sensitive mechanisms. All four mechanisms are being targeted in clinical trials.

BCR-ABL1 gene amplification and decreased intracellular imatinib concentrations are addressed by intensifying the therapy with higher (up to 800 mg/d) imatinib doses. Three randomized trials have been published so far. The first randomized study compared 400 mg/d to 800 mg/d in newly diagnosed CML patients and revealed improved major molecular responses at 3, 6, and 9 months but similar results at 12 months. A similar study comparing 600 mg/d to 800 mg/d showed a borderline benefit for the higher dose based on both cytogenetic and major molecular responses at 12 months, while a third study, concentrating only on high-risk (Sokal) patients failed to show any significant difference between 400 mg/d and 800 mg/d at 12 months. All these studies have too short follow-up to evaluate dosing effect on survival.

Mutations at the kinase domain occur in approximately half of imatinib-resistant chronic-phase cases and even more frequently in the more advanced phases of the disease. These mutations are being targeted by novel TK inhibitors that have a different conformation than imatinib, demonstrating activity against most imatinib-resistant mutations. Nilotinib (Tasigma), like imatinib, binds to the kinase domain in the inactive conformation. Dasatinib (Sprycel) binds to the kinase domain in the open conformation and also inhibits the SRC (sarcoma) family of kinases, addressing the last mechanism of resistance. CML with the T315I mutation is resistant to imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib. In addition, nilotinib is also resistant to E255K/V and Y253F/H while dasatinib is also resistant to X299L and F317L.

Dasatinib is approved by the FDA at a dose of 100 mg/day for the treatment of all stages of CML with resistance or intolerance to prior therapy, including imatinib. Nilotinib is approved by the FDA at a dose of 400 mg twice daily for the treatment of chronic- and accelerated-phase CML with resistance or intolerance to prior therapy, including imatinib. Both are oral agents, dasatinib is given once daily while nilotinib is given twice daily with food restrictions before and after dosing. Their toxicity profiles are similar to imatinib with small but significant differences. Dasatinib causes pleural effusions in 22% of patients, with 7% developing grade 3每4 toxicity. Nilotinib was associated with sudden death in 6 of approximately 550 CML patients. A suspected relationship to nilotinib was reported in two of these cases and led to a requirement for additional cardiac monitoring while using this drug. A randomized trial in chronic-phase imatinib-resistant CML patients showed superiority of switching to dasatinib over increasing imatinib to 800 mg/day. Finally, randomized trials have demonstrated that either nilotinib or dasatinib are more effective than imatinib as first-line treatment in newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML patients in time to complete hematologic and cytogenetic remission and major molecular response at 1 year and led to their approval for the first line setting. Similar results are likely with bosutinib, another Src and Abl TK inhibitor. These studies are expanding the armamentarium for newly diagnosed CML patients.

These new agents have already changed the treatment algorithm of CML. For example, patients who do not achieve any cytogenetic remission at 6 months (or 3 months by ELN) on imatinib are now offered dasatinib, nilotinib, or HSCT. IFN- is FDA approved for CML but is only offered if all other options have failed.

The encouraging results with imatinib have led clinicians to offer it as first-line therapy for newly diagnosed CML patients, including those who otherwise would have benefited from transplant (e.g., young patients with a matched sibling donor). Prior exposure to imatinib does not affect transplant outcome. Similar data, in smaller series, were also described for dasatinib and nilotinib treatment before HSCT. However, delaying HSCT for high-risk patients (Sokal/Hasford criteria) may result in disease progression. HSCT after disease progression is associated with poorer outcome. Therefore, we recommend close monitoring of TK inhibitors response in these patients.

New Agents

Several new agents are now in development for CML with T315I and patients who fail all currently available TK inhibitors. These include omacetaxine, XL228, FTY720, AP24534, DCC-2036, PH-739358, and sorafenib (Table 109每6).

Table 109每6 Novel Agents for BCR-ABL with T315I and Patients Who Failed All Currently Available Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors

 
 
Agent Mechanism of Action 
Omacetaxine (formerly known as homoharringtonine) Protein translation inhibitor 
XL228 Dual Src/Abl inhibitor with potential effect against T315I mutation 
FTY720 (also known as fingolimod) Activation of protein phosphatase 2A that is essential for ABL1-mediated leukemogenesis  
AP24534 Pan-Bcr-Abl inhibitor that inhibits T315I 
DCC-2036 Non-ATP-competitive Abl inhibition, avoids the steric clash with T315I mutation 
PH-739358 Aurora kinase inhibitor that is also active against T315I mutation 
Sorafenib Raf kinase inhibitor that down regulates down stream Bcr-Abl targets 
 

 

Allogeneic HSCT

Allogeneic HSCT is complicated by early mortality owing to the transplant procedure. Outcome of HSCT depends on multiple factors, including (1) the patient (e.g., age and phase of disease); (2) the type of donor [e.g., syngeneic (monozygotic twins) or HLA-compatible allogeneic, related or unrelated]; (3) the preparative regimen (myeloablative or reduced-intensity); (4) GVHD; and (5) posttransplantation treatment.

Posttransplantation Treatment

Posttransplant BCR-ABL1 transcript levels have served as early predictors for hematologicrelapse following HSCT. These should facilitate risk-adapted approaches with immunosuppression or TK inhibitor(s), or a combination of the two. Donor leukocyte infusions (without any preparative chemotherapy or GVHD prophylaxis) can induce hematologic and cytogenetic remissions in patients with CML who have relapsed after allogeneic HSCT but carry the risk of significant GVHD.

Imatinib can control CML that has recurred after allogeneic HSCT but is sometimes associated with myelosuppression and recurrence of severe GVHD. Imatinib after allogeneic HSCT is being studied for prevention of relapse in patients with advanced disease at the time of transplantation (i.e., patients at high risk for relapse), patients undergoing reduced-intensity transplants, or patients with slow reduction of BCR-ABL1 message following transplantation. Imatinib has also been combined with donor lymphocytes to induce rapid molecular remissions in CML patients with disease relapse after allogeneic HSCT. Of interest are studies with newer TK inhibitors following transplantation for imatinib-resistant CML.

Interferon

Before imatinib, when allogeneic HSCT was not feasible, IFN- therapy was the treatment of choice. Only longer follow-up of patients treated with imatinib will prove whether IFN- will still have a role in the treatment of CML. Its mode(s) of action in CML is still unknown.

Chemotherapy

Initial management of patients with chemotherapy is currently reserved for rapid lowering of WBCs, reduction of symptoms, and reversal of symptomatic splenomegaly. Hydroxyurea, a ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor, induces rapid disease control. The initial dose is 1每4 g/d; the dose should be halved with each 50% reduction of the leukocyte count. Unfortunately, cytogenetic remissions with hydroxyurea are uncommon. Busulphan, an alkylating agent that acts on early progenitor cells, has a more prolonged effect. However, we do not recommend its use because of its serious side effects, which include unexpected, and occasionally fatal, myelosuppression in 5每10% of patients; pulmonary, endocardial, and marrow fibrosis; and an Addison-like wasting syndrome.

Autologous HSCT

Autologous HSCT could potentially cure CML if cells are collected at complete molecular remission. However, since patients who achieve this degree of response do not relapse, this treatment modality has been abandoned by most groups.

Leukapheresis and Splenectomy

Intensive leukapheresis may control the blood counts in chronic-phase CML; however, it is expensive and cumbersome. It is useful in emergencies where leukostasis-related complications such as pulmonary failure or cerebrovascular accidents are likely. It may also have a role in the treatment of pregnant women, in whom it is important to avoid potentially teratogenic drugs.

Splenectomy was used in CML in the past because of the suggestion that evolution to the acute phase might occur in the spleen. However, this does not appear to be the case, and splenectomy is now reserved for symptomatic relief of painful splenomegaly unresponsive to imatinib or chemotherapy, or for significant anemia or thrombocytopenia associated with hypersplenism. Splenic radiation is used rarely to reduce the size of the spleen.

Minimal Residual Disease

The kinetics of BCR-ABL1 transcript elimination is currently replacing qualitative detection of the BCR-ABL1 message as an index of tumor burden, in spite of a lack of standard acceptable methodology. A consensus panel has proposed ways to harmonize the different methods and to use a conversion factor so that individual laboratories will be able to express BCR-ABL1 transcript levels on an agreed upon scale.

Slow reduction of BCR-ABL1 transcripts following HSCT correlates with the possibility of hematologicrelapse. However, the definition of "slow reduction" depends on the preparative regimen (reduced-intensity vs fully myeloablative) and the selection of time points to measure the transcript levels. While persistent RT-PCR positivity at 6 months was regarded as an indication for additional therapy in the past, current studies utilize periods between engraftment and day 100 for evaluating the clearance rate of BCR-ABL1 transcripts and recommending additional therapies. Large trials with longer follow-up are needed to establish consensus guidelines.

The randomized trial of imatinib versus IFN- and cytarabine (IRIS) was the first to establish the concept of log10 reduction of BCR-ABL1 transcript from a standardized baseline for untreated patients. This measurement unit was developed instead of either the transcript numbers expressed per microgram of leukocyte RNA or the ratio of BCR-ABL1 to a housekeeping gene on a log scale. In this randomized trial, patients who achieved 3 log reduction of BCR-ABL1 message had an extremely low probability of relapse, with a median follow-up of 96 months.

These studies also established the value and convenience of using peripheral blood instead of bone marrow testing as a means to assess disease status in patients who achieve complete cytogenetic responses. However, one still needs to consider following CML patients in complete cytogenetic remission and at least major molecular remission with occasional cytogenetic bone marrow testing. This should be performed if they develop cytopenia late in the treatment course as such patients are at risk of developing cytogenetic aberrations, especially monosomy 7, in t(9;22)-negative cells and secondary MDS/AML. Other aberrations in the t(9;22)-negative cells are frequently transient, and their clinical significance is unclear. Development of secondary MDS/AML is rare.

Treatment of Blast Crisis

Treatments for primary blast crisis, including imatinib, are generally ineffective. Only 52% of patients treated with imatinib achieved hematologicremission (21% complete hematologic remission), and the median overall survival was 6.6 months. Patients who achieve complete hematologic remission or whose disease returns to a second chronic phase should be considered for allogeneic HSCT. Other approaches include induction chemotherapy tailored to the phenotype of the blast cell followed by TK inhibitors, with or without additional chemotherapy and HSCT. Blast crisis following initial therapy with imatinib carries a dismal prognosis even if treated with dasatinib or nilotinib.
 
Further Readings

AML

D?hner H et al: Diagnosis and management of acute myeloid leukemia in adults: Recommendations from an international expert panel, on behalf of the European Leukemia Net. Blood 115:453, 2010[PMID: 21698843] 

 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network: Acute myeloid leukemia. Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Version 2. 2010.http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/cml.pdf 

 
Sanz MA et al: Management of acute promyelocytic leukemia: Recommendations from an expert panel on behalf of the European Leukemia Net. Blood 113:1875, 2009[PMID: 18812465] 

 
Vardiman JW et al: The 2008 revision of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia: Rationale and important changes. Blood 114:937, 2009[PMID: 19357394] 

 

CML

Baccarani M et al: Chronic myeloid leukemia: An update of concepts and management recommendations of European Leukemia Net. J Clin Oncol 27:6041, 2009[PMID: 19884523] 

 
Irvine DA et al: Optimising chronic myeloid leukaemia therapy in the face of resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors〞a synthesis of clinical and laboratory data. Blood Rev 24:1, 2010[PMID: 20005615] 

 
Kantarjian H et al: Dasatinib versus imatinib in newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 362:2260, 2010[PMID: 20525995] 

 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network: Chronic myelogenous leukemia. Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Version 2. 2010. http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/cml.pdf 

 
Saglio G et al: Nilotinib versus imatinib for newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 362:2251, 2010[PMID: 20525993] 
 
 

^^
Malignancies of Lymphoid Cells: Introduction

Malignancies of lymphoid cells range from the most indolent to the most aggressive human malignancies. These cancers arise from cells of the immune system at different stages of differentiation, resulting in a wide range of morphologic, immunologic, and clinical findings. Insights on the normal immune system have allowed a better understanding of these sometimes confusing disorders.

Some malignancies of lymphoid cells almost always present as leukemia (i.e., primary involvement of bone marrow and blood), while others almost always present as lymphomas (i.e., solid tumors of the immune system). However, other malignancies of lymphoid cells can present as either leukemia or lymphoma. In addition, the clinical pattern can change over the course of the illness. This change is more often seen in a patient who seems to have a lymphoma and then develops the manifestations of leukemia over the course of the illness.
 
Biology of Lymphoid Malignancies: Concepts of the WHO Classification of Lymphoid Malignancies

The classification of lymphoid cancers evolved steadily throughout the twentieth century. The distinction between leukemia and lymphoma was made early, and separate classification systems were developed for each. Leukemias were first divided into acute and chronic subtypes based on average survival. Chronic leukemias were easily subdivided into those of lymphoid or myeloid origin based on morphologic characteristics. However, a spectrum of diseases that were formerly all called chronic lymphoid leukemia has become apparent (Table 110每1). The acute leukemias were usually malignancies of blast cells with few identifying characteristics. When cytochemical stains became available, it was possible to divide these objectively into myeloid malignancies and acute leukemias of lymphoid cells. Acute leukemias of lymphoid cells have been subdivided based on morphologic characteristics by the French-American-British (FAB) group (Table 110每2). Using this system, lymphoid malignancies of small uniform blasts (e.g., typical childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia) were called L1, lymphoid malignancies with larger and more variable size cells were called L2, and lymphoid malignancies of uniform cells with basophilic and sometimes vacuolated cytoplasm were called L3 (e.g., typical Burkitt's lymphoma cells). Acute leukemias of lymphoid cells have also been subdivided based on immunologic (i.e., T cell vs. B cell) and cytogenetic abnormalities (Table 110每2). Major cytogenetic subgroups include the t(9;22) (e.g., Philadelphia chromosome每positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia) and the t(8;14) found in the L3 or Burkitt's leukemia.

Table 110每1 Lymphoid Disorders that Can Present as "Chronic Leukemia" and Be Confused with Typical B Cell Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia

 
 
Follicular lymphoma

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma

Mantle cell lymphoma

Hairy cell leukemia
 Prolymphocytic leukemia (B cell or

T cell)

Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma

S谷zary's syndrome

Smoldering adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma
 
 

 
Table 110每2 Classification of Acute Lymphoid Leukemia (ALL)

 
 
Immunologic Subtype % of Cases FAB Subtype Cytogenetic Abnormalities 
Pre-B ALL

T cell ALL

B cell ALL
 75

20

5
 L1, L2

L1, L2

L3
 t(9;22), t(4;11), t(1;19)

14q11 or 7q34

t(8;14), t(8;22), t(2;8)
 
 


Abbreviation: FAB, French-American-British classification.
 

Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas were separated from Hodgkin's disease by recognition of the Sternberg-Reed cells early in the twentieth century. The histologic classification for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas has been one of the most contentious issues in oncology. Imperfect morphologic systems were supplanted by imperfect immunologic systems, and poor reproducibility of diagnosis has hampered progress. In 1999, the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of lymphoid malignancies was devised through a process of consensus development among international leaders in hematopathology and clinical oncology. The WHO classification takes into account morphologic, clinical, immunologic, and genetic information and attempts to divide non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and other lymphoid malignancies into clinical/pathologic entities that have clinical and therapeutic relevance. This system is presented in Table 110每3. This system is clinically relevant and has a higher degree of diagnostic accuracy than those used previously. The possibilities for subdividing lymphoid malignancies are extensive. However, Table 110每3 presents in bold those malignancies that occur in at least 1% of patients. Specific lymphoma subtypes will be dealt with in more detail below. Lymphomas associated with HIV infection are discussed in Chap. 189.

Table 110每3 WHO Classification of Lymphoid Malignancies

 
 
B Cell T Cell Hodgkin's Disease 
Precursor B cell neoplasm
 Precursor T cell neoplasm
 Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease 
  Precursor B lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (precursor B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia)
   Precursor T lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia (precursor T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia)
   
Mature (peripheral) B cell neoplasms Mature (peripheral) T cell neoplasms Classical Hodgkin's disease 
  B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
 T cell prolymphocytic leukemia Nodular sclerosis Hodgkin's disease 
  B cell prolymphocytic leukemia T cell granular lymphocytic leukemia Lymphocyte-rich classic Hodgkin's disease 
  Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma Aggressive NK cell leukemia Mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease 
  Splenic marginal zone B cell lymphoma (㊣ villous lymphocytes) Adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia (HTLV-I+) Lymphocyte-depletion Hodgkin's disease 
  Hairy cell leukemia Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type   
  Plasma cell myeloma/plasmacytoma  Enteropathy-type T cell lymphoma   
  Extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma of MALT type  Hepatosplenic  T cell lymphoma   
  Mantle cell lymphoma  Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma   
  Follicular lymphoma  Mycosis fungoides/S谷zary's syndrome    
  Nodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma (㊣ monocytoid B cells) Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, primary cutaneous type   
  Diffuse large B cell lymphoma  Peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (NOS)    
  Burkitt's lymphoma/Burkitt's cell leukemia  Angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma    
  Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, primary systemic type    
 


Note: Malignancies in bold occur in at least 1% of patients.

Abbreviations: HTLV, human T cell lymphotropic virus; MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; NK, natural killer; WHO, World Health Organization.

Source: Adapted from Harris et al.
 
 
General Aspects of Lymphoid Malignancies

Etiology and Epidemiology

The relative frequency of the various lymphoid malignancies is shown in Fig. 110-1. Chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL) is the most prevalent form of leukemia in Western countries. It occurs most frequently in older adults and is exceedingly rare in children. In 2010, 14,990 new cases were diagnosed in the United States, but because of the prolonged survival associated with this disorder, the total prevalence is many times higher. CLL is more common in men than in women and more common in whites than in blacks. This is an uncommon malignancy in Asia. The etiologic factors for typical CLL are unknown.

Figure 110-1

 
 
 
Relative frequency of lymphoid malignancies. ALL, acute lymphoid leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphoid leukemia; MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
 
 

In contrast to CLL, acute lymphoid leukemias (ALLs) are predominantly cancers of children and young adults. The L3 or Burkitt's leukemia occurring in children in developing countries seems to be associated with infection by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in infancy. However, the explanation for the etiology of more common subtypes of ALL is much less certain. Childhood ALL occurs more often in higher socioeconomic subgroups. Children with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) have an increased risk for childhood ALL as well as acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Exposure to high-energy radiation in early childhood increases the risk of developing T cell ALL.

The etiology of ALL in adults is also uncertain. ALL is unusual in middle-aged adults but increases in incidence in the elderly. However, AML is still much more common in older patients. Environmental exposures, including certain industrial exposures, exposure to agricultural chemicals, and smoking, might increase the risk of developing ALL as an adult. ALL was diagnosed in 5330 persons and AML in 12,330 persons in the United States in 2010.

The preponderance of evidence suggests that Hodgkin's disease is of B cell origin. The incidence of Hodgkin's disease appears fairly stable, with 8490 new cases diagnosed in 2010 in the United States. Hodgkin's disease is more common in whites than in blacks and more common in males than in females. A bimodal distribution of age at diagnosis has been observed, with one peak incidence occurring in patients in their twenties and the other in those in their eighties. Some of the late age peak may be attributed to confusion among entities with similar appearance such as anaplastic large cell lymphoma and T cell每rich B cell lymphoma. Patients in the younger age groups diagnosed in the United States largely have the nodular sclerosing subtype of Hodgkin's disease. Elderly patients, patients infected with HIV, and patients in Third World countries more commonly have mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease or lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin's disease. Infection by HIV is a risk factor for developing Hodgkin's disease. In addition, an association between infection by EBV and Hodgkin's disease has been suggested. A monoclonal or oligoclonal proliferation of EBV-infected cells in 20每40% of the patients with Hodgkin's disease has led to proposals for this virus having an etiologic role in Hodgkin's disease. However, the matter is not settled definitively.

For unknown reasons, non-Hodgkin's lymphomas increased in frequency in the United States at the rate of 4% per year and increased 2每8% per year globally between 1950 and the late 1990s. The rate of increase in the past few years seems to be decreasing. About 65,540 new cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were diagnosed in the United States in 2010 and nearly 360,000 cases worldwide. Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas are more frequent in the elderly and more frequent in men. Patients with both primary and secondary immunodeficiency states are predisposed to developing non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. These include patients with HIV infection; patients who have undergone organ transplantation; and patients with inherited immune deficiencies, the sicca syndrome, and rheumatoid arthritis.

The incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and the patterns of expression of the various subtypes differ geographically. T cell lymphomas are more common in Asia than in Western countries, while certain subtypes of B cell lymphomas such as follicular lymphoma are more common in Western countries. A specific subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma known as the angiocentric nasal T/natural killer (NK) cell lymphoma has a striking geographic occurrence, being most frequent in Southern Asia and parts of Latin America. Another subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma associated with infection by human T cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) I is seen particularly in southern Japan and the Caribbean (Chap. 188).

A number of environmental factors have been implicated in the occurrence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, including infectious agents, chemical exposures, and medical treatments. Several studies have demonstrated an association between exposure to agricultural chemicals and an increased incidence in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Patients treated for Hodgkin's disease can develop non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; it is unclear whether this is a consequence of the Hodgkin's disease or its treatment. However, a number of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas are associated with infectious agents (Table 110每4). HTLV-I infects T cells and leads directly to the development of adult T cell lymphoma (ATL) in a small percentage of infected patients. The cumulative lifetime risk of developing lymphoma in an infected patient is 2.5%. The virus is transmitted by infected lymphocytes ingested by nursing babies of infected mothers, bloodborne transmission, or sexually. The median age of patients with ATL is 56 years, emphasizing the long latency. HTLV-I is also the cause of tropical spastic paraparesis〞a neurologic disorder that occurs somewhat more frequently than lymphoma and with shorter latency and usually from transfusion-transmitted virus (Chap. 188).

Table 110每4 Infectious Agents Associated with the Development of Lymphoid Malignancies

 
 
Infectious Agent Lymphoid Malignancy 
Epstein-Barr virus Burkitt's lymphoma

Post每organ transplant lymphoma

Primary CNS diffuse large B cell lymphoma

Hodgkin's disease

Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type
 
HTLV-I Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma 
HIV Diffuse large B cell lymphoma

Burkitt's lymphoma
 
Hepatitis C virus Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 
Helicobacter pylori  Gastric MALT lymphoma 
Human herpesvirus 8 Primary effusion lymphoma

Multicentric Castleman's disease
 
 


Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HTLV, human T cell lymphotropic virus; MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; NK, natural killer.
 

EBV is associated with the development of Burkitt's lymphoma in Central Africa and the occurrence of aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphomas in immunosuppressed patients in Western countries. The majority of primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphomas are associated with EBV. EBV infection is strongly associated with the occurrence of extranodal nasal T/NK cell lymphomas in Asia and South America. Infection with HIV predisposes to the development of aggressive, B cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. This may be through overexpression of interleukin 6 by infected macrophages. Infection of the stomach by the bacterium Helicobacter pylori induces the development of gastric MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphomas. This association is supported by evidence that patients treated with antibiotics to eradicate H. pylori have regression of their MALT lymphoma. The bacterium does not transform lymphocytes to produce the lymphoma; instead, a vigorous immune response is made to the bacterium, and the chronic antigenic stimulation leads to the neoplasia. MALT lymphomas of the skin may be related to Borrelia sp. infections, those of the eyes to Chlamydophila psittaci, and those of the small intestine to Campylobacter jejuni.

Chronic hepatitis C virus infection has been associated with the development of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Human herpesvirus 8 is associated with primary effusion lymphoma in HIV-infected persons and multicentric Castleman's disease, a diffuse lymphadenopathy associated with systemic symptoms of fever, malaise, and weight loss.

In addition to infectious agents, a number of other diseases or exposures may predispose to developing lymphoma (Table 110每5).

Table 110每5 Diseases or Exposures Associated with Increased Risk of Development of Malignant Lymphoma

 
 
Inherited immunodeficiency disease

   Klinefelter's syndrome

   Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome

   Ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome

   Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome

   Common variable

   immunodeficiency disease

Acquired immunodeficiency diseases

   Iatrogenic immunosuppression

   HIV-1 infection

   Acquired hypogammaglobulinemia
 Autoimmune disease

   Sj?gren's syndrome

   Celiac sprue

   Rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus

Chemical or drug exposures

   Phenytoin

   Dioxin, Phenoxy herbicides

   Radiation

   Prior chemotherapy and radiation therapy
 
 

 

Immunology

All lymphoid cells are derived from a common hematopoietic progenitor that gives rise to lymphoid, myeloid, erythroid, monocyte, and megakaryocyte lineages. Through the ordered and sequential activation of a series of transcription factors, the cell first becomes committed to the lymphoid lineage and then gives rise to B and T cells. About 75% of all lymphoid leukemias and 90% of all lymphomas are of B cell origin. A cell becomes committed to B cell development when it begins to rearrange its immunoglobulin genes. The sequence of cellular changes, including changes in cell-surface phenotype, that characterizes normal B cell development is shown in Fig. 110-2. A cell becomes committed to T cell differentiation upon migration to the thymus and rearrangement of T cell antigen receptor genes. The sequence of the events that characterize T cell development is depicted in Fig. 110-3.

Figure 110-2

 
 
 
Pathway of normal B cell differentiation and relationship to B cell lymphomas. HLA-DR, CD10, CD19, CD20, CD21, CD22, CD5, and CD38 are cell markers used to distinguish stages of development. Terminal transferase (TdT) is a cellular enzyme. Immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement (HCR) and light chain gene rearrangement or deletion (R or D, R or D) occur early in B cell development. The approximate normal stage of differentiation associated with particular lymphomas is shown. ALL, acute lymphoid leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphoid leukemia; SL, small lymphocytic lymphoma.
 
 

Figure 110-3

 
 
 
Pathway of normal T cell differentiation and relationship to T cell lymphomas. CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD6, CD7, CD8, CD38, and CD71 are cell markers used to distinguish stages of development. T cell antigen receptors (TCR) rearrange in the thymus, and mature T cells emigrate to nodes and peripheral blood. ALL, acute lymphoid leukemia; T-ALL, T cell ALL; T-LL, T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma; T-CLL, T cell chronic lymphoid leukemia; CTCL, cutaneous T cell lymphoma; NHL, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
 
 

Although lymphoid malignancies often retain the cell-surface phenotype of lymphoid cells at particular stages of differentiation, this information is of little consequence. The so-called stage of differentiation of a malignant lymphoma does not predict its natural history. For example, the clinically most aggressive lymphoid leukemia is Burkitt's leukemia, which has the phenotype of a mature follicle center IgM-bearing B cell. Leukemias bearing the immunologic cell-surface phenotype of more primitive cells (e.g., pre-B ALL, CD10+) are less aggressive and more amenable to curative therapy than the "more mature" appearing Burkitt's leukemia cells. Furthermore, the apparent stage of differentiation of the malignant cell does not reflect the stage at which the genetic lesions that gave rise to the malignancy developed. For example, follicular lymphoma has the cell-surface phenotype of a follicle center cell, but its characteristic chromosomal translocation, the t(14;18), which involves juxtaposition of the antiapoptotic bcl-2 gene next to the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene (see below), had to develop early in ontogeny as an error in the process of immunoglobulin gene rearrangement. Why the subsequent steps that led to transformation became manifest in a cell of follicle center differentiation is not clear.

The major value of cell-surface phenotyping is to aid in the differential diagnosis of lymphoid tumors that appear similar by light microscopy. For example, benign follicular hyperplasia may resemble follicular lymphoma; however, the demonstration that all the cells bear the same immunoglobulin light chain isotype strongly suggests the mass is a clonal proliferation rather than a polyclonal response to an exogenous stimulus.

Malignancies of lymphoid cells are associated with recurring genetic abnormalities. While specific genetic abnormalities have not been identified for all subtypes of lymphoid malignancies, it is presumed that they exist. Genetic abnormalities can be identified at a variety of levels including gross chromosomal changes (i.e., translocations, additions, or deletions); rearrangement of specific genes that may or may not be apparent from cytogenetic studies; and overexpression, underexpression, or mutation of specific oncogenes. Altered expression or mutation of specific proteins is particularly important. Many lymphomas contain balanced chromosomal translocations involving the antigen receptor genes; immunoglobulin genes on chromosomes 2, 14, and 22 in B cells; and T cell antigen receptor genes on chromosomes 7 and 14 in T cells. The rearrangement of chromosome segments to generate mature antigen receptors must create a site of vulnerability to aberrant recombination. B cells are even more susceptible to acquiring mutations during their maturation in germinal centers; the generation of antibody of higher affinity requires the introduction of mutations into the variable region genes in the germinal centers. Other nonimmunoglobulin genes, e.g., bcl-6, may acquire mutations as well.

In the case of diffuse large B cell lymphoma, the translocation t(14;18) occurs in 30% of patients and leads to overexpression of the bcl-2 gene found on chromosome 18. Some other patients without the translocation also overexpress the BCL-2 protein. This protein is involved in suppressing apoptosis〞i.e., the mechanism of cell death most often induced by cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents. A higher relapse rate has been observed in patients whose tumors overexpress the BCL-2 protein, but not in those patients whose lymphoma cells show only the translocation. Thus, particular genetic mechanisms have clinical ramifications.

Table 110每6 presents the best documented translocations and associated oncogenes for various subtypes of lymphoid malignancies. In some cases, such as the association of the t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma, the t(2;5) in anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma, the t(8;14) in Burkitt's lymphoma, and the t(11;14) in mantle cell lymphoma, the great majority of tumors in patients with these diagnoses display these abnormalities. In other types of lymphoma where a minority of the patients have tumors expressing specific genetic abnormalities, the defects may have prognostic significance. No specific genetic abnormalities have been identified in Hodgkin's disease other than aneuploidy.

Table 110每6 Cytogenetic Translocation and Associated Oncogenes Often Seen in Lymphoid Malignancies

 
 
Disease Cytogenetic Abnormality Oncogene 
CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma t(14;15)(q32;q13) 〞 
MALT lymphoma t(11;18)(q21;q21) API2/MALT, BCL-10 
Precursor B cell acute lymphoid leukemia t(9;22)(q34;q11) or variant

t(4;11)(q21;q23)
 BCR/ABL

AF4, ALLI
 
Precursor acute lymphoid leukemia t(9;22)

t(1;19)

t(17;19)

t(5;14)
 BCR, ABL

E2A, PBX 

HLF, E2A

HOX11L2, CTIP2
 
Mantle cell lymphoma t(11;14)(q13;q32) BCL-1, IgH 
Follicular lymphoma t(14;18)(q32;q21) BCL-2, IgH 
Diffuse large cell lymphoma t(3;-)(q27;-)a

t(17;-)(p13;-)
 BCL-6

p53
 
Burkitt's lymphoma, Burkitt's leukemia t(8;-)(q24;-)a  C-MYC 
CD30+ Anaplastic large cell lymphoma t(2;5)(p23;q35) ALK 
Lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma t(9;14)(p13;q32) PAX5, IgH 
 


aNumerous sites of translocation may be involved with these genes.

Abbreviations: CLL, chronic lymphoid leukemia; IgH, immunoglobulin heavy chain; MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
 

In typical B cell CLL, trisomy 12 conveys a poorer prognosis. In ALL in both adults and children, genetic abnormalities have important prognostic significance. Patients whose tumor cells display the t(9;22) and translocations involving the MLL gene on chromosome 11q23 have a much poorer outlook than patients who do not have these translocations. Other genetic abnormalities that occur frequently in adults with ALL include the t(4;11) and the t(8;14). The t(4;11) is associated with younger age, female predominance, high white cell counts, and L1 morphology. The t(8;14) is associated with older age, male predominance, frequent CNS involvement, and L3 morphology. Both are associated with a poor prognosis. In childhood ALL, hyperdiploidy has been shown to have a favorable prognosis.

Gene profiling using array technology allows the simultaneous assessment of the expression of thousands of genes. This technology provides the possibility to identify new genes with pathologic importance in lymphomas, the identification of patterns of gene expression with diagnostic and/or prognostic significance, and the identification of new therapeutic targets. Recognition of patterns of gene expression is complicated and requires sophisticated mathematical techniques. Early successes using this technology in lymphoma include the identification of previously unrecognized subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma whose gene expression patterns resemble either those of follicular center B cells or activated peripheral blood B cells. Patients whose lymphomas have a germinal center B cell pattern of gene expression have a considerably better prognosis than those whose lymphomas have a pattern resembling activated peripheral blood B cells. This improved prognosis is independent of other known prognostic factors. Similar information is being generated in follicular lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma. The challenge remains to provide information from such techniques in a clinically useful time frame.

Approach to the Patient: Lymphoid Cell Malignancies

Regardless of the type of lymphoid malignancy, the initial evaluation of the patient should include performance of a careful history and physical examination. These will help confirm the diagnosis, identify those manifestations of the disease that might require prompt attention, and aid in the selection of further studies to optimally characterize the patient's status to allow the best choice of therapy. It is difficult to overemphasize the importance of a carefully done history and physical examination. They might provide observations that lead to reconsidering the diagnosis, provide hints at etiology, clarify the stage, and allow the physician to establish rapport with the patient that will make it possible to develop and carry out a therapeutic plan.

For patients with ALL, evaluation is usually completed after a complete blood count, chemistry studies reflecting major organ function, a bone marrow biopsy with genetic and immunologic studies, and a lumbar puncture. The latter is necessary to rule out occult CNS involvement. At this point, most patients would be ready to begin therapy. In ALL, prognosis is dependent upon the genetic characteristics of the tumor, the patient's age, the white cell count, and the patient's overall clinical status and major organ function.

In CLL, the patient evaluation should include a complete blood count, chemistry tests to measure major organ function, serum protein electrophoresis, and a bone marrow biopsy. However, some physicians believe that the diagnosis would not always require a bone marrow biopsy. Patients often have imaging studies of the chest and abdomen looking for pathologic lymphadenopathy. Patients with typical B cell CLL can be subdivided into three major prognostic groups. Those patients with only blood and bone marrow involvement by leukemia but no lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, or signs of bone marrow failure have the best prognosis. Those with lymphadenopathy and organomegaly have an intermediate prognosis, and patients with bone marrow failure, defined as hemoglobin <100 g/L (10 g/dL) or platelet count <100,000/L, have the worst prognosis. The pathogenesis of the anemia or thrombocytopenia is important to discern. The prognosis is adversely affected when either or both of these abnormalities are due to progressive marrow infiltration and loss of productive marrow. However, either or both may be due to autoimmune phenomena or to hypersplenism that can develop during the course of the disease. These destructive mechanisms are usually completely reversible (glucocorticoids for autoimmune disease; splenectomy for hypersplenism) and do not influence disease prognosis.

Two popular staging systems have been developed to reflect these prognostic groupings (Table 110每7). Patients with typical B cell CLL can have their course complicated by immunologic abnormalities, including autoimmune hemolytic anemia, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and hypogammaglobulinemia. Patients with hypogammaglobulinemia benefit from regular (monthly)  globulin administration. Because of expense,  globulin is often withheld until the patient experiences a significant infection. These abnormalities do not have a clear prognostic significance and should not be used to assign a higher stage.

Table 110每7 Staging of Typical B Cell Lymphoid Leukemia

 
 
Stage Clinical Features Median Survival, Years 
Rai System  
0: Low risk Lymphocytosis only in blood and marrow >10 
I: Intermediate risk Lymphocytosis + lymphadenopathy >7 
II: Intermediate risk Lymphocytosis + lymphadenopathy + splenomegaly ㊣ hepatomegaly   
III: High risk Lymphocytosis + anemia 1.5 
IV: High risk Lymphocytosis + thrombocytopenia   
Binet System  
A Fewer than three areas of clinical lymphadenopathy; no anemia or thrombocytopenia >10 
B Three or more involved node areas; no anemia or thrombocytopenia 7 
C Hemoglobin 10 g/dL and/or platelets <100,000/L 2 
 

 

Two other features may be used to assess prognosis in B cell CLL, but neither has yet been incorporated into a staging classification. At least two subsets of CLL have been identified based on the cytoplasmic expression of ZAP-70; expression of this protein, which is usually expressed in T cells, identifies a subgroup with poorer prognosis. A less powerful subsetting tool is CD38 expression. CD38+ tumors tend to have a poorer prognosis than CD38每 tumors.

The initial evaluation of a patient with Hodgkin's disease or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is similar. In both situations, the determination of an accurate anatomic stage is an important part of the evaluation. Staging is done using the Ann Arbor staging system originally developed for Hodgkin's disease (Table 110每8).

Table 110每8 The Ann Arbor Staging System for Hodgkin's Disease

 
 
Stage Definition 
I Involvement of a single lymph node region or lymphoid structure (e.g., spleen, thymus, Waldeyer's ring) 
II Involvement of two or more lymph node regions on the same side of the diaphragm (the mediastinum is a single site; hilar lymph nodes should be considered "lateralized" and, when involved on both sides, constitute stage II disease) 
III Involvement of lymph node regions or lymphoid structures on both sides of the diaphragm 
  III1
    Subdiaphragmatic involvement limited to spleen, splenic hilar nodes, celiac nodes, or portal nodes 
  III2
    Subdiaphragmatic involvement includes paraaortic, iliac, or mesenteric nodes plus structures in III1
  
IV Involvement of extranodal site(s) beyond that designated as "E"
 
    More than one extranodal deposit at any location
 
    Any involvement of liver or bone marrow
   
A No symptoms 
B Unexplained weight loss of >10% of the body weight during the 6 months before staging investigation
 
  Unexplained, persistent, or recurrent fever with temperatures >38∼C during the previous month
 
  Recurrent drenching night sweats during the previous month
 
E Localized, solitary involvement of extralymphatic tissue, excluding liver and bone marrow 
 

 

Evaluation of patients with Hodgkin's disease will typically include a complete blood count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; chemistry studies reflecting major organ function; CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and a bone marrow biopsy. Neither a positron emission tomography (PET) scan nor a gallium scan is absolutely necessary for primary staging, but one performed at the completion of therapy allows evaluation of persisting radiographic abnormalities, particularly the mediastinum. Knowing that the PET scan or gallium scan is abnormal before treatment can help in this assessment. In most cases, these studies will allow assignment of anatomic stage and the development of a therapeutic plan.

In patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, the same evaluation described for patients with Hodgkin's disease is usually carried out. In addition, serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and 2-microglobulin and serum protein electrophoresis are often included in the evaluation. Anatomic stage is assigned in the same manner as used for Hodgkin's disease. However, the prognosis of patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is best assigned using the International Prognostic Index (IPI) (Table 110每9). This is a powerful predictor of outcome in all subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Patients are assigned an IPI score based on the presence or absence of five adverse prognostic factors and may have none or all five of these adverse prognostic factors. Figure 110-4 shows the prognostic significance of this score in 1300 patients with all types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. With the addition of rituximab to CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), treatment outcomes have improved and the original IPI has lost some of its discrimination power. A revised IPI has been proposed that better predicts outcome of rituximab plus chemotherapy-based programs (Table 110每9). CT scans are routinely used in the evaluation of patients with all subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, but PET and gallium scans are much more useful in aggressive subtypes such as diffuse large B cell lymphoma than in more indolent subtypes such as follicular lymphoma or small lymphocytic lymphoma. While the IPI does divide patients with follicular lymphoma into subsets with distinct prognoses, the distribution of such patients is skewed toward lower-risk categories. A follicular lymphoma每specific IPI (FLIPI) has been proposed that replaces performance status with hemoglobin level [<120 g/L (<12 g/dL)] and number of extranodal sites with number of nodal sites (more than four). Low risk (zero or one factor) was assigned to 36% of patients, intermediate risk (two factors) to 37%, and poor risk (more than two factors) to 27% of patients.

Table 110每9 International Prognostic Index for NHL

 
 
Five clinical risk factors:  
   Age  60 years

   Serum lactate dehydrogenase levels elevated

   Performance status 2 (ECOG) or  70 (Karnofsky)

   Ann Arbor stage III or IV

   >1 site of extranodal involvement

Patients are assigned a number for each risk factor they have

Patients are grouped differently based upon the type of lymphoma
 
For diffuse large B cell lymphoma:  
  0, 1 factor = low risk: 35% of cases; 5-year survival, 73% 
  2 factors = low-intermediate risk: 27% of cases; 5-year survival, 51% 
  3 factors = high-intermediate risk: 22% of cases; 5-year survival, 43% 
  4, 5 factors = high risk: 16% of cases; 5-year survival, 26% 
For diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP:  
  0 factor = very good: 10% of cases; 5-year survival, 94% 
  1, 2 factors = good: 45% of cases; 5-year survival, 79% 
  3, 4, 5 factors = poor: 45% of cases; 5-year survival, 55% 
 


Abbreviations: ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; R-CHOP, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone.
 
Figure 110-4

 
 
 
Relationship of International Prognostic Index (IPI) to survival. Kaplan-Meier survival curves for 1300 patients with various kinds of lymphoma stratified according to the IPI.
 
 
 
Clinical Features, Treatment, and Prognosis of Specific Lymphoid Malignancies

Precursor Cell B Cell Neoplasms

Precursor B Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma

The most common cancer in childhood is B cell ALL. Although this disorder can also present as a lymphoma in either adults or children, presentation as lymphoma is rare.

The malignant cells in patients with precursor B cell lymphoblastic leukemia are most commonly of pre每B cell origin. Patients typically present with signs of bone marrow failure such as pallor, fatigue, bleeding, fever, and infection related to peripheral blood cytopenias. Peripheral blood counts regularly show anemia and thrombocytopenia but might show leukopenia, a normal leukocyte count, or leukocytosis based largely on the number of circulating malignant cells (Fig. 110-5). Extramedullary sites of disease are frequently involved in patients who present with leukemia, including lymphadenopathy, hepato- or splenomegaly, CNS disease, testicular enlargement, and/or cutaneous infiltration.

Figure 110-5

 
 
 
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The cells are heterogeneous in size, have round or convoluted nuclei, high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and absence of cytoplasmic granules.
 
 

The diagnosis is usually made by bone marrow biopsy, which shows infiltration by malignant lymphoblasts. Demonstration of a pre每B cell immunophenotype (Fig. 110-2) and, often, characteristic cytogenetic abnormalities (Table 110每6) confirm the diagnosis. An adverse prognosis in patients with precursor B cell ALL is predicted by a very high white cell count, the presence of symptomatic CNS disease, and unfavorable cytogenetic abnormalities. For example, t(9;22), frequently found in adults with B cell ALL, has been associated with a very poor outlook. The bcr/abl kinase inhibitors have improved the prognosis.

Treatment: Precursor B Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia

The treatment of patients with precursor B cell ALL involves remission induction with combination chemotherapy, a consolidation phase that includes administration of high-dose systemic therapy and treatment to eliminate disease in the CNS, and a period of continuing therapy to prevent relapse and effect cure. The overall cure rate in children is 90%, while 50% of adults are long-term disease-free survivors. This reflects the high proportion of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities seen in adults with precursor B cell ALL.

Precursor B cell lymphoblastic lymphoma is a rare presentation of precursor B cell lymphoblastic malignancy. These patients often have a rapid transformation to leukemia and should be treated as though they had presented with leukemia. The few patients who present with the disease confined to lymph nodes have a high cure rate.

Mature (Peripheral) B Cell Neoplasms

B Cell Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma

B cell CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma represents the most common lymphoid leukemia, and when presenting as a lymphoma, it accounts for 7% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Presentation can be as either leukemia or lymphoma. The major clinical characteristics of B cell CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma are presented in Table 110每10.

Table 110每10 Clinical Characteristics of Patients with Common Types of Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas (NHL)

 
 
Disease Median Age, years Frequency in Children % Male Stage I/II vs III/IV, % B Symptoms, % Bone Marrow Involvement, % Gastrointestinal Tract Involvement, % % Surviving 5 years 
B cell chronic lymphocytic

leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
 65 Rare 53 9 vs 91 33 72 3 51 
Mantle cell lymphoma 63 Rare 74 20 vs 80 28 64 9 27 
Extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma of MALT type 60 Rare 48 67 vs 33 19 14 50 74 
Follicular lymphoma 59 Rare 42 33 vs 67 28 42 4 72 
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma 64 ~25% of childhood NHL 55 54 vs 46 33 16 18 46 
Burkitt's lymphoma 31 ~30% of childhood NHL 89 62 vs 38 22 33 11 45 
Precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma 28 ~40% of childhood NHL 64 11 vs 89 21 50 4 26 
Anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma 34 Common 69 51 vs 49 53 13 9 77 
Peripheral T cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 61 ~5% of childhood NHL 55 20 vs 80 50 36 15 25 
 


Abbreviation: MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
 

The diagnosis of typical B cell CLL is made when an increased number of circulating lymphocytes (i.e., >4 x 109/L and usually >10 x 109/L) is found (Fig. 110-6) that are monoclonal B cells expressing the CD5 antigen. Finding bone marrow infiltration by the same cells confirms the diagnosis. The peripheral blood smear in such patients typically shows many "smudge" or "basket" cells, nuclear remnants of cells damaged by the physical shear stress of making the blood smear. If cytogenetic studies are performed, trisomy 12 is found in 25每30% of patients. Abnormalities in chromosome 13 are also seen.

Figure 110-6

 
 
 
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. The peripheral white blood cell count is high due to increased numbers of small, well每differentiated, normal-appearing lymphocytes. The leukemia lymphocytes are fragile, and substantial numbers of broken, smudged cells are usually also present on the blood smear.
 
 

If the primary presentation is lymphadenopathy and a lymph node biopsy is performed, pathologists usually have little difficulty in making the diagnosis of small lymphocytic lymphoma based on morphologic findings and immunophenotype. However, even in these patients, 70每75% will be found to have bone marrow involvement and circulating monoclonal B lymphocytes are often present.

The differential diagnosis of typical B cell CLL is extensive (Table 110每1). Immunophenotyping will eliminate the T cell disorders and can often help sort out other B cell malignancies. For example, only mantle cell lymphoma and typical B cell CLL are usually CD5 positive. Typical B cell small lymphocytic lymphoma can be confused with other B cell disorders, including lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (i.e., the tissue manifestation of Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia), nodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma, and mantle cell lymphoma. In addition, some small lymphocytic lymphomas have areas of large cells that can lead to confusion with diffuse large B cell lymphoma. An expert hematopathologist is vital for making this distinction.

Typical B cell CLL is often found incidentally when a complete blood count is done for another reason. However, complaints that might lead to the diagnosis include fatigue, frequent infections, and new lymphadenopathy. The diagnosis of typical B cell CLL should be considered in a patient presenting with an autoimmune hemolytic anemia or autoimmune thrombocytopenia. B cell CLL has also been associated with red cell aplasia. When this disorder presents as lymphoma, the most common abnormality is asymptomatic lymphadenopathy, with or without splenomegaly. The staging systems predict prognosis in patients with typical B cell CLL (Table 110每7). The evaluation of a new patient with typical B cell CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma will include many of the studies (Table 110每11) that are used in patients with other non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. In addition, particular attention needs to be given to detecting immune abnormalities such as autoimmune hemolytic anemia, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, and red cell aplasia. Molecular analysis of immunoglobulin gene sequences in CLL has demonstrated that about half the patients have tumors expressing mutated immunoglobulin genes and half have tumors expressing unmutated or germ-line immunoglobulin sequences. Patients with unmutated immunoglobulins tend to have a more aggressive clinical course and are less responsive to therapy. Unfortunately, immunoglobulin gene sequencing is not routinely available. CD38 expression is said to be low in the better-prognosis patients expressing mutated immunoglobulin and high in poorer-prognosis patients expressing unmutated immunoglobulin, but this test has not been confirmed as a reliable means of distinguishing the two groups. ZAP-70 expression correlates with the presence of unmutated immunoglobulin genes, but the assay is not yet standardized and widely available.

Table 110每11 Staging Evaluation for Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma

 
 
Physical examination

Documentation of B symptoms

Laboratory evaluation

   Complete blood counts

   Liver function tests

   Uric acid

   Calcium

Serum protein electrophoresis

   Serum 2-microglobulin

Chest radiograph

CT scan of abdomen, pelvis, and usually chest

Bone marrow biopsy

Lumbar puncture in lymphoblastic, Burkitt's, and diffuse large B cell lymphoma with positive marrow biopsy

Gallium scan (SPECT) or PET scan in large cell lymphoma
 
 


Abbreviations: PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single photon emission CT.
 

Treatment: B Cell Chronic Lymphoid Leukemia/Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma

Patients whose presentation is typical B cell CLL with no manifestations of the disease other than bone marrow involvement and lymphocytosis (i.e., Rai stage 0 and Binet stage A; Table 110每7) can be followed without specific therapy for their malignancy. These patients have a median survival >10 years, and some will never require therapy for this disorder. If the patient has an adequate number of circulating normal blood cells and is asymptomatic, many physicians would not initiate therapy for patients in the intermediate stage of the disease manifested by lymphadenopathy and/or hepatosplenomegaly. However, the median survival for these patients is 7 years, and most will require treatment in the first few years of follow-up. Patients who present with bone marrow failure (i.e., Rai stage III or IV or Binet stage C) will require initial therapy in almost all cases. These patients have a serious disorder with a median survival of only 1.5 years. It must be remembered that immune manifestations of typical B cell CLL should be managed independently of specific antileukemia therapy. For example, glucocorticoid therapy for autoimmune cytopenias and  globulin replacement for patients with hypogammaglobulinemia should be used whether or not antileukemia therapy is given.

Patients who present primarily with lymphoma and have a low IPI score have a 5-year survival of 75%, but those with a high IPI score have a 5-year survival of <40% and are more likely to require early therapy.

The most common treatments for patients with typical B cell CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma have been chlorambucil or fludarabine, alone or in combination. Chlorambucil can be administered orally with few immediate side effects, while fludarabine is administered IV and is associated with significant immune suppression. However, fludarabine is by far the more active agent and is the only drug associated with a significant incidence of complete remission. The combination of rituximab (375每500 mg/m2 day 1), fludarabine (25 mg/m2 days 2每4 on cycle 1 and 1每3 in subsequent cycles), and cyclophosphamide (250 mg/m2 with fludarabine) achieves complete responses in 69% of patients, and those responses are associated with molecular remissions in half of the cases. Half the patients experience grade III or IV neutropenia. For young patients presenting with leukemia requiring therapy, regimens containing fludarabine are the treatment of choice. Because fludarabine is an effective second-line agent in patients with tumors unresponsive to chlorambucil, the latter agent is often chosen in elderly patients who require therapy. Bendamustine, an alkylating agent structurally related to nitrogen mustard, is highly effective and is vying with fludarabine as the primary treatment of choice. Patients who present with lymphoma (rather than leukemia) are also highly responsive to bendamustine and some patients will receive a combination chemotherapy regimen used in other lymphomas such as CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone) or CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) plus rituximab. Alemtuzumab (anti-CD52) is an antibody with activity in the disease, but it kills both B and T cells and is associated with more immune compromise than rituximab. Young patients with this disease can be candidates for bone marrow transplantation. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation can be curative but is associated with a significant treatment-related mortality rate. Mini-transplants using immunosuppressive rather than myeloablative doses of preparative drugs are being studied (Chap. 114). The use of autologous transplantation in patients with this disorder has been discouraging.

Extranodal Marginal Zone B Cell Lymphoma of Malt Type

Extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma of MALT type (MALT lymphoma) makes up 8% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. This small cell lymphoma presents in extranodal sites. It was previously considered a small lymphocytic lymphoma or sometimes a pseudolymphoma. The recognition that the gastric presentation of this lymphoma was associated with H. pylori infection was an important step in recognizing it as a separate entity. The clinical characteristics of MALT lymphoma are presented in Table 110每10.

The diagnosis of MALT lymphoma can be made accurately by an expert hematopathologist based on a characteristic pattern of infiltration of small lymphocytes that are monoclonal B cells and CD5 negative. In some cases, transformation to diffuse large B cell lymphoma occurs, and both diagnoses may be made in the same biopsy. The differential diagnosis includes benign lymphocytic infiltration of extranodal organs and other small cell B cell lymphomas.

MALT lymphoma may occur in the stomach, orbit, intestine, lung, thyroid, salivary gland, skin, soft tissues, bladder, kidney, and CNS. It may present as a new mass, be found on routine imaging studies, or be associated with local symptoms such as upper abdominal discomfort in gastric lymphoma. Most MALT lymphomas are gastric in origin. At least two genetic forms of gastric MALT exist: one (accounting for 50% of cases) characterized by t(11;18)(q21;q21) that juxtaposes the amino terminal of the API2 gene with the carboxy terminal of the MALT1 gene creating an API2/MALT1 fusion product, and the other characterized by multiple sites of genetic instability including trisomies of chromosomes 3, 7, 12, and 18. About 95% of gastric MALT lymphomas are associated with H. pylori infection, and those that are do not usually express t(11;18). The t(11;18) usually results in activation of NF-B, which acts as a survival factor for the cells. Lymphomas with t(11;18) translocations are genetically stable and do not evolve to diffuse large B cell lymphoma. By contrast, t(11;18)-negative MALT lymphomas often acquire BCL6 mutations and progress to aggressive histology lymphoma. MALT lymphomas are localized to the organ of origin in 40% of cases and to the organ and regional lymph nodes in 30% of patients. However, distant metastasis can occur〞particularly with transformation to diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Many patients who develop this lymphoma will have an autoimmune or inflammatory process such as Sj?gren's syndrome (salivary gland MALT), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (thyroid MALT), Helicobacter gastritis (gastric MALT), C. psittaci conjunctivitis (ocular MALT), or Borrelia skin infections (cutaneous MALT).

Evaluation of patients with MALT lymphoma follows the pattern (Table 110每11) for staging a patient with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. In particular, patients with gastric lymphoma need to have studies performed to document the presence or absence of H. pylori infection. Endoscopic studies including ultrasound can help define the extent of gastric involvement. Most patients with MALT lymphoma have a good prognosis, with a 5-year survival of 75%. In patients with a low IPI score, the 5-year survival is 90%, while it drops to 40% in patients with a high IPI score.

Treatment: Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma

MALT lymphoma is often localized. Patients with gastric MALT lymphomas who are infected with H. pylori can achieve remission in the 80% of cases with eradication of the infection. These remissions can be durable, but molecular evidence of persisting neoplasia is not infrequent. After H. pylori eradication, symptoms generally improve quickly but molecular evidence of persistent disease may be present for 12每18 months. Additional therapy is not indicated unless progressive disease is documented. Patients with more extensive disease or progressive disease are most often treated with single-agent chemotherapy such as chlorambucil. Combination regimens that include rituximab are also highly effective. Coexistent diffuse large B cell lymphoma must be treated with combination chemotherapy (see below). The additional acquired mutations that mediate the histologic progression also convey Helicobacter independence to the growth.

Mantle Cell Lymphoma

Mantle cell lymphoma makes up 6% of all non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. This lymphoma was previously placed in a number of other subtypes. Its existence was confirmed by the recognition that these lymphomas have a characteristic chromosomal translocation, t(11;14), between the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene on chromosome 14 and the bcl-1 gene on chromosome 11, and regularly overexpress the BCL-1 protein, also known as cyclin D1. Table 110每10 shows the clinical characteristics of mantle cell lymphoma.

The diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma can be made accurately by an expert hematopathologist. As with all subtypes of lymphoma, an adequate biopsy is important. The differential diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma includes other small cell B cell lymphomas. In particular, mantle cell lymphoma and small lymphocytic lymphoma share a characteristic expression of CD5. Mantle cell lymphoma usually has a slightly indented nucleus.

The most common presentation of mantle cell lymphoma is with palpable lymphadenopathy, frequently accompanied by systemic symptoms. The median age is 63 years and men are affected four times as commonly as women. Approximately 70% of patients will be stage IV at the time of diagnosis, with frequent bone marrow and peripheral blood involvement. Of the extranodal organs that can be involved, gastrointestinal involvement is particularly important to recognize. Patients who present with lymphomatosis polyposis in the large intestine usually have mantle cell lymphoma. Table 110每11 outlines the evaluation of patients with mantle cell lymphoma. Patients who present with gastrointestinal tract involvement often have Waldeyer's ring involvement, and vice versa. The 5-year survival for all patients with mantle cell lymphoma is 25%, with only occasional patients who present with a high IPI score surviving 5 years and 50% of patients with a low IPI score surviving 5 years.

Treatment: Mantle Cell Lymphoma

Current therapies for mantle cell lymphoma are evolving. Patients with localized disease might be treated with combination chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy; however, these patients are exceedingly rare. For the usual presentation with disseminated disease, standard lymphoma treatments have been unsatisfactory, with the minority of patients achieving complete remission. Aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens followed by autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation are frequently offered to younger patients. For the occasional elderly, asymptomatic patient, observation followed by single-agent chemotherapy might be the most practical approach. An intensive combination chemotherapy regimen originally used in the treatment of acute leukemia, HyperC-VAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone, cytarabine, and methotrexate), in combination with rituximab, seems to be associated with better response rates〞particularly in younger patients. Alternating two regimens, HyperC-VAD with rituximab added (R-HyperC-VAD) and rituximab plus high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine can achieve complete responses in >80% of patients and 8-year survival of 56%, comparable to regimens employing high-dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bortezomib, temsirolimus, and bendamustine are single agents that induce transient partial responses in a minority of patients and are being added to primary combinations.

Follicular Lymphoma

Follicular lymphomas make up 22% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas worldwide and at least 30% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas diagnosed in the United States. This type of lymphoma can be diagnosed accurately on morphologic findings alone and has been the diagnosis in the majority of patients in therapeutic trials for "low-grade" lymphoma in the past. The clinical characteristics of follicular lymphoma are presented in Table 110每10.

Evaluation of an adequate biopsy by an expert hematopathologist is sufficient to make a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma. The tumor is composed of small cleaved and large cells in varying proportions organized in a follicular pattern of growth (Fig. 110-7). Confirmation of B cell immunophenotype and the existence of the t(14;18) and abnormal expression of BCL-2 protein are confirmatory. The major differential diagnosis is between lymphoma and reactive follicular hyperplasia. The coexistence of diffuse large B cell lymphoma must be considered. Patients with follicular lymphoma are often subclassified into those with predominantly small cells, those with a mixture of small and large cells, and those with predominantly large cells. While this distinction cannot be made simply or very accurately, these subdivisions do have prognostic significance. Patients with follicular lymphoma with predominantly large cells have a higher proliferative fraction, progress more rapidly, and have a shorter overall survival with simple chemotherapy regimens.

Figure 110-7

 
 
 
Follicular lymphoma. The normal nodal architecture is -effaced by nodular expansions of tumor cells. Nodules vary in size and contain predominantly small lymphocytes with cleaved nuclei along with variable numbers of larger cells with vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli.
 
 

The most common presentation for follicular lymphoma is with new, painless lymphadenopathy. Multiple sites of lymphoid involvement are typical, and unusual sites such as epitrochlear nodes are sometimes seen. However, essentially any organ can be involved, and extranodal presentations do occur. Most patients do not have fevers, sweats, or weight loss, and an IPI score of 0 or 1 is found in 50% of patients. Fewer than 10% of patients have a high (i.e., 4 or 5) IPI score. The staging evaluation for patients with follicular lymphoma should include the studies included in Table 110每11.

Treatment: Follicular Lymphoma

Follicular lymphoma is one of the malignancies most responsive to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In addition, tumors in as many as 25% of the patients undergo spontaneous regression〞usually transient〞without therapy. In an asymptomatic patient, no initial treatment and watchful waiting can be an appropriate management strategy and is particularly likely to be adopted for older patients with advanced-stage disease. For patients who do require treatment, single-agent chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide or combination chemotherapy with CVP or CHOP are most frequently used. With adequate treatment, 50每75% of patients will achieve a complete remission. While most patients relapse (median response duration is 2 years), at least 20% of complete responders will remain in remission for >10 years. For the rare patient (15%) with localized follicular lymphoma, involved field radiotherapy produces long-term disease-free survival in the majority.

A number of therapies have been shown to be active in the treatment of patients with follicular lymphoma. These include cytotoxic agents such as fludarabine, biologic agents such as interferon , monoclonal antibodies with or without radionuclides, and lymphoma vaccines. In patients treated with a doxorubicin-containing combination chemotherapy regimen, interferon  given to patients in complete remission seems to prolong survival, but interferon toxicities can affect quality of life. The monoclonal antibody rituximab can cause objective responses in 35每50% of patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma, and radiolabeled antibodies appear to have response rates well in excess of 50%. The addition of rituximab to CHOP and other effective combination chemotherapy programs is beginning to show prolonged overall survival and a decreased risk of histologic progression. Complete remissions can be noted in 85% or more of patients treated with R-CHOP and median remission durations can exceed 6 or 7 years. Maintenance intermittent rituximab therapy can prolong remissions even further, though it is not completely clear that overall survival is prolonged. Some trials with tumor vaccines have been encouraging. Both autologous and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation yield high complete response rates in patients with relapsed follicular lymphoma, and long-term remissions can occur in 40% or more of patients.

Patients with follicular lymphoma with a predominance of large cells have a shorter survival when treated with single-agent chemotherapy but seem to benefit from receiving an anthracycline-containing combination chemotherapy regimen plus rituximab. When their disease is treated aggressively, the overall survival for such patients is no lower than for patients with other follicular lymphomas, and the failure-free survival is superior.

Patients with follicular lymphoma have a high rate of histologic transformation to diffuse large B cell lymphoma (5每7% per year). This is recognized 40% of the time during the course of the illness by repeat biopsy and is present in almost all patients at autopsy. This transformation is usually heralded by rapid growth of lymph nodes〞often localized〞and the development of systemic symptoms such as fevers, sweats, and weight loss. Although these patients have a poor prognosis, aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens can sometimes cause a complete remission in the diffuse large B cell lymphoma, at times leaving the patient with persisting follicular lymphoma. With more frequent use of R-CHOP to treat follicular lymphoma at diagnosis, it appears that the rate of histologic progression is decreasing.

Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma is the most common type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, representing approximately one-third of all cases. This lymphoma makes up the majority of cases in previous clinical trials of "aggressive" or "intermediate-grade" lymphoma. Table 110每10 shows the clinical characteristics of diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

The diagnosis of diffuse large B cell lymphoma can be made accurately by an expert hematopathologist (Fig. 110-8). Cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies are not necessary for diagnosis, but some evidence has accumulated that patients whose tumors overexpress the BCL-2 protein might be more likely to relapse than others. Patients with prominent mediastinal involvement are sometimes diagnosed as a separate subgroup having primary mediastinal diffuse large B cell lymphoma. This latter group of patients has a younger median age (i.e., 37 years) and a female predominance (66%). Subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma, including those with an immunoblastic subtype and tumors with extensive fibrosis, are recognized by pathologists but do not appear to have important independent prognostic significance.

Figure 110-8

 
 
 
Diffuse large B cell lymphoma. The neoplastic cells are heterogeneous but predominantly large cells with vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli.
 
 

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma can present as either primary lymph node disease or at extranodal sites. More than 50% of patients will have some site of extranodal involvement at diagnosis, with the most common sites being the gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow, each being involved in 15每20% of patients. Essentially any organ can be involved, making a diagnostic biopsy imperative. For example, diffuse large B cell lymphoma of the pancreas has a much better prognosis than pancreatic carcinoma but would be missed without biopsy. Primary diffuse large B cell lymphoma of the brain is being diagnosed with increasing frequency. Other unusual subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma such as pleural effusion lymphoma and intravascular lymphoma have been difficult to diagnose and associated with a very poor prognosis.

Table 110每11 shows the initial evaluation of patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma. After a careful staging evaluation, 50% of patients will be found to have stage I or II disease and 50% will have widely disseminated lymphoma. Bone marrow biopsy shows involvement by lymphoma in 15% of cases, with marrow involvement by small cells more frequent than by large cells.

Treatment: Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma

The initial treatment of all patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma should be with a combination chemotherapy regimen. The most popular regimen in the United States is CHOP plus rituximab, although a variety of other anthracycline-containing combination chemotherapy regimens appear to be equally efficacious. Patients with stage I or nonbulky stage II disease can be effectively treated with three to four cycles of combination chemotherapy with or without subsequent involved field radiotherapy. The need for radiation therapy is unclear. Cure rates of 70每80% in stage II disease and 85每90% in stage I disease can be expected.

For patients with bulky stage II, stage III, or stage IV disease, six to eight cycles of CHOP plus rituximab are usually administered. A large randomized trial showed the superiority of CHOP combined with rituximab over CHOP alone in elderly patients. A frequent approach would be to administer four cycles of therapy and then reevaluate. If the patient has achieved a complete remission after four cycles, two more cycles of treatment might be given and then therapy discontinued. Using this approach, 70每80% of patients can be expected to achieve a complete remission, and 50每70% of complete responders will be cured. The chances for a favorable response to treatment are predicted by the IPI. In fact, the IPI was developed based on the outcome of patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with CHOP-like regimens. For the 35% of patients with a low IPI score of 0每1, the 5-year survival is >70%, while for the 20% of patients with a high IPI score of 4每5, the 5-year survival is 20%. The addition of rituximab to CHOP has improved each of those numbers by 15%. A number of other factors, including molecular features of the tumor, levels of circulating cytokines and soluble receptors, and other surrogate markers, have been shown to influence prognosis. However, they have not been validated as rigorously as the IPI and have not been uniformly applied clinically.

Because a number of patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma are either initially refractory to therapy or relapse after apparently effective chemotherapy, 30每40% of patients will be candidates for salvage treatment at some point. Alternative combination chemotherapy regimens can induce complete remission in as many as 50% of these patients, but long-term disease-free survival is seen in 10%. Autologous bone marrow transplantation is superior to salvage chemotherapy at usual doses and leads to long-term disease-free survival in 40% of patients whose lymphomas remain chemotherapy-sensitive after relapse.

Burkitt's Lymphoma/Leukemia

Burkitt's lymphoma/leukemia is a rare disease in adults in the United States, making up <1% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, but it makes up 30% of childhood non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Burkitt's leukemia, or L3 ALL, makes up a small proportion of childhood and adult acute leukemias. Table 110每10 shows the clinical features of Burkitt's lymphoma.

Burkitt's lymphoma can be diagnosed morphologically by an expert hematopathologist with a high degree of accuracy. The cells are homogeneous in size and shape (Fig. 110-9). Demonstration of a very high proliferative fraction and the presence of the t(8;14) or one of its variants, t(2;8) (c-myc and the  light chain gene) or t(8;22) (c-myc and the  light chain gene), can be confirmatory. Burkitt's cell leukemia is recognized by the typical monotonous mass of medium-sized cells with round nuclei, multiple nucleoli, and basophilic cytoplasm with cytoplasmic vacuoles. Demonstration of surface expression of immunoglobulin and one of the above-noted cytogenetic abnormalities is confirmatory.

Figure 110-9

 
 
 
Burkitt's lymphoma. The neoplastic cells are homogeneous, medium-sized B cells with frequent mitotic figures, a morphologic correlate of high growth fraction. Reactive macrophages are scattered through the tumor and their pale cytoplasm in a background of blue-staining tumor cells give the tumor a so-called starry sky appearance.
 
 

Three distinct clinical forms of Burkitt's lymphoma are recognized; endemic, sporadic, and immunodeficiency-associated. Endemic and sporadic Burkitt's lymphomas occur frequently in children in Africa, and the sporadic form in Western countries. Immunodeficiency-associated Burkitt's lymphoma is seen in patients with HIV infection.

Pathologists sometimes have difficulty distinguishing between Burkitt's lymphoma and diffuse large B cell lymphoma. In the past, a separate subgroup of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma intermediate between the two was recognized. When tested, this subgroup could not be diagnosed accurately. Distinction between the two major types of B cell aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma can sometimes be made based on the extremely high proliferative fraction seen in patients with Burkitt's lymphoma (i.e., essentially 100% of tumor cells are in cycle) caused by c-myc deregulation.

Most patients in the United States with Burkitt's lymphoma present with peripheral lymphadenopathy or an intraabdominal mass. The disease is rapidly progressive and has a propensity to metastasize to the CNS. Initial evaluation should always include an examination of cerebrospinal fluid to rule out metastasis in addition to the other staging evaluations noted in Table 110每11. Once the diagnosis of Burkitt's lymphoma is suspected, a diagnosis must be made promptly and staging evaluation must be accomplished expeditiously. This is the most rapidly progressive human tumor, and any delay in initiating therapy can adversely affect the patient's prognosis.

Treatment: Burkitt's Lymphoma

Treatment of Burkitt's lymphoma in both children and adults should begin within 48 h of diagnosis and involves the use of intensive combination chemotherapy regimens incorporating high doses of cyclophosphamide. Prophylactic therapy to the CNS is mandatory. Burkitt's lymphoma was one of the first cancers shown to be curable by chemotherapy. Today, cure can be expected in 70每80% of both children and young adults when effective therapy is administered precisely. Salvage therapy has been generally ineffective in patients failing the initial treatment, emphasizing the importance of the initial treatment approach.

Other B Cell Lymphoid Malignancies

B cell prolymphocytic leukemia involves blood and marrow infiltration by large lymphocytes with prominent nucleoli. Patients typically have a high white cell count, splenomegaly, and minimal lymphadenopathy. The chances for a complete response to therapy are poor.

Hairy cell leukemia is a rare disease that presents predominantly in older males. Typical presentation involves pancytopenia, although occasional patients will have a leukemic presentation. Splenomegaly is usual. The malignant cells appear to have "hairy" projections on light and electron microscopy and show a characteristic staining pattern with tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase. Bone marrow is typically not able to be aspirated, and biopsy shows a pattern of fibrosis with diffuse infiltration by the malignant cells. Patients with this disorder are prone to unusual infections, including infection by Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, and to vasculitic syndromes. Hairy cell leukemia is responsive to chemotherapy with interferon , pentostatin, or cladribine, with the latter being the usually preferred treatment. Clinical complete remissions with cladribine occur in the majority of patients, and long-term disease-free survival is frequent.

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma involves infiltration of the splenic white pulp by small, monoclonal B cells. This is a rare disorder that can present as leukemia as well as lymphoma. Definitive diagnosis is often made at splenectomy, which is also an effective therapy. This is an extremely indolent disorder, but when chemotherapy is required, the most usual treatment has been chlorambucil.

Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma is the tissue manifestation of Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia (Chap. 111). This type of lymphoma has been associated with chronic hepatitis C virus infection, and an etiologic association has been proposed. Patients typically present with lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, bone marrow involvement, and occasionally peripheral blood involvement. The tumor cells do not express CD5. Patients often have a monoclonal IgM protein, high levels of which can dominate the clinical picture with the symptoms of hyperviscosity. Treatment of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma can be aimed primarily at reducing the abnormal protein, if present, but will usually also involve chemotherapy. Chlorambucil, fludarabine, and cladribine have been utilized. The median 5-year survival for patients with this disorder is 60%.

Nodal marginal zone lymphoma, also known as monocytoid B cell lymphoma, represents 1% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. This lymphoma has a slight female predominance and presents with disseminated disease (i.e., stage III or IV) in 75% of patients. Approximately one-third of patients have bone marrow involvement, and a leukemic presentation occasionally occurs. The staging evaluation and therapy should use the same approach as used for patients with follicular lymphoma. Approximately 60% of the patients with nodal marginal zone lymphoma will survive 5 years after diagnosis.

Precursor T Cell Malignancies

Precursor T Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma

Precursor T cell malignancies can present either as ALL or as an aggressive lymphoma. These malignancies are more common in children and young adults, with males more frequently affected than females.

Precursor T cell ALL can present with bone marrow failure, although the severity of anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia is often less than in precursor B cell ALL. These patients sometimes have very high white cell counts, a mediastinal mass, lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. Precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma is most often found in young men presenting with a large mediastinal mass and pleural effusions. Both presentations have a propensity to metastasize to the CNS, and CNS involvement is often present at diagnosis.

Treatment: Precursor T Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma

Children with precursor T cell ALL seem to benefit from very intensive remission induction and consolidation regimens. The majority of patients treated in this manner can be cured. Older children and young adults with precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma are also often treated with "leukemia-like" regimens. Patients who present with localized disease have an excellent prognosis. However, advanced age is an adverse prognostic factor. Adults with precursor T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma who present with high LDH levels or bone marrow or CNS involvement are often offered bone marrow transplantation as part of their primary therapy.

Mature (Peripheral) T Cell Disorders

Mycosis Fungoides

Mycosis fungoides is also known as cutaneous T cell lymphoma. This lymphoma is more often seen by dermatologists than internists. The median age of onset is in the midfifties, and the disease is more common in males and in blacks.

Mycosis fungoides is an indolent lymphoma with patients often having several years of eczematous or dermatitic skin lesions before the diagnosis is finally established. The skin lesions progress from patch stage to plaque stage to cutaneous tumors. Early in the disease, biopsies are often difficult to interpret, and the diagnosis may only become apparent by observing the patient over time. In advanced stages, the lymphoma can spread to lymph nodes and visceral organs. Patients with this lymphoma may develop generalized erythroderma and circulating tumor cells, called S谷zary's syndrome.

Rare patients with localized early-stage mycosis fungoides can be cured with radiotherapy, often total-skin electron beam irradiation. More advanced disease has been treated with topical glucocorticoids, topical nitrogen mustard, phototherapy, psoralen with ultraviolet A (PUVA), extracorporeal photopheresis, retinoids (bexarotene), electron beam radiation, interferon, antibodies, fusion toxins, histone deacetylase inhibitors, and systemic cytotoxic therapy. Unfortunately, these treatments are palliative.

Adult T Cell Lymphoma/Leukemia

Adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia is one manifestation of infection by the HTLV-I retrovirus. Patients can be infected through transplacental transmission, mother's milk, blood transfusion, and by sexual transmission of the virus. Patients who acquire the virus from their mother through breast milk are most likely to develop lymphoma, but the risk is still only 2.5% and the latency averages 55 years. Nationwide testing for HTLV-I antibodies and the aggressive implementation of public health measures could theoretically lead to the disappearance of adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia. Tropical spastic paraparesis, another manifestation of HTLV-I infection (Chap. 188), occurs after a shorter latency (1每3 years) and is most common in individuals who acquire the virus during adulthood from transfusion or sex.

The diagnosis of adult T cell lymphoma/leukemia is made when an expert hematopathologist recognizes the typical morphologic picture, a T cell immunophenotype (i.e., CD4 positive), and the presence in serum of antibodies to HTLV-I. Examination of the peripheral blood will usually reveal characteristic, pleomorphic abnormal CD4-positive cells with indented nuclei, which have been called "flower" cells (Fig. 110-10).

Figure 110-10

 
 
 
Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma. Peripheral blood smear showing leukemia cells with typical "flower-shaped" nucleus.
 
 

A subset of patients have a smoldering clinical course and long survival, but most patients present with an aggressive disease manifested by lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, skin infiltration, pulmonary infiltrates, hypercalcemia, lytic bone lesions, and elevated LDH levels. The skin lesions can be papules, plaques, tumors, and ulcerations. Lung lesions can be either tumor or opportunistic infection in light of the underlying immunodeficiency in the disease. Bone marrow involvement is not usually extensive, and anemia and thrombocytopenia are not usually prominent. Although treatment with combination chemotherapy regimens can result in objective responses, true complete remissions are unusual, and the median survival of patients is 7 months. A small phase II study reported a high response rate with interferon plus zidovudine and arsenic trioxide.

Anaplastic Large T/Null Cell Lymphoma

Anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma was previously usually diagnosed as undifferentiated carcinoma or malignant histiocytosis. Discovery of the CD30 (Ki-1) antigen and the recognition that some patients with previously unclassified malignancies displayed this antigen led to the identification of a new type of lymphoma. Subsequently, discovery of the t(2;5) and the resultant frequent overexpression of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) protein confirmed the existence of this entity. This lymphoma accounts for 2% of all non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Table 110每10 shows the clinical characteristics of patients with anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma.

The diagnosis of anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma is made when an expert hematopathologist recognizes the typical morphologic picture and a T cell or null cell immunophenotype with CD30 positivity. Documentation of the t(2;5) and/or overexpression of ALK protein confirm the diagnosis. Some diffuse large B cell lymphomas can also have an anaplastic appearance but have the same clinical course or response to therapy as other diffuse large B cell lymphomas.

Patients with anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma are typically young (median age, 33 years) and male (70%). Some 50% of patients present in stage I/II, and the remainder with more extensive disease. Systemic symptoms and elevated LDH levels are seen in about one-half of patients. Bone marrow and the gastrointestinal tract are rarely involved, but skin involvement is frequent. Some patients with disease confined to the skin have a different and more indolent disorder that has been termed cutaneous anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma and might be related to lymphomatoid papulosis.

Treatment: Anaplastic Large T/Null Cell Lymphoma

Treatment regimens appropriate for other aggressive lymphomas, such as diffuse large B cell lymphoma, should be utilized in patients with anaplastic large T/null cell lymphoma, with the exception that the B cell每specific antibody, rituximab, is omitted. Surprisingly, given the anaplastic appearance, this disorder has the best survival rate of any aggressive lymphoma. The 5-year survival is >75%. While traditional prognostic factors such as the IPI predict treatment outcome, overexpression of the ALK protein is an important prognostic factor, with patients overexpressing this protein having a superior treatment outcome. The ALK inhibitor crizotinib appears highly active as well.

Peripheral T Cell Lymphoma

The peripheral T cell lymphomas make up a heterogeneous morphologic group of aggressive neoplasms that share a mature T cell immunophenotype. They represent 7% of all cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. A number of distinct clinical syndromes are included in this group of disorders. Table 110每10 shows the clinical characteristics of patients with peripheral T cell lymphoma.

The diagnosis of peripheral T cell lymphoma, or any of its specific subtypes, requires an expert hematopathologist, an adequate biopsy, and immunophenotyping. Most peripheral T cell lymphomas are CD4+, but a few will be CD8+, both CD4+ and CD8+, or have an NK cell immunophenotype. No characteristic genetic abnormalities have yet been identified, but translocations involving the T cell antigen receptor genes on chromosomes 7 or 14 may be detected. The differential diagnosis of patients suspected of having peripheral T cell lymphoma includes reactive T cell infiltrative processes. In some cases, demonstration of a monoclonal T cell population using T cell receptor gene rearrangement studies will be required to make a diagnosis.

The initial evaluation of a patient with a peripheral T cell lymphoma should include the studies in Table 110每11 for staging patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Unfortunately, patients with peripheral T cell lymphoma usually present with adverse prognostic factors, with >80% of patients having an IPI score 2 and >30% having an IPI score 4. As this would predict, peripheral T cell lymphomas are associated with a poor outcome, and only 25% of the patients survive 5 years after diagnosis. Treatment regimens are the same as those used for diffuse large B cell lymphoma (omitting rituximab), but patients with peripheral T cell lymphoma have a poorer response to treatment. Because of this poor treatment outcome, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is often considered early in the care of young patients.

A number of specific clinical syndromes are seen in the peripheral T cell lymphomas. Angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma is one of the more common subtypes, making up 20% of T cell lymphomas. These patients typically present with generalized lymphadenopathy, fever, weight loss, skin rash, and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. In some cases, it is difficult to separate patients with a reactive disorder from those with true lymphoma.

Extranodal T/NK cell lymphoma of nasal type has also been called angiocentric lymphoma and was previously termed lethal midline granuloma. This disorder is more frequent in Asia and South America than in the United States and Europe. EBV is thought to play an etiologic role. Although most frequent in the upper airway, it can involve other organs. The course is aggressive, and patients frequently have the hemophagocytic syndrome. When marrow and blood involvement occur, distinction between this disease and leukemia might be difficult. Some patients will respond to aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens, but the overall outlook is poor.

Enteropathy-type intestinal T cell lymphoma is a rare disorder that occurs in patients with untreated gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Patients are frequently wasted and sometimes present with intestinal perforation. The prognosis is poor. Hepatosplenic  T cell lymphoma is a systemic illness that presents with sinusoidal infiltration of the liver, spleen, and bone marrow by malignant T cells. Tumor masses generally do not occur. The disease is associated with systemic symptoms and is often difficult to diagnose. Treatment outcome is poor. Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T cell lymphoma is a rare disorder that is often confused with panniculitis. Patients present with multiple subcutaneous nodules, which progress and can ulcerate. Hemophagocytic syndrome is common. Response to therapy is poor. The development of the hemophagocytic syndrome (profound anemia, ingestion of erythrocytes by monocytes and macrophages) in the course of any peripheral T cell lymphoma is generally associated with a fatal outcome.

Hodgkin's Disease

Classical Hodgkin's Disease

Hodgkin's disease occurs in 8000 patients in the United States each year, and the disease does not appear to be increasing in frequency. Most patients present with palpable lymphadenopathy that is nontender; in most patients, these lymph nodes are in the neck, supraclavicular area, and axilla. More than half the patients will have mediastinal adenopathy at diagnosis, and this is sometimes the initial manifestation. Subdiaphragmatic presentation of Hodgkin's disease is unusual and more common in older males. One-third of patients present with fevers, night sweats, and/or weight loss〞B symptoms in the Ann Arbor staging classification (Table 110每8). Occasionally, Hodgkin's disease can present as a fever of unknown origin. This is more common in older patients who are found to have mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease in an abdominal site. Rarely, the fevers persist for days to weeks, followed by afebrile intervals and then recurrence of the fever. This pattern is known as Pel-Ebstein fever. Hodgkin's disease can occasionally present with unusual manifestations. These include severe and unexplained itching, cutaneous disorders such as erythema nodosum and ichthyosiform atrophy, paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and other distant effects on the CNS, nephrotic syndrome, immune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, hypercalcemia, and pain in lymph nodes on alcohol ingestion.

The diagnosis of Hodgkin's disease is established by review of an adequate biopsy specimen by an expert hematopathologist. In the United States, most patients have nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease, with a minority of patients having mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease. Lymphocyte-predominant and lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin's disease are rare. Mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease or lymphocyte-depletion Hodgkin's disease are seen more frequently in patients infected by HIV (Fig. 110-11). Hodgkin's disease is a tumor characterized by rare neoplastic cells of B cell origin (immunoglobulin genes are rearranged but not expressed) in a tumor mass that is largely polyclonal inflammatory infiltrate, probably a reaction to cytokines produced by the tumor cells. The differential diagnosis of a lymph node biopsy suspicious for Hodgkin's disease includes inflammatory processes, mononucleosis, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, phenytoin-induced adenopathy, and nonlymphomatous malignancies.

Figure 110-11

 
 
 
Mixed-cellularity Hodgkin's disease. A Reed-Sternberg cell is present near the center of the field; a large cell with a bilobed nucleus and prominent nucleoli giving an "owl's eyes" appearance. The majority of the cells are normal lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils that form a pleomorphic cellular infiltrate.
 
 

The staging evaluation for a patient with Hodgkin's disease would typically include a careful history and physical examination; complete blood count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; serum chemistry studies including LDH; chest radiograph; CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and bone marrow biopsy. Many patients would also have a PET scan or a gallium scan. Although rarely utilized, a bipedal lymphangiogram can be helpful. PET and gallium scans are most useful to document remission. Staging laparotomies were once popular for most patients with Hodgkin's disease but are now done rarely because of an increased reliance on systemic rather than local therapy.

Treatment: Classical Hodgkin's Disease

Patients with localized Hodgkin's disease are cured >90% of the time. In patients with good prognostic factors, extended-field radiotherapy has a high cure rate. Increasingly, patients with all stages of Hodgkin's disease are treated initially with chemotherapy. Patients with localized or good-prognosis disease receive a brief course of chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy to sites of node involvement. Patients with more extensive disease or those with B symptoms receive a complete course of chemotherapy. The most popular chemotherapy regimens used in Hodgkin's disease include doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) and mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone (MOPP), or combinations of the drugs in these two regimens. Today, most patients in the United States receive ABVD, but a weekly chemotherapy regimen administered for 12 weeks called Stanford V is becoming increasingly popular, but includes radiation therapy, which has been associated with life-threatening late toxicities such as premature coronary artery disease and second solid tumors. In Europe, a high-dose regimen called BEACOPP incorporating alkylating agents has become popular and might have a better response rate in very high risk patients. Long-term disease-free survival in patients with advanced disease can be achieved in >75% of patients who lack systemic symptoms and in 60每70% of patients with systemic symptoms.

Patients who relapse after primary therapy of Hodgkin's disease can frequently still be cured. Patients who relapse after initial treatment with only radiotherapy have an excellent outcome when treated with chemotherapy. Patients who relapse after an effective chemotherapy regimen are usually not curable with subsequent chemotherapy administered at standard doses. However, patients with a long initial remission can be an exception to this rule. Autologous bone marrow transplantation can cure half of patients who fail effective chemotherapy regimens.

Because of the very high cure rate in patients with Hodgkin's disease, long-term complications have become a major focus for clinical research. In fact, in some series of patients with early-stage disease, more patients died from late complications of therapy than from Hodgkin's disease itself. This is particularly true in patients with localized disease. The most serious late side effects include second malignancies and cardiac injury. Patients are at risk for the development of acute leukemia in the first 10 years after treatment with combination chemotherapy regimens that contain alkylating agents plus radiation therapy. The risk for development of acute leukemia appears to be greater after MOPP-like regimens than with ABVD. The risk of development of acute leukemia after treatment for Hodgkin's disease is also related to the number of exposures to potentially leukemogenic agents (i.e., multiple treatments after relapse) and the age of the patient being treated, with those aged >60 years at particularly high risk. The development of carcinomas as a complication of treatment for Hodgkin's disease has become a major problem. These tumors usually occur 10 years after treatment and are associated with use of radiotherapy. For this reason, young women treated with thoracic radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease should institute screening mammograms 5每10 years after treatment, and all patients who receive thoracic radiotherapy for Hodgkin's disease should be discouraged from smoking. Thoracic radiation also accelerates coronary artery disease, and patients should be encouraged to minimize risk factors for coronary artery disease such as smoking and elevated cholesterol levels. Cervical radiation therapy increases the risk of carotid atherosclerosis and stroke.

A number of other late side effects from the treatment of Hodgkin's disease are well known. Patients who receive thoracic radiotherapy are at very high risk for the eventual development of hypothyroidism and should be observed for this complication; intermittent measurement of thyrotropin should be made to identify the condition before it becomes symptomatic. Lhermitte's syndrome occurs in 15% of patients who receive thoracic radiotherapy. This syndrome is manifested by an "electric shock" sensation into the lower extremities on flexion of the neck. Infertility is a concern for all patients undergoing treatment for Hodgkin's disease. In both women and men, the risk of permanent infertility is age-related, with younger patients more likely to recover fertility. In addition, treatment with ABVD rather than MOPP increases the chances to retain fertility.

Nodular Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin's Disease

Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease is now recognized as an entity distinct from classical Hodgkin's disease. Previous classification systems recognized that biopsies from a subset of patients diagnosed as having Hodgkin's disease contained a predominance of small lymphocytes and rare Reed-Sternberg cells (Fig. 110-11). A subset of these patients have tumors with nodular growth pattern and a clinical course that varied from that of patients with classical Hodgkin's disease. This is an unusual clinical entity and represents <5% of cases of Hodgkin's disease.

Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease has a number of characteristics that suggest its relationship to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. These include a clonal proliferation of B cells and a distinctive immunophenotype; tumor cells express J chain and display CD45 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and do not express two markers normally found on Reed-Sternberg cells, CD30 and CD15. This lymphoma tends to have a chronic, relapsing course and sometimes transforms to diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

The treatment of patients with nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin's disease is controversial. Some clinicians favor no treatment and merely close follow-up. In the United States, most physicians will treat localized disease with radiotherapy and disseminated disease with regimens utilized for patients with classical Hodgkin's disease. Regardless of the therapy utilized, most series report a long-term survival of >80%.
 
Lymphoma-Like Disorders

The most common condition that pathologists and clinicians might confuse with lymphoma is reactive, atypical lymphoid hyperplasia. Patients might have localized or disseminated lymphadenopathy and might have the systemic symptoms characteristic of lymphoma. Underlying causes include a drug reaction to phenytoin or carbamazepine. Immune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythematosus, viral infections such as cytomegalovirus and EBV, and bacterial infections such as cat-scratch disease may cause adenopathy (Chap. 59). In the absence of a definitive diagnosis after initial biopsy, continued follow-up, further testing, and repeated biopsies, if necessary, are the appropriate approach rather than instituting therapy.

Specific conditions that can be confused with lymphoma include Castleman's disease, which can present with localized or disseminated lymphadenopathy; some patients have systemic symptoms. The disseminated form is often accompanied by anemia and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, and the condition has been associated with overproduction of interleukin 6, possibly produced by human herpesvirus 8. Patients with localized disease can be treated effectively with local therapy, while the initial treatment for patients with disseminated disease is usually with systemic glucocorticoids. IL-6-directed therapy is being developed.

Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman's disease) usually presents with bulky lymphadenopathy in children or young adults. The disease is usually nonprogressive and self-limited, but patients can manifest autoimmune hemolytic anemia.

Lymphomatoid papulosis is a cutaneous lymphoproliferative disorder that is often confused with anaplastic large cell lymphoma involving the skin. The cells of lymphomatoid papulosis are similar to those seen in lymphoma and stain for CD30, and T cell receptor gene rearrangements are sometimes seen. However, the condition is characterized by waxing and waning skin lesions that usually heal, leaving small scars. In the absence of effective communication between the clinician and the pathologist regarding the clinical course in the patient, this disease will be misdiagnosed. Since the clinical picture is usually benign, misdiagnosis is a serious mistake.
 
Acknowledgment

James Armitage was a coauthor of this chapter in prior editions, and substantial material from those editions has been included here.
 
Further Readings

Ansel SM, Armitage JO: Management of Hodgkin lymphoma. Mayo Clin Proc 81:419, 2006 

 
Armitage JO: Early-stage Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 363:653, 2010[PMID: 20818856] 

 
Brepoels L et al: PET and PET/CT for response evaluation in lymphoma: Current practice and developments. Leuk Lymphoma 48:270, 2007[PMID: 17325886] 

 
Cabanillas F: Front-line therapy of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Curr Opin Oncol 22:642, 2010[PMID: 20811278] 

 
Harris NL et al: World Health Organization classification of neoplastic diseases of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: Report of the Clinical Advisory Committee Meeting, Airlie House, Virginia, November, 1997. J Clin Oncol 17:3835, 1999[PMID: 10577857] 

 
Longo DL (ed): Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer J 15:114, 2009[PMID: 19390305] 

 
Sehn LH et al: The revised International Prognostic Index (R-IPI) is a better predictor of outcome than the standard IPI for patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP. Blood 109:1857, 2007[PMID: 17105812] 

 
Stathis A et al: Treatment of gastric marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type. Expert Opin Pharmacother 11:2141, 2010[PMID: 20586708] 
 
 

^^
Plasma Cell Disorders: Introduction

The plasma cell disorders are monoclonal neoplasms related to each other by virtue of their development from common progenitors in the B lymphocyte lineage. Multiple myeloma, Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, primary amyloidosis (Chap. 112), and the heavy chain diseases comprise this group and may be designated by a variety of synonyms such as monoclonal gammopathies, paraproteinemias, plasma cell dyscrasias, and dysproteinemias. Mature B lymphocytes destined to produce IgG bear surface immunoglobulin molecules of both M and G heavy chain isotypes with both isotypes having identical idiotypes (variable regions). Under normal circumstances, maturation to antibody-secreting plasma cells and their proliferation is stimulated by exposure to the antigen for which the surface immunoglobulin is specific; however, in the plasma cell disorders the control over this process is lost. The clinical manifestations of all the plasma cell disorders relate to the expansion of the neoplastic cells, to the secretion of cell products (immunoglobulin molecules or subunits, lymphokines), and to some extent to the host's response to the tumor. Normal development of B lymphocytes is discussed in Chap. 314.

There are three categories of structural variation among immunoglobulin molecules that form antigenic determinants, and these are used to classify immunoglobulins (Chap. 314). Isotypes are those determinants that distinguish among the main classes of antibodies of a given species and are the same in all normal individuals of that species. Therefore, isotypic determinants are, by definition, recognized by antibodies from a distinct species (heterologous sera) but not by antibodies from the same species (homologous sera). There are five heavy chain isotypes (M, G, A, D, E) and two light chain isotypes (, ). Allotypes are distinct determinants that reflect regular small differences between individuals of the same species in the amino acid sequences of otherwise similar immunoglobulins. These differences are determined by allelic genes; by definition, they are detected by antibodies made in the same species. Idiotypes are the third category of antigenic determinants. They are unique to the molecules produced by a given clone of antibody-producing cells. Idiotypes are formed by the unique structure of the antigen-binding portion of the molecule.

Antibody molecules (Fig. 314-8) are composed of two heavy chains (50,000 mol wt) and two light chains (25,000 mol wt). Each chain has a constant portion (limited amino acid sequence variability) and a variable region (extensive sequence variability). The light and heavy chains are linked by disulfide bonds and are aligned so that their variable regions are adjacent to one another. This variable region forms the antigen recognition site of the antibody molecule; its unique structural features form a particular set of determinants, or idiotypes, that are reliable markers for a particular clone of cells because each antibody is formed and secreted by a single clone. Each chain is specified by distinct genes, synthesized separately, and assembled into an intact antibody molecule after translation. Because of the mechanics of the gene rearrangements necessary to specify the immunoglobulin variable regions (VDJ joining for the heavy chain, VJ joining for the light chain), a particular clone rearranges only one of the two chromosomes to produce an immunoglobulin molecule of only one light chain isotype and only one allotype (allelic exclusion). After exposure to antigen, the variable region may become associated with a new heavy chain isotype (class switch). Each clone of cells performs these sequential gene arrangements in a unique way. This results in each clone producing a unique immunoglobulin molecule. In most plasma cells, light chains are synthesized in slight excess, secreted as free light chains, and are cleared by the kidney, but <10 mg of such light chains is excreted per day.

Electrophoretic analysis permits separation of components of the serum proteins (Fig. 111-1). The immunoglobulins move heterogeneously in an electric field and form a broad peak in the gamma region. The  globulin region of the electrophoretic pattern is usually increased in the sera of patients with plasma cell tumors. There is a sharp spike in this region called an M component (M for monoclonal). Less commonly, the M component may appear in the 2 or 2 globulin region. The monoclonal antibody must be present at a concentration of at least 5 g/L (0.5 g/dL) to be accurately quantitated by this method. This corresponds to 109 cells producing the antibody. Confirmation that such an M component is truly monoclonal and the type of immunoglobulin is determined by immunoelectrophoresis that reveals a single heavy and/or light chain type. Hence immunoelectrophoresis and electrophoresis provide qualitative and quantitative assessment of the M component, respectively. Once the presence of an M component has been confirmed, electrophoresis provides the more practical information for managing patients with monoclonal gammopathies. In a given patient, the amount of M component in the serum is a reliable measure of the tumor burden. This makes the M component an excellent tumor marker, yet it is not specific enough to be used to screen asymptomatic patients. In addition to the plasma cell disorders, M components may be detected in other lymphoid neoplasms such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia and lymphomas of B or T cell origin; nonlymphoid neoplasms such as chronic myeloid leukemia, breast cancer, and colon cancer; a variety of nonneoplastic conditions such as cirrhosis, sarcoidosis, parasitic diseases, Gaucher disease, and pyoderma gangrenosum; and a number of autoimmune conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, myasthenia gravis, and cold agglutinin disease. At least two very rare skin diseases〞lichen myxedematosus, or papular mucinosis, and necrobiotic xanthogranuloma〞are associated with a monoclonal gammopathy. In papular mucinosis, highly cationic IgG is deposited in the dermis of patients. This organ specificity may reflect the specificity of the antibody for some antigenic component of the dermis. Necrobiotic xanthogranuloma is a histiocytic infiltration of the skin, usually of the face, that produces red or yellow nodules that can enlarge to plaques. Some 10% progress to myeloma. Five percent of patients with sensory motor neuropathy are associated with monoclonal protein.

Figure 111-1

 
 
 
Representative patterns of serum electrophoresis and immunofixation. The upper panels represent agarose gel, middle panels are the densitometric tracing of the gel, and lower panels are immunofixation patterns. Panel on the left illustrates the normal pattern of serum protein on electrophoresis. Since there are many different immunoglobulins in the serum, their differing mobilities in an electric field produce a broad peak. In conditions associated with increases in polyclonal immunoglobulin, the broad peak is more prominent (middle panel). In monoclonal gammopathies, the predominance of a product of a single cell produces a "church spire" sharp peak, usually in the  globulin region (right panel). The immunofixation (lower panel) identifies the type of immunoglobulin. For example, normal and polyclonal increase in immunoglobulins produce no distinct bands; however, the right panel shows distinct bands in IgG and lambda protein lanes, confirming the presence of IgG lambda monoclonal protein. (Courtesy of Dr. Neal I Lindeman; with permission.)
 
 

The nature of the M component is variable in plasma cell disorders. It may be an intact antibody molecule of any heavy chain subclass, or it may be an altered antibody or fragment. Isolated light or heavy chains may be produced. In some plasma cell tumors such as extramedullary or solitary bone plasmacytomas, less than one-third of patients will have an M component. In 20% of myelomas, only light chains are produced and in most cases are secreted in the urine as Bence Jones proteins. The frequency of myelomas of a particular heavy chain class is roughly proportional to the serum concentration, and therefore IgG myelomas are more common than IgA and IgD myelomas. In approximately 1% of patients with myeloma, biclonal or triclonal gammopathy is observed.
 
Multiple Myeloma

Definition

Multiple myeloma represents a malignant proliferation of plasma cells derived from a single clone. The tumor, its products, and the host response to it result in a number of organ dysfunctions and symptoms, including bone pain or fracture, renal failure, susceptibility to infection, anemia, hypercalcemia, and occasionally clotting abnormalities, neurologic symptoms, and manifestations of hyperviscosity.

Etiology

The cause of myeloma is not known. Myeloma occurred with increased frequency in those exposed to the radiation of nuclear warheads in World War II after a 20-year latency. Myeloma has been seen more commonly than expected among farmers, wood workers, leather workers, and those exposed to petroleum products. A variety of chromosomal alterations with prognostic significance has been found in patients with myeloma; 13q14 deletions, 17p13 deletions, and translocations t(11;14)(q13;q32) and t(4;14)(p16;q32) predominate, and evidence is strong that errors in switch recombination〞the genetic mechanism to change antibody heavy chain isotype〞participate in the transformation process. However, no common molecular pathogenetic pathway has yet emerged. The neoplastic event in myeloma may involve cells earlier in B cell differentiation than the plasma cell. Interleukin (IL)-6 may play a role in driving myeloma cell proliferation. It remains difficult to distinguish benign from malignant plasma cells on the basis of morphologic criteria in all but a few cases (Fig. 111-2).

Figure 111-2

 
 
 
Multiple myeloma (marrow). The cells bear characteristic morphologic features of plasma cells, round or oval cells with an eccentric nucleus composed of coarsely clumped chromatin, a densely basophilic cytoplasm, and a perinuclear clear zone containing the Golgi apparatus. Binucleate and multinucleate malignant plasma cells can be seen.
 
 

Incidence and Prevalence

Estimated 20,180 new cases of myeloma were diagnosed in 2010, and 10,650 people died from the disease in the United States. Myeloma increases in incidence with age. The median age at diagnosis is 70 years; it is uncommon under age 40. Males are more commonly affected than females, and blacks have nearly twice the incidence of whites. Myeloma accounts for 1% of all malignancies in whites and 2% in blacks, and 13% of all hematologic cancers in whites and 33% in blacks.

Global Considerations

The incidence of myeloma is highest in African Americans and Pacific islanders; intermediate in Europeans and North American whites; and lowest in developing countries including Asia. The higher incidence in more developed countries may result from the combination of a longer life expectancy and more frequent medical surveillance. Incidence of multiple myeloma in other ethnic groups including native Hawaiians, female Hispanics, American Indians from New Mexico, and Alaskan natives is higher relative to U.S. whites in the same geographic area. Chinese and Japanese populations have a lower incidence than whites. Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease with alpha heavy chain disease is most prevalent in the Mediterranean area. Despite these differences in prevalence, the characteristics, response to therapy, and prognosis of myeloma are similar worldwide.

Pathogenesis and Clinical Manifestations (Table 111每1)

Table 111每1 Clinical Features of Multiple Myeloma

 
 
Clinical Finding Underlying Cause and Pathogenetic Mechanism 
Hypercalcemia, osteoporosis, pathologic fractures, lytic bone lesions, bone pain Tumor expansion, production of osteoclast activating factor by tumor cells, osteoblast inhibitory factors 
Renal failure Hypercalcemia, light chain deposition, amyloidosis, urate nephropathy, drug toxicity (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, bisphosphonates), contrast dye 
Easy fatigue/anemia Bone marrow infiltration, production of inhibitory factors, hemolysis, decreased red cell production, decreased erythropoietin levels 
Recurrent infections Hypogammaglobulinemia, low CD4 count, decreased neutrophil migration 
Neurologic symptoms Hyperviscosity, cryoglobulinemia, amyloid deposits, hypercalcemia, nerve compression, antineuronal antibody, POEMS syndrome, therapy-related toxicity 
Nausea and vomiting Renal failure, hypercalcemia 
Bleeding/clotting disorder Interference with clotting factors, antibody to clotting factors, amyloid damage of endothelium, platelet dysfunction, antibody coating of platelet, therapy-related hypercoagulable defects 
 


Abbreviation: POEMS, polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, multiple myeloma, and skin changes.
 

Multiple myeloma (MM) cells bind via cell-surface adhesion molecules to bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and extracellular matrix (ECM), which triggers MM cell growth, survival, drug resistance, and migration in the bone marrow milieu (Fig. 111-3). These effects are due both to direct MM cell每BMSC binding and to induction of various cytokines, including IL-6, insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and stromal cell每derived growth factor (SDF)-1. Growth, drug resistance, and migration are mediated via Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase, PI3-K/Akt, and protein kinase C signaling cascades, respectively.

Figure 111-3

 
 
 
Pathogenesis of multiple myeloma. Multiple myeloma cells interact with bone marrow stromal cells and extracellular matrix proteins via adhesion molecules, triggering adhesion-mediated signaling as well as cytokine production. This triggers cytokine-mediated signaling that provides growth, survival, and antiapoptotic effects as well as development of drug resistance. HSP, heparin sulfate proteoglycan.
 
 


Bone pain is the most common symptom in myeloma, affecting nearly 70% of patients. The pain usually involves the back and ribs, and unlike the pain of metastatic carcinoma, which often is worse at night, the pain of myeloma is precipitated by movement. Persistent localized pain in a patient with myeloma usually signifies a pathologic fracture. The bone lesions of myeloma are caused by the proliferation of tumor cells, activation of osteoclasts that destroy bone, and suppression of osteoblasts that form new bone. The increased osteoclast activity is mediated by osteoclast activating factors (OAF) made by the myeloma cells [OAF activity can be mediated by several cytokines, including IL-1, lymphotoxin, VEGF, receptor activator of NF-B (RANK) ligand, macrophage inhibitory factor (MIP)-1, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)]. The bone lesions are lytic in nature and are rarely associated with osteoblastic new bone formation due to their suppression by dickhoff-1 (DKK-1) produced by myeloma cells. Therefore, radioisotopic bone scanning is less useful in diagnosis than is plain radiography. The bony lysis results in substantial mobilization of calcium from bone, and serious acute and chronic complications of hypercalcemia may dominate the clinical picture (see below). Localized bone lesions may expand to the point that mass lesions may be palpated, especially on the skull (Fig. 111-4), clavicles, and sternum, and the collapse of vertebrae may lead to spinal cord compression.

Figure 111-4

 
 
 
Bony lesions in multiple myeloma. The skull demonstrates the typical "punched out" lesions characteristic of multiple myeloma. The lesion represents a purely osteolytic lesion with little or no osteoblastic activity. (Courtesy of Dr. Geraldine Schechter; with permission.)
 
 

The next most common clinical problem in patients with myeloma is susceptibility to bacterial infections. The most common infections are pneumonias and pyelonephritis, and the most frequent pathogens are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Klebsiella pneumoniae in the lungs and Escherichia coli and other gram-negative organisms in the urinary tract. In 25% of patients, recurrent infections are the presenting features, and >75% of patients will have a serious infection at some time in their course. The susceptibility to infection has several contributing causes. First, patients with myeloma have diffuse hypogammaglobulinemia if the M component is excluded. The hypogammaglobulinemia is related to both decreased production and increased destruction of normal antibodies. Moreover, some patients generate a population of circulating regulatory cells in response to their myeloma that can suppress normal antibody synthesis. In the case of IgG myeloma, normal IgG antibodies are broken down more rapidly than normal because the catabolic rate for IgG antibodies varies directly with the serum concentration. The large M component results in fractional catabolic rates of 8每16% instead of the normal 2%. These patients have very poor antibody responses, especially to polysaccharide antigens such as those on bacterial cell walls. Most measures of T cell function in myeloma are normal, but a subset of CD4+ cells may be decreased. Granulocyte lysozyme content is low, and granulocyte migration is not as rapid as normal in patients with myeloma, probably the result of a tumor product. There are also a variety of abnormalities in complement functions in myeloma patients. All these factors contribute to the immune deficiency of these patients. Some commonly used therapeutic agents, e.g., dexamethasone, suppress immune responses and increase susceptibility to infection.

Renal failure occurs in nearly 25% of myeloma patients, and some renal pathology is noted in more than 50%. Many factors contribute to this. Hypercalcemia is the most common cause of renal failure. Glomerular deposits of amyloid, hyperuricemia, recurrent infections, frequent use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents for pain control, use of iodinated contrast dye for imaging, bisphosphonate use, and occasional infiltration of the kidney by myeloma cells all may contribute to renal dysfunction. However, tubular damage associated with the excretion of light chains is almost always present. Normally, light chains are filtered, reabsorbed in the tubules, and catabolized. With the increase in the amount of light chains presented to the tubule, the tubular cells become overloaded with these proteins, and tubular damage results either directly from light chain toxic effects or indirectly from the release of intracellular lysosomal enzymes. The earliest manifestation of this tubular damage is the adult Fanconi syndrome (a type 2 proximal renal tubular acidosis), with loss of glucose and amino acids, as well as defects in the ability of the kidney to acidify and concentrate the urine. The proteinuria is not accompanied by hypertension, and the protein is nearly all light chains. Generally, very little albumin is in the urine because glomerular function is usually normal. When the glomeruli are involved, nonselective proteinuria is also observed. Patients with myeloma also have a decreased anion gap [i.e., Na+ 每 (Cl每 + HCO3每)] because the M component is cationic, resulting in retention of chloride. This is often accompanied by hyponatremia that is felt to be artificial (pseudohyponatremia) because each volume of serum has less water as a result of the increased protein. Renal dysfunction due to light chain deposition disease, light chain cast nephropathy, and amyloidosis is partially reversible with effective therapy. Myeloma patients are susceptible to developing acute renal failure if they become dehydrated.

Normocytic and normochromic anemia occurs in 80% of myeloma patients. It is usually related to the replacement of normal marrow by expanding tumor cells, to the inhibition of hematopoiesis by factors made by the tumor, and to reduced production of erythropoietin by the kidney. In addition, mild hemolysis may contribute to the anemia. A larger than expected fraction of patients may have megaloblastic anemia due to either folate or vitamin B12 deficiency. Granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia are very rare except when therapy-induced. Clotting abnormalities may be seen due to the failure of antibody-coated platelets to function properly or to the interaction of the M component with clotting factors I, II, V, VII, or VIII. Deep venous thrombosis is also observed with use of thalidomide or lenalidomide in combination with dexamethasone. Raynaud's phenomenon and impaired circulation may result if the M component forms cryoglobulins, and hyperviscosity syndromes may develop depending on the physical properties of the M component (most common with IgM, IgG3, and IgA paraproteins). Hyperviscosity is defined on the basis of the relative viscosity of serum as compared with water. Normal relative serum viscosity is 1.8 (i.e., serum is normally almost twice as viscous as water). Symptoms of hyperviscosity occur at a level greater than 4 centipoise (cP), which is usually reached at paraprotein concentrations of 40 g/L (4 g/dL) for IgM, 50 g/L (5 g/dL) for IgG3, and 70 g/L (7 g/dL) for IgA.

Although neurologic symptoms occur in a minority of patients, they may have many causes. Hypercalcemia may produce lethargy, weakness, depression, and confusion. Hyperviscosity may lead to headache, fatigue, visual disturbances, and retinopathy. Bony damage and collapse may lead to cord compression, radicular pain, and loss of bowel and bladder control. Infiltration of peripheral nerves by amyloid can be a cause of carpal tunnel syndrome and other sensorimotor mono- and polyneuropathies. Neuropathy associated with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) and myeloma is more frequently sensory than motor neuropathy and is associated with IgM more than other isotypes. Sensory neuropathy is also a side effect of thalidomide and bortezomib therapy.

Many of the clinical features of myeloma, e.g., cord compression, pathologic fractures, hyperviscosity, sepsis, and hypercalcemia, can present as medical emergencies. Despite the widespread distribution of plasma cells in the body, tumor expansion is dominantly within bone and bone marrow and, for reasons unknown, rarely causes enlargement of spleen, lymph nodes, or gut-associated lymphatic tissue.

Diagnosis and Staging

The classic triad of myeloma is marrow plasmacytosis (>10%), lytic bone lesions, and a serum and/or urine M component. Bone marrow plasma cells are CD138+ and monoclonal. The most important differential diagnosis in patients with myeloma involves their separation from individuals with MGUS or smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM). MGUS are vastly more common than myeloma, occurring in 1% of the population older than age 50 years and in up to 10% of individuals older than age 75 years. The diagnostic criteria for MGUS, SMM, and myeloma are described in Table 111每2. When bone marrow cells are exposed to radioactive thymidine in order to quantitate dividing cells, patients with MGUS always have a labeling index <1%, whereas patients with myeloma always have a labeling index >1%. Although 1% per year of patients with MGUS go on to develop myeloma, all myeloma is preceded by MGUS. Non-IgG subtype, abnormal kappa/lambda free light chain ratio, and serum M protein >15 g/L (1.5 g/dL) are associated with higher incidence of progression of MGUS to myeloma. The features responsible for higher risk of progression from smoldering myeloma to MM are bone marrow plasmacytosis >30%, abnormal kappa/lambda free light chain ratio, and serum M protein >30 g/L (3 g/dL). Typically, patients with MGUS and smoldering myeloma require no therapy. There are two important variants of myeloma, solitary bone plasmacytoma and extramedullary plasmacytoma. These lesions are associated with an M component in <30% of the cases, they may affect younger individuals, and both are associated with median survivals of 10 years. Solitary bone plasmacytoma is a single lytic bone lesion without marrow plasmacytosis. Extramedullary plasmacytomas usually involve the submucosal lymphoid tissue of the nasopharynx or paranasal sinuses without marrow plasmacytosis. Both tumors are highly responsive to local radiation therapy. If an M component is present, it should disappear after treatment. Solitary bone plasmacytomas may recur in other bony sites or evolve into myeloma. Extramedullary plasmacytomas rarely recur or progress.

Table 111每2 Diagnostic Criteria for Multiple Myeloma, Myeloma Variants, and Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance

 
 
Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS)  
M protein in serum <30 g/L

Bone marrow clonal plasma cells <10%

No evidence of other B cell proliferative disorders

No myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (no end organ damage, including bone lesions)a
 
Asymptomatic Myeloma (Smoldering Myeloma)  
M protein in serum 30 g/L and/or

Bone marrow clonal plasma cells 10%

No myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (no end organ damage, including bone lesions)a or symptoms
 
Symptomatic Multiple Myeloma  
M protein in serum and/or urine

Bone marrow (clonal) plasma cellsb or plasmacytoma

Myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage, including bone lesions)
 
Nonsecretory Myeloma  
No M protein in serum and/or urine with immunofixation

Bone marrow clonal plasmacytosis 10% or plasmacytoma

Myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage, including bone lesions)a
 
Solitary Plasmacytoma of Bone  
No M protein in serum and/or urinec

Single area of bone destruction due to clonal plasma cells

Bone marrow not consistent with multiple myeloma

Normal skeletal survey (and MRI of spine and pelvis if done)

No related organ or tissue impairment (no end organ damage other than solitary bone lesion)a
 
 


aMyeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage) (ROTI): Calcium levels increased: serum calcium >0.25 mmol/L above the upper limit of normal or >2.75 mmol/L; renal insufficiency: creatinine >173 mmol/L; anemia: hemoglobin 2 g/dL below the lower limit of normal or hemoglobin <10 g/dL; bone lesions: lytic lesions or osteoporosis with compression fractures (MRI or CT may clarify); other: symptomatic hyperviscosity, amyloidosis, recurrent bacterial infections (>2 episodes in 12 months).

bIf flow cytometry is performed, most plasma cells (>90%) will show a "neoplastic" phenotype.

cA small M component may sometimes be present.
 

The clinical evaluation of patients with myeloma includes a careful physical examination searching for tender bones and masses. Chest and bone radiographs may reveal lytic lesions or diffuse osteopenia. MRI offers a sensitive means to document extent of bone marrow infiltration and cord or root compression in patients with pain syndromes. A complete blood count with differential may reveal anemia. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate is elevated. Rare patients (2%) may have plasma cell leukemia with >2000 plasma cells/L. This may be seen in disproportionate frequency in IgD (12%) and IgE (25%) myelomas. Serum calcium, urea nitrogen, creatinine, and uric acid levels may be elevated. Protein electrophoresis and measurement of serum immunoglobulins and free light chains are useful for detecting and characterizing M spikes, supplemented by immunoelectrophoresis, which is especially sensitive for identifying low concentrations of M components not detectable by protein electrophoresis. A 24-h urine specimen is necessary to quantitate Bence Jones protein excretion. Serum alkaline phosphatase is usually normal even with extensive bone involvement because of the absence of osteoblastic activity. It is also important to quantitate serum 2-microglobulin (see below).

The serum M component will be IgG in 53% of patients, IgA in 25%, and IgD in 1%; 20% of patients will have only light chains in serum and urine. Dipsticks for detecting proteinuria are not reliable at identifying light chains, and the heat test for detecting Bence Jones protein is falsely negative in 50% of patients with light chain myeloma. Fewer than 1% of patients have no identifiable M component; these patients usually have light chain myeloma in which renal catabolism has made the light chains undetectable in the urine. In most of these patients, light chains can now be detected by serum free light chain assay. IgD myeloma may also present as light chain myeloma. About two-thirds of patients with serum M components also have urinary light chains. The light chain isotype may have an impact on survival. Patients secreting lambda light chains have a significantly shorter overall survival than those secreting kappa light chains. Whether this is due to some genetically important determinant of cell proliferation or because lambda light chains are more likely to cause renal damage and form amyloid than are kappa light chains is unclear. The heavy chain isotype may have an impact on patient management as well. About half of patients with IgM paraproteins develop hyperviscosity compared with only 2每4% of patients with IgA and IgG M components. Among IgG myelomas, it is the IgG3 subclass that has the highest tendency to form both concentration- and temperature-dependent aggregates, leading to hyperviscosity and cold agglutination at lower serum concentrations.

The staging systems for patients with myeloma (Table 111每3) are functional systems for predicting survival and are based on a variety of clinical and laboratory tests, unlike the anatomic staging systems for solid tumors. The Durie-Salmon staging system used previously has been found not to predict prognosis after treatment with high-dose therapy or the novel targeted therapies that have emerged.

Table 111每3 International Staging System

 
 
  Stage Median Survival, Months 
2M < 3.5, alb  3.5
  I (28%) 62 
2M < 3.5, alb < 3.5 or 2M = 3.5每5.5
  II (39%) 44 
2M > 5.5
  III (33%) 29 
 


Note: (#), % patients presenting at each stage.

Abbreviations: 2M, serum 2-microglobulin in mg/L; alb, serum albumin in g/Dl.
 

Serum 2-microglobulin is the single most powerful predictor of survival and can substitute for staging. 2-Microglobulin is a protein of 11,000 mol wt with homologies to the constant region of immunoglobulins that is the light chain of the class I major histocompatibility antigens (HLA-A, -B, -C) on the surface of every cell. Patients with 2-microglobulin levels <0.004 g/L have a median survival of 43 months and those with levels >0.004 g/L only 12 months. Serum 2-microglobulin and albumin levels are the basis for a three-stage International Staging System (ISS) (Table 111每3). It is also felt that once the diagnosis of myeloma is firm, histologic features of atypia may also exert an influence on prognosis. High labeling index and high levels of lactate dehydrogenase are also associated with poor prognosis.

Other factors that may influence prognosis are the presence and number of cytogenetic abnormalities, hypodiploidy, chromosome 13q and 17p deletion, translocations t(4;14) and t(14;16); circulating plasma cells; performance status; as well as serum levels of soluble IL-6 receptor, C-reactive protein, hepatocyte growth factor, C-terminal cross-linked telopeptide of collagen I, transforming growth factor (TGF)-, and syndecan-1. Microarray profiling and comparative genomic hybridization have formed the basis for RNA- and DNA-based prognostic staging systems, respectively. The ISS system is the most widely used method of assessing prognosis (Table 111每3).

Treatment: Multiple Myeloma

About 10% of patients with myeloma will have an indolent course (smoldering myeloma) demonstrating only very slow progression of disease over many years. Such patients only require antitumor therapy when the disease becomes symptomatic with development of anemia, hypercalcemia, progressive lytic bone lesions, renal dysfunction, progressive rise in serum myeloma protein levels and/or Bence Jones proteinuria, or recurrent infections. Patients with solitary bone plasmacytomas and extramedullary plasmacytomas may be expected to enjoy prolonged disease-free survival after local radiation therapy to a dose of around 40 Gy. There is a low incidence of occult marrow involvement in patients with solitary bone plasmacytoma. Such patients are usually detected because their serum M component falls slowly or disappears initially only to return after a few months. These patients respond well to systemic therapy.

Patients with symptomatic and/or progressive myeloma require therapeutic intervention. In general, such therapy is of two sorts: systemic therapy to control the progression of myeloma and symptomatic supportive care to prevent serious morbidity from the complications of the disease. Therapy can significantly prolong survival and improve the quality of life for myeloma patients.

The initial standard treatment for newly diagnosed myeloma is dependent on whether or not the patient is a candidate for high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell transplant.

In patients who are transplant candidates, alkylating agents such as melphalan should be avoided since they damage stem cells, leading to decreased ability to collect stem cells for autologous transplant. Newer agents combined with pulsed glucocorticoids have now become standard of care as induction therapy in newly diagnosed patients. Two phase II studies have combined thalidomide with dexamethasone as initial therapy for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma in transplant candidates and reported rapid responses in two-thirds of patients, while allowing for successful harvesting of peripheral blood stem cells for transplantation. A randomized phase III trial showed significantly higher response rates for thalidomide (200 mg PO qhs) plus dexamethasone (40 mg for 4 days every 2 weeks) compared to dexamethasone alone, setting the stage for use of this combination as standard therapy in newly diagnosed patients. Importantly, novel agents bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, and lenalidomide, an immunomodulatory derivative of thalidomide, have similarly been combined with dexamethasone and obtained high response rates (>80%) without compromising stem cell collection for transplantation. Their superior toxicity profile with improved efficacy has made them the preferred agents for induction therapy. Efforts to improve the fraction of patients responding and the degree of response have involved adding agents to the treatment program. Combination of lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone achieves close to 100% response rate, and other similar three-drug combinations (bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexamethasone or bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone) achieve >90% response rate. Initial therapy is continued until maximal cytoreduction.

In patients who are not transplant candidates, besides the options available for transplant candidates, therapy consisting of intermittent pulses of an alkylating agent, melphalan with prednisone, has been utilized. The usual doses of melphalan/prednisone (MP) are melphalan, 0.25 mg/kg per day, and prednisone, 1 mg/kg per day for 4 days. Doses may need adjustment due to unpredictable absorption and based on marrow tolerance. However, a number of studies have combined novel agents with MP combination and reported superior response and survival outcome. In patients >65 years old, combining thalidomide with MP (MPT) obtains higher response rates and overall survival compared to MP alone. Similarly, significantly improved response (71 vs 35%) and overall survival (3-year survival 72 vs 59%) were observed with combination of bortezomib with MP compared to MP alone. Lenalidomide added to MP followed by lenalidomide maintenance also prolonged progression-free survival compared to MP alone. These combinations of novel agents with MP also achieve high complete response rates (MPT  15%; MPV  30%, MPR  20%, and MP  2-4%). Patients responding to therapy generally have a prompt and gratifying reduction in bone pain, hypercalcemia, and anemia and often have fewer infections. Improvement in the serum M component may lag behind the symptomatic improvement. The fall in M component depends on the rate of tumor kill and the fractional catabolic rate of immunoglobulin, which in turn depends on the serum concentration (for IgG). Light chain excretion, with a functional half-life of 6 h, may fall within the first week of treatment. Since urine light chain levels may relate to renal tubular function, they are not a reliable measure of tumor cell kill; however, improvements in serum free light chain measurement are often seen sooner. Although patients may not achieve complete remission, clinical responses may last long periods of time. The important feature of the level of the M protein is not how far or how fast it falls but the rate of its increase after therapy.

Randomized studies comparing standard-dose therapy to high-dose melphalan therapy (HDT) with hematopoietic stem cell support have shown that HDT can achieve high overall response rates and prolonged progression-free and overall survival; however, few, if any, patients are cured. Although complete responses are rare (<5%) with standard-dose chemotherapy, HDT achieves 25每40% complete responses. In randomized studies, HDT produced better median event-free survival in four of five studies, higher complete response rate in four of five trials, and better overall survival in three of five studies. A randomized study failed to show any significant difference in overall survival between early transplant after induction therapy versus delayed transplant at relapse. These data allow an option to delay transplant, especially with the availability of more agents and combinations. Two successive HDTs (tandem transplants) are more effective than single HDT in the subset of patients who do not achieve a complete or very good partial response to the first transplant. Allogeneic transplants may also produce high response rates, but treatment-related mortality may be as high as 40%. Nonmyeloablative allogeneic transplantation is now under evaluation to reduce toxicity, while permitting an immune graft-vs-myeloma effect.

Oral prednisone maintenance therapy was effective in a single trial after standard-dose chemotherapy. Maintenance therapy prolongs remissions following standard-dose regimens as well as HDT. Thalidomide administered post-HDT prolongs relapse-free survival. Phase III studies have demonstrated improved outcome in patients receiving lenalidomide compared to placebo as maintenance therapy after HDT, and another phase III study showed prolonged progression-free survival after MP lenalidomide and lenalidomide maintenance therapy in nontransplant candidates.

Relapsed myeloma can be treated with novel agents including lenalidomide and/or bortezomib. These agents target not only the tumor cell but also the tumor cell每bone marrow interaction and the bone marrow milieu. These agents in combination with dexamethasone can achieve up to 60% partial responses and 10每15% complete responses in patients with relapsed disease. The combination of bortezomib and liposomal doxorubicin is active in relapsed myeloma. Thalidomide, if not used as initial therapy, can achieve responses in refractory cases. High-dose melphalan and stem cell transplant, if not used earlier, also have activity in patients with refractory disease.

The median overall survival of patients with myeloma is 7每8 years, with subsets of younger patients surviving more than 10 years. The major causes of death are progressive myeloma, renal failure, sepsis, or therapy-related myelodysplasia. Nearly a quarter of patients die of myocardial infarction, chronic lung disease, diabetes, or stroke〞all intercurrent illnesses related more to the age of the patient group than to the tumor.

Supportive care directed at the anticipated complications of the disease may be as important as primary antitumor therapy. The hypercalcemia generally responds well to bisphosphonates, glucocorticoid therapy, hydration, and natriuresis. Calcitonin may add to the inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids on bone resorption. Bisphosphonates (e.g., pamidronate 90 mg or zoledronate 4 mg once a month) reduce osteoclastic bone resorption and preserve performance status and quality of life, decrease bone-related complications, and may also have antitumor effects. Osteonecrosis of the jaw and renal dysfunction can occur in a minority of cases. Treatments aimed at strengthening the skeleton, such as fluorides, calcium, and vitamin D, with or without androgens, have been suggested but are not of proven efficacy. Iatrogenic worsening of renal function may be prevented by maintaining a high fluid intake to prevent dehydration and to help excrete light chains and calcium. In the event of acute renal failure, plasmapheresis is 10 times more effective at clearing light chains than peritoneal dialysis; however, its role in reversing renal failure remains controversial. Importantly, reducing the protein load by effective antitumor therapy with agents such as bortezomib may result in functional improvement. Urinary tract infections should be watched for and treated early. Plasmapheresis may be the treatment of choice for hyperviscosity syndromes. Although the pneumococcus is a dreaded pathogen in myeloma patients, pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines may not elicit an antibody response. Prophylactic administration of IV  globulin preparations is used in the setting of recurrent serious infections. Chronic oral antibiotic prophylaxis is probably not warranted. Patients developing neurologic symptoms in the lower extremities, severe localized back pain, or problems with bowel and bladder control may need emergency MRI and radiation therapy for cord compression. Most bone lesions respond to analgesics and chemotherapy, but certain painful lesions may respond most promptly to localized radiation. The anemia associated with myeloma may respond to erythropoietin along with hematinics (iron, folate, cobalamin). The pathogenesis of the anemia should be established and specific therapy instituted, where possible.
 
Waldenstr?m's Macroglobulinemia

In 1948, Waldenstr?m described a malignancy of lymphoplasmacytoid cells that secreted IgM. In contrast to myeloma, the disease was associated with lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, but the major clinical manifestation was the hyperviscosity syndrome. The disease resembles the related diseases chronic lymphocytic leukemia, myeloma, and lymphocytic lymphoma. It originates from a post每germinal center B cell that has undergone somatic mutations and antigenic selection in the lymphoid follicle and has the characteristics of an IgM-bearing memory B cell. Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia and IgM myeloma follow a similar clinical course, but therapeutic options are different. The diagnosis of IgM myeloma is usually reserved for patients with lytic bone lesions and predominant infiltration with CD138+ plasma cells in the bone marrow. Such patients are at greater risk of pathologic fractures than patients with Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia.

The cause of macroglobulinemia is unknown. The disease is similar to myeloma in being slightly more common in men and occurring with increased incidence with age (median 64 years). There have been reports that the IgM in some patients with macroglobulinemia may have specificity for myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), a protein that has been associated with demyelinating disease of the peripheral nervous system and may be lost earlier and to a greater extent than the better known myelin basic protein in patients with multiple sclerosis. Sometimes patients with macroglobulinemia develop a peripheral neuropathy, and half of these patients are positive for anti-MAG antibody. The neuropathy may precede the appearance of the neoplasm. There is speculation that the whole process begins with a viral infection that may elicit an antibody response that cross-reacts with a normal tissue component.

Like myeloma, the disease involves the bone marrow, but unlike myeloma, it does not cause bone lesions or hypercalcemia. Bone marrow shows >10% infiltration with lymphoplasmacytic cells (surface IgM+, CD19+, CD20+, and CD22+, rarely CD5+, but CD10每 and CD23每) with increase in number of mast cells. Like myeloma, M component is present in the serum in excess of 30 g/L (3 g/dL), but unlike myeloma, the size of the IgM paraprotein results in little renal excretion, and only 20% of patients excrete light chains. Therefore, renal disease is not common. The light chain isotype is kappa in 80% of the cases. Patients present with weakness, fatigue, and recurrent infections, similar to myeloma patients, but epistaxis, visual disturbances, and neurologic symptoms such as peripheral neuropathy, dizziness, headache, and transient paresis are much more common in macroglobulinemia. Physical examination reveals adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, and ophthalmoscopic examination may reveal vascular segmentation and dilation of the retinal veins characteristic of hyperviscosity states. Patients may have a normocytic, normochromic anemia, but rouleaux formation and a positive Coombs' test are much more common than in myeloma. Malignant lymphocytes are usually present in the peripheral blood. About 10% of macroglobulins are cryoglobulins. These are pure M components and are not the mixed cryoglobulins seen in rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. Mixed cryoglobulins are composed of IgM or IgA complexed with IgG, for which they are specific. In both cases, Raynaud's phenomenon and serious vascular symptoms precipitated by the cold may occur, but mixed cryoglobulins are not commonly associated with malignancy. Patients suspected of having a cryoglobulin based on history and physical examination should have their blood drawn into a warm syringe and delivered to the laboratory in a container of warm water to avoid errors in quantitating the cryoglobulin.

Treatment: Waldenstr?m's Macroglobulinemia

Control of serious hyperviscosity symptoms such as an altered state of consciousness or paresis can be achieved acutely by plasmapheresis because 80% of the IgM paraprotein is intravascular. The median survival is 50 months, similar to that of multiple myeloma. However, many individuals with Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia have indolent disease that does not require therapy. Pretreatment parameters including older age, male sex, general symptoms, and cytopenias define a high-risk population. Fludarabine (25 mg/m2 per day for 5 days every 4 weeks) or cladribine (0.1 mg/kg per day for 7 days every 4 weeks) are highly effective single agents. About 80% of patients respond to chemotherapy, and their median survival is >3 years. Rituximab (anti-CD20) can produce responses alone or combined with chemotherapy. As in multiple myeloma, the introduction of novel agents such as bortezomib, bendamustine, and lenalidomide have improved patient outcome.
 
Poems Syndrome

The features of this syndrome are polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, multiple myeloma, and skin changes (POEMS). Patients usually have a severe, progressive sensorimotor polyneuropathy associated with sclerotic bone lesions from myeloma. Polyneuropathy occurs in 1.4% of myelomas, but the POEMS syndrome is only a rare subset of that group. Unlike typical myeloma, hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy occur in about two-thirds of patients, and splenomegaly is seen in one-third. The lymphadenopathy frequently resembles Castleman's disease histologically, a condition that has been linked to IL-6 overproduction. The endocrine manifestations include amenorrhea in women and impotence and gynecomastia in men. Hyperprolactinemia due to loss of normal inhibitory control by the hypothalamus may be associated with other central nervous system manifestations such as papilledema and elevated cerebrospinal fluid pressure and protein. Type 2 diabetes mellitus occurs in about one-third of patients. Hypothyroidism and adrenal insufficiency are occasionally noted. Skin changes are diverse: hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, skin thickening, and digital clubbing. Other manifestations include peripheral edema, ascites, pleural effusions, fever, and thrombocytosis. Not all the components of POEMS syndrome may be present initially.

The pathogenesis of the disease is unclear, but high circulating levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6, VEGF, and TNF have been documented, and levels of the inhibitory cytokine TGF- are lower than expected. Treatment of the myeloma may result in an improvement in the other disease manifestations.

Patients are often treated similarly to those with myeloma. Plasmapheresis does not appear to be of benefit in POEMS syndrome. Patients presenting with isolated sclerotic lesions may have resolution of neuropathic symptoms after local therapy for plasmacytoma with radiotherapy. Similar to multiple myeloma, novel agents as well as high-dose therapy with autologous stem cell transplant have been pursued in selected patients and have been associated with prolonged progression-free survival.
 
Heavy Chain Diseases

The heavy chain diseases are rare lymphoplasmacytic malignancies. Their clinical manifestations vary with the heavy chain isotype. Patients have absence of light chain and secrete a defective heavy chain that usually has an intact Fc fragment and a deletion in the Fd region. Gamma, alpha, and mu heavy chain diseases have been described, but no reports of delta or epsilon heavy chain diseases have appeared. Molecular biologic analysis of these tumors has revealed structural genetic defects that may account for the aberrant chain secreted.

Gamma Heavy Chain Disease (Franklin's Disease)

This disease affects individuals of widely different age groups and countries of origin. It is characterized by lymphadenopathy, fever, anemia, malaise, hepatosplenomegaly, and weakness. It is frequently associated with autoimmune diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis. Its most distinctive symptom is palatal edema, resulting from involvement of nodes in Waldeyer's ring, and this may progress to produce respiratory compromise. The diagnosis depends on the demonstration of an anomalous serum M component [often <20 g/L (<2 g/dL)] that reacts with anti-IgG but not anti每light chain reagents. The M component is typically present in both serum and urine. Most of the paraproteins have been of the 1 subclass, but other subclasses have been seen. The patients may have thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, and nondiagnostic bone marrow that may show increased numbers of lymphocytes or plasma cells that do not stain for light chain. Patients usually have a rapid downhill course and die of infection; however, some patients have survived 5 years with chemotherapy. Therapy is indicated when symptomatic and involves chemotherapeutic combinations used in low-grade lymphoma. Rituximab has also been reported to show efficacy.

Alpha Heavy Chain Disease (Seligmann's Disease)

This is the most common of the heavy chain diseases. It is closely related to a malignancy known as Mediterranean lymphoma, a disease that affects young persons in parts of the world where intestinal parasites are common, such as the Mediterranean, Asia, and South America. The disease is characterized by an infiltration of the lamina propria of the small intestine with lymphoplasmacytoid cells that secrete truncated alpha chains. Demonstrating alpha heavy chains is difficult because the alpha chains tend to polymerize and appear as a smear instead of a sharp peak on electrophoretic profiles. Despite the polymerization, hyperviscosity is not a common problem in alpha heavy chain disease. Without J chain每facilitated dimerization, viscosity does not increase dramatically. Light chains are absent from serum and urine. The patients present with chronic diarrhea, weight loss, and malabsorption and have extensive mesenteric and paraaortic adenopathy. Respiratory tract involvement occurs rarely. Patients may vary widely in their clinical course. Some may develop diffuse aggressive histologies of malignant lymphoma. Chemotherapy may produce long-term remissions. Rare patients appear to have responded to antibiotic therapy, raising the question of the etiologic role of antigenic stimulation, perhaps by some chronic intestinal infection. Chemotherapy plus antibiotics may be more effective than chemotherapy alone. Immunoproliferative small-intestinal disease (IPSID) is recognized as an infectious pathogen每associated human lymphoma that has association with Campylobacter jejuni. It involves mainly the proximal small intestine resulting in malabsorption, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. IPSID is associated with excessive plasma cell differentiation and produces truncated alpha heavy chain proteins lacking the light chains as well as the first constant domain. Early-stage IPSID responds to antibiotics (30每70% complete remission). Most untreated IPSID patients progress to lymphoplasmacytic and immunoblastic lymphoma. Patients not responding to antibiotic therapy are considered for treatment with combination chemotherapy used to treat low-grade lymphoma.

Mu Heavy Chain Disease

The secretion of isolated mu heavy chains into the serum appears to occur in a very rare subset of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. The only features that may distinguish patients with mu heavy chain disease are the presence of vacuoles in the malignant lymphocytes and the excretion of kappa light chains in the urine. The diagnosis requires ultracentrifugation or gel filtration to confirm the nonreactivity of the paraprotein with the light chain reagents, because some intact macroglobulins fail to interact with these serums. The tumor cells seem to have a defect in the assembly of light and heavy chains, because they appear to contain both in their cytoplasm. There is no evidence that such patients should be treated differently from other patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Chap. 110).
 
Further Readings

Dimopoulos M et al: Consensus recommendations for standard investigative workup: Report of the International Myeloma Workshop Consensus Panel 3. Blood 117:4701, 2011[PMID: 21292778] 

 
Facon T et al: Frontline treatment in elderly patients with multiple myeloma. Semin Hematol 46:133, 2009[PMID: 19389497] 

 
Harousseau JL, Moreau P: Autologous hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 360:2645, 2009[PMID: 19535803] 

 
Hideshima T et al: Understanding multiple myeloma pathogenesis in the bone marrow to identify new therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Cancer 7:585, 2007[PMID: 17646864] 

 
The International Myeloma Working Group: Criteria for the classification of monoclonal gammopathies, multiple myeloma and related disorders: A report of the International Myeloma Working Group. Br J Haematol 121:749, 2003 

 
Jagannath S et al: The current status and future of multiple myeloma in the clinic. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 10:28, 2010[PMID: 20223727] 

 
Kyle RA et al: Prevalence of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. N Engl J Med 354:1362, 2006[PMID: 16571879] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Clinical course and prognosis of smoldering (asymptomatic) multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 356:2582, 2007 

 
Munshi NC et al: Consensus recommendations for risk stratification in multiple myeloma: Report of the International Myeloma Workshop Consensus Panel 2. Blood 117:4696, 2011[PMID: 21292777] 

 
Rajkumar SV et al: Front-line treatment in younger patients with multiple myeloma. Semin Hematol 46:118, 2009[PMID: 19389495] 

 
Treon SP: How I treat Waldenstr?m macroglobulinemia. Blood 114:2375, 2009[PMID: 19617573] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Advances in the biology and treatment of Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia: A report from the 5th International Workshop on Waldenstr?m's Macroglobulinemia, Stockholm, Sweden. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma 9:10, 2009 

 
Wahner-Roedler DL et al: Gamma-heavy chain disease: Review of 23 cases. Medicine 82:236, 2003[PMID: 12861101] 
 
 

^^
General Principles

Amyloidosis is the term for diseases caused by the extracellular deposition of insoluble polymeric protein fibrils in tissues and organs. These diseases are a subset of a growing group of disorders attributed to misfolding of proteins. Among these are Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases, transmissible prion diseases, and genetic diseases caused by mutations that lead to misfolding, aggregation, and protein loss of function, such as certain of the cystic fibrosis mutations. Amyloid fibrils share a common -pleated sheet structural conformation that confers unique staining properties. The term amyloid was coined by the pathologist Rudolf Virchow around 1854, who thought such deposits were cellulose-like under the microscope.

Amyloid diseases are defined by the biochemical nature of the protein in the fibril deposits and are classified according to whether they are systemic or localized, acquired or inherited, and by their clinical patterns (Table 112-1). The accepted nomenclature is AX, where A indicates amyloidosis and X represents the protein in the fibril. AL is amyloid composed of immunoglobulin light chains (LCs), and has been called primary systemic amyloidosis; it arises from a clonal B cell disorder and may be associated with myeloma or lymphoma. AF groups the familial amyloidoses, most commonly due to mutations in transthyretin, the transport protein for thyroid hormone and retinol-binding protein. AA amyloid is composed of the acute-phase reactant serum amyloid A protein and occurs in the setting of chronic inflammatory or infectious diseases and has been termed secondary amyloidosis. A2M is amyloid composed of 2-microglobulin and occurs in individuals with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) of long duration. A is the most common form of localized amyloidosis. A is deposited in the brain in Alzheimer's disease and is derived from abnormal proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP).

Table 112-1 Amyloid Fibril Proteins and Their Clinical Syndromes

 
 
Term Precursor Clinical Syndrome Clinical Involvement 
  Systemic Amyloidoses      
AL Immunoglobulin light chain Primary or myeloma associateda
  Any 
AH Immunoglobulin heavy chain Primary or myeloma associated (rare) Any 
AA Serum amyloid A protein Secondary; reactiveb
  Renal, any 
A2M
  2-Microglobulin
  Hemodialysis-associated Synovial membrane, bone 
ATTR Transthyretin Familial (mutant)

Senile systemic (wild type)
 Cardiac, peripheral and autonomic nerves 
AApoAI Apolipoprotein AI Familial Hepatic, renal 
AApoAII Apolipoprotein AII Familial Renal 
AGel Gelsolin Familial Corneas, cranial nerves, renal 
AFib Fibrinogen A Familial Renal 
ALys Lysozyme Familial Renal 
ALECT2 Leukocyte chemotactic factor 2 ? Renal 
  Localized Amyloidoses      
A Amyloid  protein Alzheimer＊s disease; Down syndrome CNS 
ACys Cystatin C Cerebral amyloid angiopathy CNS, vascular 
APrP Prion protein Spongiform encephalopathies CNS 
AIAPP Islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) Diabetes-associated Pancreas 
ACal Calcitonin Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid Thyroid 
AANF Atrial natriuretic factor Age-related Cardiac atria 
APro Prolactin Endocrinopathy Pituitary 
 


aLocalized deposits can occur in skin, conjunctiva, urinary bladder, and tracheobronchial tree.

bSecondary to chronic inflammation or infection, or to a hereditary periodic fever syndrome, e.g., familial Mediterranean fever.
 

Diagnosis and treatment of the amyloidoses rest upon the pathologic diagnosis of amyloid deposits and immunohistochemical or biochemical identification of amyloid type (Fig. 112-1). In the systemic amyloidoses, the involved organs can be biopsied, but amyloid deposits may be found in any tissue of the body. Historically, blood vessels of the gingiva or rectal mucosa were examined, but the most easily accessible tissue, positive in more than 80% of patients with systemic amyloidosis, is fat. After local anesthesia, needle aspiration of fat from the abdominal wall can be expelled onto a slide and stained, avoiding even a minor surgical procedure. If this material is negative, biopsy of kidney, heart, liver, or gastrointestinal tract can be considered. The regular -sheet structure of amyloid deposits exhibits a unique green birefringence by polarized light microscopy when stained with Congo red dye; the 10-nm-diameter fibrils can be seen directly by electron microscopy of paraformaldehyde-fixed tissue. Once amyloid is found, the protein type must be determined, usually by immunohistochemistry, immunoelectron microscopy, or by extraction and biochemical analysis by mass spectrometry or other technique. Careful evaluation of the patient's history, physical findings, and clinical presentation, including age and ethnic origin, organ system involvement, underlying diseases, and family history, can provide helpful clues to the type of amyloid.

Figure 112-1

 
 
 
Algorithm for the diagnosis of amyloidosis and determination of type: Clinical suspicion: unexplained nephropathy, cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, enteropathy, arthropathy, and macroglossia. ApoAI, apolipoprotein AI; ApoAII, apolipoprotein AII; GI, gastrointestinal.
 
 

The mechanisms of fibril formation and tissue toxicity remain controversial. Factors that contribute to fibrillogenesis include variant or unstable protein structure, extensive -sheet conformation of the precursor protein, proteolytic processing of the precursor protein, association with components of the serum or extracellular matrix (e.g., amyloid P-component, apolipoprotein E, or glycosaminoglycans), and local physical properties, including pH of the tissue. Monomeric proteins appear to go through an oligomeric aggregation step and then form higher order polymers. Once the polymers reach a critical size, they become insoluble and deposit in extracellular tissue sites as fibrils. These large macromolecular deposits interfere with organ function and, due to cellular uptake of oligomeric amyloid precursors, may be toxic to target cells.

The clinical syndromes of the amyloidoses are associated with relatively nonspecific alterations in routine laboratory tests. Blood counts are usually normal, although the erythrocyte sedimentation rate is frequently elevated. Patients with renal involvement will usually have proteinuria, which can be as much as 30 g/d, producing hypoalbuminemia that can be profound. Patients with cardiac involvement will often have elevation of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), pro-BNP, and troponin. These can be useful for monitoring disease activity and have been proposed as prognostic factors; they can be falsely elevated in the presence of renal insufficiency. Patients with liver involvement, even when it is advanced, usually develop cholestasis with an elevated alkaline phosphatase but minimal elevation of the transaminases and preservation of synthetic function. In AL amyloidosis, endocrinopathies can occur, with laboratory testing demonstrating hypothyroidism, hypoadrenalism, or even hypopituitarism. None of these findings are specific for amyloidosis. Thus, a diagnosis of amyloidosis rests upon a tissue biopsy that, after Congo red staining, shows "apple-green" birefringence on polarization microscopy.
 
AL Amyloidosis

Etiology and Incidence

AL amyloidosis is most frequently caused by a clonal expansion of plasma cells in the bone marrow that secrete a monoclonal immunoglobulin LC that deposits as amyloid fibrils in tissues. It may be purely serendipitous whether the clonal plasma cells produce a LC that misfolds and leads to AL amyloidosis, or folds properly, allowing the cells to inexorably expand over time and develop into multiple myeloma (Chap. 111). It is also possible that the two processes have diverse molecular etiologies. AL amyloidosis can occur with multiple myeloma or other B lymphoproliferative diseases, including non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (Chap. 110) and Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia (Chap. 111). AL amyloidosis is the most common type of systemic amyloidosis in North America. Its incidence has been estimated at 4.5 per 100,000; however, ascertainment continues to be inadequate, and the true incidence may be much higher. AL amyloidosis, like other plasma cell diseases, usually occurs after age 40 and is often rapidly progressive and fatal if untreated.

Pathology and Clinical Features of AL Amyloidosis

Amyloid deposits are usually widespread in AL amyloidosis and can be present in the interstitium of any organ outside of the central nervous system. The amyloid fibril deposits are composed of intact 23-kDa monoclonal Ig LCs or smaller fragments, 11每18 kDa in size, representing the variable (V) region alone, or the V region and a portion of the constant (C) region. Although all kappa and lambda LC subtypes have been identified in AL amyloid fibrils, lambda subtypes predominate. The lambda 6 subtype appears to have unique structural properties that predispose it to fibril formation, often in the kidney.

AL amyloidosis is usually a rapidly progressive disease that presents with a pleiotropic set of clinical syndromes, recognition of which is key to initiating appropriate workup. Nonspecific symptoms of fatigue and weight loss are common; however, the diagnosis is rarely considered until symptoms referable to a specific organ develop. The kidneys are the most frequently affected organ, in 70每70% of patients. Renal amyloidosis is usually manifested as proteinuria, often in the nephrotic range and associated with significant hypoalbuminemia, secondary hypercholesterolemia, and edema or anasarca. In some patients, tubular rather than glomerular deposition of amyloid can produce azotemia without significant proteinuria. The heart is the second most commonly affected organ, in 50每50% of patients, and the leading cause of mortality. Early on, the electrocardiogram may show low voltage in the limb leads, with a pseudo-infarct pattern. Eventually, the echocardiogram will display concentrically thickened ventricles and diastolic dysfunction, leading to a restrictive cardiomyopathy; systolic function is preserved until late in the disease. A "sparkly" appearance is usually not seen using modern high-resolution echocardiography equipment. Cardiac MRI can show an increased wall thickness and also a characteristic subendocardial enhancement with gadolinium. Nervous system symptoms include a peripheral sensory neuropathy and/or autonomic dysfunction with gastrointestinal motility disturbances (early satiety, diarrhea, constipation) and orthostatic hypotension. Macroglossia, with an enlarged, indented, or immobile tongue, is pathognomonic of AL amyloidosis but is seen only in ~10% of patients. Liver involvement causes cholestasis and hepatomegaly. The spleen is frequently involved, and there may be functional hyposplenism in the absence of significant splenomegaly. Many patients have "easy bruising" due to amyloid deposits in capillaries or to deficiency of clotting factor X, which can bind to amyloid fibrils; cutaneous ecchymoses appear, particularly around the eyes, giving the "raccoon-eye" sign. Other findings include nail dystrophy, alopecia, and amyloid arthropathy with thickening of synovial membranes in wrists and shoulders (Fig. 112-2). The presence of a multisystem illness or general fatigue along with any of these clinical syndromes should prompt a workup for amyloidosis.

Figure 112-2

 
 
 
 
 
Clinical signs of AL amyloidosis.A. Macroglossia. B. Periorbital ecchymoses. C. Fingernail dystrophy.
 
 

Diagnosis

Identification of the underlying B lymphoproliferative process and clonal LC is key to the diagnosis of AL amyloidosis. The serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP) are NOT useful screening tests if AL amyloidosis is suspected because the clonal LC or whole immunoglobulin, unlike in multiple myeloma, is often not present in sufficient quantity in the serum to produce a monoclonal "M-spike" or in the urine to cause LC (Bence Jones) proteinuria. However, more than 90% of patients have a serum or urine monoclonal LC or whole immunoglobulin that can be detected by immunofixation electrophoresis of serum (SIFE) or urine (UIFE) (Fig. 112-3A). Assaying for free immunoglobulin LCs circulating in the serum unbound to heavy chains using commercially available nephelometric (FreeLite?) assay demonstrates an elevation and abnormal free kappa:lambda ratio in more than 75% of patients. Examining the ratio as well as the absolute amount is essential, because in renal insufficiency LC clearance is reduced, and both types of LCs will be elevated. In addition, an increased percentage of plasma cells in the bone marrow, typically 5每5% of nucleated cells, is noted in about 90% of patients. Kappa or lambda clonality can be demonstrated by flow cytometry, immunohistochemical staining, or by in situ hybridization for LC mRNA (Fig. 112-3B).

Figure 112-3

 
 
 
 
Laboratory features of AL amyloidosis. A. Serum immunofixation electrophoresis reveals an IgG monoclonal protein in this example; the serum protein electrophoresis is often normal. B. Bone marrow biopsy sections from another patient, stained with antibody to CD138 (syndecan, highly expressed on plasma cells) by immunohistochemistry (left panel). The middle and right panels are stained using in situ hybridization with fluorescein-tagged probes (Ventana Medical Systems) binding to  and  mRNA respectively in plasma cells. (Photomicrograph courtesy of C. O'Hara; with permission.)
 
 

A monoclonal serum protein by itself is not diagnostic of amyloidosis, since monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance (MGUS) is common in older patients (Chap. 111). However, when MGUS is present in patients with biopsy-proven amyloidosis, the AL type should be strongly suspected. Similarly, patients thought to have "smoldering myeloma" because of modest elevation of bone marrow plasma cells should be screened for AL amyloidosis if they have evidence of organ dysfunction. Accurate typing is essential for appropriate treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of the amyloid deposits is useful if they bind one light chain antibody in preference to the other; some AL deposits bind many antisera nonspecifically. Immunoelectron microscopy is more reliable and mass-spectrometry-based microsequencing of small amounts of protein extracted from fibril deposits can also be done. In ambiguous cases, other forms of amyloidosis should be thoroughly excluded with appropriate genetic and other testing.

Treatment: AL Amyloidosis

Extensive multisystem involvement typifies AL amyloidosis, and median survival with no treatment is usually only about 1每2 years from the time of diagnosis. Current therapies target the clonal bone marrow plasma cells using approaches employed for multiple myeloma. Treatment with cyclic oral melphalan and prednisone can decrease the plasma cell burden but produces complete hematologicremission in only a few percent of patients and minimal organ responses and improvement in survival (median 2 years), and it is no longer widely used. The substitution of dexamethasone for prednisone produces a higher response rate and more durable remissions, although dexamethasone is not always well tolerated by patients with significant edema or cardiac disease. High-dose intravenous melphalan followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (HDM/SCT) produces complete hematologic responses in about 40% of treated patients, as measured by complete loss (CR) of clonal plasma cells in the bone marrow and disappearance of the monoclonal LC by IFE and assay for free LCs. Hematologic responses can be followed in the subsequent 6每12 months by improvement in organ function and quality of life. The CRs after HDM/SCT appear to be more durable than those seen in multiple myeloma, with remissions continuing in some patients beyond 15 years without additional treatment. Unfortunately, only about half of AL amyloidosis patients are eligible for such aggressive treatment, and even at specialized treatment centers, peritransplant mortality is higher than for other hematologic diseases because of impaired organ function. Amyloid cardiomyopathy, poor nutritional status, impaired performance status, and multiple-organ disease contribute to excess morbidity and mortality. The bleeding diathesis due to adsorption of clotting factor X to amyloid fibrils also confers high mortality during myelosuppressive therapy; however, this syndrome occurs in only a few percent of patients. The single randomized multicenter trial comparing oral melphalan and dexamethasone to HDM/SCT to date failed to show a benefit to dose-intensive treatment, although the transplant-related mortality in this study was very high.

For patients with impaired cardiac function or arrhythmias due to amyloid involvement of the myocardium, median survival is only about 6 months without treatment, and stem cell mobilization and high-dose chemotherapy are dangerous. In these patients, cardiac transplantation can be performed, followed by treatment with HDM/SCT to prevent amyloid deposition in the transplanted heart or other organs. 

Recently, novel agents have been investigated for treatment of plasma cell diseases. The immunomodulators thalidomide and lenalidomide have activity; lenalidomide is well tolerated in doses lower than those used for myeloma and, in combination with dexamethasone, produces complete hematologic remissions and improvement in organ function. The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib has also been found to be effective in single- and multicenter trials. Combination therapy trials are now under development, and studies are examining the as yet unproven role of induction and maintenance treatment. Clinical trials are essential for improving therapy for this rare disease.

Supportive care is important for patients with any type of amyloidosis. For nephrotic syndrome, diuretics and supportive stockings can ameliorate edema; angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors should be used with caution and have not been shown to slow renal disease progression. Congestive heart failure due to amyloid cardiomyopathy is also best treated with diuretics; it is important to note that digitalis, calcium channel blockers, and beta blockers are relatively contraindicated as they can interact with amyloid fibrils and produce heart block and worsening heart failure. Amiodarone has been used for atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Automatic implantable defibrillators have reduced effectiveness due to the thickened myocardium, but they can benefit some patients. Atrial ablation is an effective approach for atrial fibrillation. For conduction abnormalities, ventricular pacing may be indicated. Atrial contractile dysfunction is common in amyloid cardiomyopathy and is an indication for anticoagulation even in the absence of atrial fibrillation. Autonomic neuropathy can be treated with  agonists such as midodrine to support the blood pressure; gastrointestinal dysfunction may respond to motility or bulk agents. Nutritional supplementation, either orally or parenterally, is also important.

In localized AL, amyloid deposits can be produced by clonal plasma cells infiltrating local sites in the airways, bladder, skin, or lymph nodes (Table 112-1). Deposits may respond to surgical intervention or radiation therapy; systemic treatment is generally not appropriate. Patients should be referred to a center familiar with management of these rare manifestations of amyloidosis.
 
AA Amyloidosis

Etiology and Incidence

AA amyloidosis can occur in association with almost any chronic inflammatory state [e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, familial Mediterranean fever (Chap. 330) or other periodic fever syndromes] or chronic infections such as tuberculosis or subacute bacterial endocarditis. In the United States and Europe, AA amyloidosis has become less common, occurring in <2% of patients with these diseases, presumably because of advances in anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial therapies. It has also been described in association with Castleman's disease, and patients with AA amyloidosis should have CT scanning to look for such tumors, as well as serologic and microbiologic studies. AA amyloidosis can also be seen without any identifiable underlying disease. AA is the only type of systemic amyloidosis that occurs in children.

Pathology and Clinical Features

Deposits are more limited in AA amyloidosis than in AL amyloidosis; they usually begin in the kidneys. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and autonomic neuropathy can also occur as the disease progresses; cardiomyopathy occurs albeit rarely. However, the symptoms and signs cannot be reliably distinguished from those of AL amyloidosis. AA amyloid fibrils are usually composed of an 8-kDa, 76-amino-acid N-terminal portion of a 12-kDa precursor protein, serum amyloid A (SAA). SAA is an acute-phase apoprotein synthesized in the liver and transported by high-density lipoprotein, HDL3, in the plasma. Several years of an underlying inflammatory disease causing chronic elevation of SAA usually precedes fibril formation, although infections can lead to AA deposition more rapidly.

Treatment: AA Amyloidosis

The primary therapy in AA amyloidosis is treatment of the underlying inflammatory or infectious disease. Treatment that suppresses or eliminates the inflammation or infection also decreases the SAA protein concentration. For familial Mediterranean fever, colchicine in a dose of 1.2每1.8 mg/d is the appropriate treatment. Colchicine has not been helpful for AA amyloidosis of other causes or for other amyloidoses. TNF and IL-1 antagonists can also be effective in syndromes related to cytokine elevation. For this disease, there is also a fibril-specific agent. Eprodisate was designed to interfere with the interaction of AA amyloid protein with glycosaminoglycans in tissues and prevent or disrupt fibril formation. This drug is well tolerated and delays progression of AA renal disease, regardless of the underlying inflammatory process. Eprodisate is awaiting FDA approval.
 
AF Amyloidosis

The familial amyloidoses are autosomal dominant diseases in which a variant plasma protein forms amyloid deposits, beginning in midlife. These diseases are rare, with an estimated incidence of <1 per 100,000 in the United States, although there are isolated areas of Portugal, Sweden, and Japan where founder effects have led to a much higher incidence of the disease. The most common form of AF is caused by mutation of the abundant plasma protein transthyretin (TTR, also known as prealbumin). More than 100 TTR mutations are known, and most are associated with ATTR amyloidosis. One variant, V122I, has a carrier frequency that may be as high as 4% in the African-American population and is associated with late-onset cardiac amyloidosis. The actual incidence and penetrance of disease in the African-American population is the subject of ongoing research, but it would be wise to consider this in the differential diagnosis of African-American patients who present with concentric cardiac hypertrophy and evidence of diastolic dysfunction, particularly in the absence of a history of hypertension. Even wild-type TTR can form fibrils, leading to so-called senile systemic amyloidosis (SSA) in older patients. It can be found in up to 25% of autopsies in patients older than age 80 years, and it can produce a clinical syndrome of amyloid cardiomyopathy that is similar to that occurring in younger patients carrying a mutant TTR. Other familial amyloidoses, caused by variant apolipoproteins AI or AII, gelsolin, fibrinogen A, or lysozyme, are reported in only a few families worldwide. New amyloidogenic serum proteins continue to be identified periodically, including recently the leukocyte chemotactic factor LECT2.

In ATTR and in other forms of familial amyloidosis, the variant structure of the precursor protein is the key factor in fibril formation. The role of aging is intriguing, since patients born with the variant proteins do not have clinically apparent disease until middle age, despite the lifelong presence of the abnormal protein. Further evidence of an age-related "trigger" is the occurrence of SSA in the elderly, caused by the deposition of fibrils derived from normal TTR.

Clinical Features and Diagnosis

AF amyloidosis has a variable presentation but is usually consistent within affected kindreds with the same mutant protein. A family history makes AF more likely, but many patients present sporadically with new mutations. ATTR usually presents as a syndrome of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy or familial amyloidotic cardiomyopathy. Peripheral neuropathy usually begins as a lower-extremity sensory and motor neuropathy and progresses to the upper extremities. Autonomic neuropathy is manifest by gastrointestinal symptoms of diarrhea with weight loss and orthostatic hypotension. Patients with TTR V30M, the most common mutation, have normal echocardiograms but may have conduction defects and require a pacemaker. Patients with TTR T60A and several other mutations have myocardial thickening similar to that caused by AL amyloidosis, although heart failure is less common and the prognosis is better. Vitreous opacities caused by amyloid deposits are pathognomonic of ATTR amyloidosis.

Typical syndromes associated with other forms of AF included renal amyloidosis with mutant fibrinogen, lysozyme, or apolipoproteins, or hepatic amyloidosis with apolipoprotein AI, and amyloidosis of cranial nerves and cornea with gelsolin.

Patients with AF amyloidosis can present with clinical syndromes that mimic those of patients with AL, and AF carriers can develop AL, or conversely, AF patients can develop a MGUS. Thus, it is important to screen for both plasma cell disorders and for mutations in some patients with amyloidosis. Variant TTR proteins can usually be detected by isoelectric focusing, but DNA sequencing is now standard for diagnosis of ATTR and the other AF mutations. 

Treatment: ATTR Amyloidosis

Without intervention, survival after ATTR disease onset is 5每15 years. Orthotopic liver transplantation removes the major source of variant TTR production and replaces it with a source of normal TTR; it also arrests disease progression and leads to improvement in autonomic and peripheral neuropathy in some patients. Cardiomyopathy often does not improve, and in some patients it can worsen after liver transplantation, perhaps due to deposition of wild-type TTR as seen in SSA. Compounds have been identified that stabilize TTR in a nonpathogenic tetrameric conformation in vitro and are undergoing clinical testing in multicenter trials.
 
A2M Amyloidosis

A2M amyloidosis is composed of 2-microglobulin, the invariant chain of class I human leukocyte antigens, and produces rheumatologic manifestations in patients on long-term hemodialysis. 2-Microglobulin is excreted by the kidney, and levels become elevated in ESRD. The molecular mass of 2M is 11.8 kDa, above the cutoff of some dialysis membranes. The incidence of this disease appears to be declining with newer high-flow dialysis techniques.

A2M amyloidosis usually presents with carpal tunnel syndrome, persistent joint effusions, spondyloarthropathy, or cystic bone lesions. Carpal tunnel syndrome is often the first symptom of disease. In the past, persistent joint effusions accompanied by mild discomfort were seen in up to 50% of patients on dialysis for more than 12 years. Involvement is bilateral, and large joints (shoulders, knees, wrists, and hips) are more frequently affected. The synovial fluid is noninflammatory, and 2M amyloid can be found if the sediment is stained with Congo red. Although less common, visceral 2M amyloid deposits do occasionally occur in the gastrointestinal tract, heart, tendons, and subcutaneous tissues of the buttocks. There is no specific therapy for A2M amyloidosis, but cessation of dialysis after renal allografting may lead to symptomatic improvement.
 
Summary

A diagnosis of amyloidosis should be considered in patients with unexplained nephropathy, cardiomyopathy (particularly with diastolic dysfunction), neuropathy (either peripheral or autonomic), enteropathy, or the pathognomonic soft tissue findings of macroglossia or periorbital ecchymoses. Pathologic identification of amyloid fibrils can be made using Congo red staining of aspirated abdominal fat or of an involved organ biopsy specimen. Accurate typing using a combination of immunologic, biochemical, and genetic testing is essential to choosing the appropriate therapy (see algorithm for workup, Fig. 112-1). Tertiary referral centers can provide specialized diagnostic techniques and access to clinical trials for patients with these rare diseases.
 
Further Readings

Benson MD et al: Leukocyte chemotactic factor 2: A novel renal amyloid protein. Kidney Int 74:218, 2008[PMID: 18449172] 

 
Connors L et al: Cardiac amyloidosis in African Americans: Comparison of clinical and laboratory features of transthyretin V122I amyloidosis and immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis. Am Heart J 158:607, 2009 

 
Dember L et al: Eprodisate for the treatment of renal disease in AA amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 356:2349, 2007 

 
Dey BR et al: Cardiac transplantation followed by dose-intensive melphalan and autologous stem-cell transplantation for light chain amyloidosis and heart failure. Transplantation 90:905, 2010[PMID: 20733534] 

 
Merlini G, Bellotti V: Molecular mechanisms of amyloidosis. N Engl J Med 349:583, 2003 

 
Sanchorawala V et al: Long-term outcome of patients with AL amyloidosis treated with high-dose melphalan and stem-cell transplantation. Blood 110:3561, 2007 

 
Skinner M et al: High-dose melphalan and autologous stem-cell transplantation in patients with AL amyloidosis: An 8-year study. Ann Intern Med 140:85, 2004[PMID: 14734330] 

 
 

^^
Blood Group Antigens and Antibodies

The study of red blood cell (RBC) antigens and antibodies forms the foundation of transfusion medicine. Serologic studies initially characterized these antigens, but now the molecular composition and structure of many are known. Antigens, either carbohydrate or protein, are assigned to a blood group system based on the structure and similarity of the determinant epitopes. Other cellular blood elements and plasma proteins are also antigenic and can result in alloimmunization, the production of antibodies directed against the blood group antigens of another individual. These antibodies are called alloantibodies.

Antibodies directed against RBC antigens may result from "natural" exposure, particularly to carbohydrates that mimic some blood group antigens. Those antibodies that occur via natural stimuli are usually produced by a T cell〞independent response (thus, generating no memory) and are IgM isotype. Autoantibodies (antibodies against autologous blood group antigens) arise spontaneously or as the result of infectious sequelae (e.g., from Mycoplasma pneumoniae) and are also often IgM. These antibodies are often clinically insignificant due to their low affinity for antigen at body temperature. However, IgM antibodies can activate the complement cascade and result in hemolysis. Antibodies that result from allogeneic exposure, such as transfusion or pregnancy, are usually IgG. IgG antibodies commonly bind to antigen at warmer temperatures and may hemolyze RBCs. Unlike IgM antibodies, IgG antibodies can cross the placenta and bind fetal erythrocytes bearing the corresponding antigen, resulting in hemolytic disease of the newborn, or hydrops fetalis.

Alloimmunization to leukocytes, platelets, and plasma proteins may also result in transfusion complications such as fevers and urticaria but generally does not cause hemolysis. Assay for these other alloantibodies is not routinely performed; however, they may be detected using special assays.

ABO Antigens and Antibodies

The first blood group antigen system, recognized in 1900, was ABO, the most important in transfusion medicine. The major blood groups of this system are A, B, AB, and O. O type RBCs lack A or B antigens. These antigens are carbohydrates attached to a precursor backbone, may be found on the cellular membrane either as glycosphingolipids or glycoproteins, and are secreted into plasma and body fluids as glycoproteins. H substance is the immediate precursor on which the A and B antigens are added. This H substance is formed by the addition of fucose to the glycolipid or glycoprotein backbone. The subsequent addition of N-acetylgalactosamine creates the A antigen, while the addition of galactose produces the B antigen.

The genes that determine the A and B phenotypes are found on chromosome 9p and are expressed in a Mendelian codominant manner. The gene products are glycosyl transferases, which confer the enzymatic capability of attaching the specific antigenic carbohydrate. Individuals who lack the "A" and "B" transferases are phenotypically type "O," while those who inherit both transferases are type "AB." Rare individuals lack the H gene, which codes for fucose transferase, and cannot form H substance. These individuals are homozygous for the silent h allele (hh) and have Bombay phenotype (Oh).

The ABO blood group system is important because essentially all individuals produce antibodies to the ABH carbohydrate antigen that they lack. The naturally occurring anti-A and anti-B antibodies are termed isoagglutinins. Thus, type A individuals produce anti-B, while type B individuals make anti-A. Neither isoagglutinin is found in type AB individuals, while type O individuals produce both anti-A and anti-B. Thus, persons with type AB are "universal recipients" because they do not have antibodies against any ABO phenotype, while persons with type O blood can donate to essentially all recipients because their cells are not recognized by any ABO isoagglutinins. The rare individuals with Bombay phenotype produce antibodies to H substance (which is present on all red cells except those of hh phenotype) as well as to both A and B antigens and are therefore compatible only with other hh donors.

In most people, A and B antigens are secreted by the cells and are present in the circulation. Nonsecretors are susceptible to a variety of infections (e.g., Candida albicans, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae) as many organisms may bind to polysaccharides on cells. Soluble blood group antigens may block this binding.

Rh System

The Rh system is the second most important blood group system in pretransfusion testing. The Rh antigens are found on a 30- to 32-kDa RBC membrane protein that has no defined function. Although >40 different antigens in the Rh system have been described, five determinants account for the vast majority of phenotypes. The presence of the D antigen confers Rh "positivity," while persons who lack the D antigen are Rh negative. Two allelic antigen pairs, E/e and C/c, are also found on the Rh protein. The three Rh genes, E/e, D, and C/c, are arranged in tandem on chromosome 1 and inherited as a haplotype, i.e., cDE or Cde. Two haplotypes can result in the phenotypic expression of two to five Rh antigens.

The D antigen is a potent alloantigen. About 15% of individuals lack this antigen. Exposure of these Rh-negative people to even small amounts of Rh-positive cells, by either transfusion or pregnancy, can result in the production of anti-D alloantibody.

Other Blood Group Systems and Alloantibodies

More than 100 blood group systems are recognized, composed of more than 500 antigens. The presence or absence of certain antigens has been associated with various diseases and anomalies; antigens also act as receptors for infectious agents. Alloantibodies of importance in routine clinical practice are listed in Table 113每1.

Table 113每1 RBC Blood Group Systems and Alloantigens

 
 
Blood Group System Antigen Alloantibody Clinical Significance 
Rh (D, C/c, E/e) RBC protein IgG HTR, HDN 
Lewis (Lea, Leactivity="italic">b)
 Oligosaccharide IgM/IgG Rare HTR 
Kell (K/k) RBC protein IgG HTR, HDN 
Duffy (Fya/Fyb)  RBC protein IgG HTR, HDN 
Kidd (Jka/Jkb)  RBC protein IgG HTR (often delayed), HDN (mild) 
I/i Carbohydrate IgM None 
MNSsU RBC protein IgM/IgG Anti-M rare HDN, anti-S, -s, and -U HDN, HTR 
 


Abbreviation: RBC, red blood cell; HDN, hemolytic disease of the newborn; HTR, hemolytic transfusion reaction.
 

Antibodies to Lewis system carbohydrate antigens are the most common cause of incompatibility during pretransfusion screening. The Lewis gene product is a fucosyl transferase and maps to chromosome 19. The antigen is not an integral membrane structure but is adsorbed to the RBC membrane from the plasma. Antibodies to Lewis antigens are usually IgM and cannot cross the placenta. Lewis antigens may be adsorbed onto tumor cells and may be targets of therapy.

I system antigens are also oligosaccharides related to H, A, B, and Le. I and i are not allelic pairs but are carbohydrate antigens that differ only in the extent of branching. The i antigen is an unbranched chain that is converted by the I gene product, a glycosyltransferase, into a branched chain. The branching process affects all the ABH antigens, which become progressively more branched in the first 2 years of life. Some patients with cold agglutinin disease or lymphomas can produce anti-I autoantibodies that cause RBC destruction. Occasional patients with mononucleosis or Mycoplasma pneumonia may develop cold agglutinins of either anti-I or anti-i specificity. Most adults lack i expression; thus, finding a donor for patients with anti-i is not difficult. Even though most adults express I antigen, binding is generally low at body temperature. Thus, administration of warm blood prevents isoagglutination.

The P system is another group of carbohydrate antigens controlled by specific glycosyltransferases. Its clinical significance is in rare cases of syphilis and viral infection that lead to paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria. In these cases, an unusual autoantibody to P is produced that binds to RBCs in the cold and fixes complement upon warming. Antibodies with these biphasic properties are called Donath-Landsteiner antibodies. The P antigen is the cellular receptor of parvovirus B19 and also may be a receptor for Escherichia coli binding to urothelial cells.

The MNSsU system is regulated by genes on chromosome 4. M and N are determinants on glycophorin A, an RBC membrane protein, and S and s are determinants on glycophorin B. Anti-S and anti-s IgG antibodies may develop after pregnancy or transfusion and lead to hemolysis. Anti-U antibodies are rare but problematic; virtually every donor is incompatible because nearly all persons express U.

The Kell protein is very large (720 amino acids), and its secondary structure contains many different antigenic epitopes. The immunogenicity of Kell is third behind the ABO and Rh systems. The absence of the Kell precursor protein (controlled by a gene on X) is associated with acanthocytosis, shortened RBC survival, and a progressive form of muscular dystrophy that includes cardiac defects. This rare condition is called the McLeod phenotype. The Kx gene is linked to the 91-kDa component of the NADPH-oxidase on the X chromosome, deletion or mutation of which accounts for about 60% of cases of chronic granulomatous disease.

The Duffy antigens are codominant alleles, Fya and Fyb, that also serve as receptors for Plasmodium vivax. More than 70% of persons in malaria-endemic areas lack these antigens, probably from selective influences of the infection on the population.

The Kidd antigens, Jka and Jkb, may elicit antibodies transiently. A delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction that occurs with blood tested as compatible is often related to delayed appearance of anti-Jka.
 
Pretransfusion Testing

Pretransfusion testing of a potential recipient consists of the "type and screen." The "forward type" determines the ABO and Rh phenotype of the recipient's RBC by using antisera directed against the A, B, and D antigens. The "reverse type" detects isoagglutinins in the patient's serum and should correlate with the ABO phenotype, or forward type.

The alloantibody screen identifies antibodies directed against other RBC antigens. The alloantibody screen is performed by mixing patient serum with type O RBCs that contain the major antigens of most blood group systems and whose extended phenotype is known. The specificity of the alloantibody is identified by correlating the presence or absence of antigen with the results of the agglutination.

Cross-matching is ordered when there is a high probability that the patient will require a packed RBC (PRBC) transfusion. Blood selected for cross-matching must be ABO compatible and lack antigens for which the patient has alloantibodies. Nonreactive cross-matching confirms the absence of any major incompatibility and reserves that unit for the patient.

In the case of Rh-negative patients, every attempt must be made to provide Rh-negative blood components to prevent alloimmunization to the D antigen. In an emergency, Rh-positive blood can be safely transfused to an Rh-negative patient who lacks anti-D; however, the recipient is likely to become alloimmunized and produce anti-D. Rh-negative women of childbearing age who are transfused with products containing Rh-positive RBCs should receive passive immunization with anti-D (RhoGam or WinRho) to reduce or prevent sensitization.
 
Blood Components

Blood products intended for transfusion are routinely collected as whole blood (450 mL) in various anticoagulants. Most donated blood is processed into components: PRBCs, platelets, and fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) or cryoprecipitate (Table 113每2). Whole blood is first separated into PRBCs and platelet-rich plasma by slow centrifugation. The platelet-rich plasma is then centrifuged at high speed to yield one unit of random donor (RD) platelets and one unit of FFP. Cryoprecipitate is produced by thawing FFP to precipitate the plasma proteins, then separated by centrifugation.

Table 113每2 Characteristics of Selected Blood Components

 
 
Component Volume, mL Content Clinical Response 
PRBC 180每200 RBCs with variable leukocyte content and small amount of plasma Increase hemoglobin 10 g/L and hematocrit 3% 
Platelets 50每70 5.5 x 1010/RD unit
  Increase platelet count 5000每10,000/L 
  200每400 3 x 1011/SDAP product
  CCI 10 x 109/L within 1 h and 7.5 x 109/L within 24 h posttransfusion
  
FFP 200每250 Plasma proteins〞coagulation factors, proteins C and S, antithrombin Increases coagulation factors about 2% 
Cryoprecipitate 10每15 Cold-insoluble plasma proteins, fibrinogen, factor VIII, vWF Topical fibrin glue, also 80 IU factor VIII 
 


Abbreviation: CCI, corrected count increment; FFP, fresh-frozen plasma; PRBC, packed red blood cells; RBC, red blood cell; RD, random donor; SDAP, single-donor apheresis platelets; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
 

Apheresis technology is used for the collection of multiple units of platelets from a single donor. These single-donor apheresis platelets (SDAP) contain the equivalent of at least six units of RD platelets and have fewer contaminating leukocytes than pooled RD platelets.

Plasma may also be collected by apheresis. Plasma derivatives such as albumin, intravenous immunoglobulin, antithrombin, and coagulation factor concentrates are prepared from pooled plasma from many donors and are treated to eliminate infectious agents.

Whole Blood

Whole blood provides both oxygen-carrying capacity and volume expansion. It is the ideal component for patients who have sustained acute hemorrhage of ≡25% total blood volume loss. Whole blood is stored at 4∼C to maintain erythrocyte viability, but platelet dysfunction and degradation of some coagulation factors occurs. In addition, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate levels fall over time, leading to an increase in the oxygen affinity of the hemoglobin and a decreased capacity to deliver oxygen to the tissues, a problem with all red cell storage. Fresh whole blood avoids these problems, but it is typically used only in emergency settings (i.e., military). Whole blood is not readily available, since it is routinely processed into components.

Packed Red Blood Cells

This product increases oxygen-carrying capacity in the anemic patient. Adequate oxygenation can be maintained with a hemoglobin content of 70 g/L in the normovolemic patient without cardiac disease; however, comorbid factors may necessitate transfusion at a higher threshold. The decision to transfuse should be guided by the clinical situation and not by an arbitrary laboratory value. In the critical care setting, liberal use of transfusions to maintain near-normal levels of hemoglobin has not proven advantageous. In most patients requiring transfusion, levels of hemoglobin of 100 g/L are sufficient to keep oxygen supply from being critically low.

PRBCs may be modified to prevent certain adverse reactions. The majority of cellular blood products are now leukocyte reduced and universal prestorage leukocyte reduction has been recommended. Prestorage filtration appears superior to bedside filtration as smaller amounts of cytokines are generated in the stored product. These PRBC units contain <5 x 106 donor white blood cells (WBCs), and their use lowers the incidence of posttransfusion fever, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections, and alloimmunization. Other theoretical benefits include less immunosuppression in the recipient and lower risk of infections. Plasma, which may cause allergic reactions, can be removed from cellular blood components by washing.

Platelets

Thrombocytopenia is a risk factor for hemorrhage, and platelet transfusion reduces the incidence of bleeding. The threshold for prophylactic platelet transfusion is 10,000/L. In patients without fever or infections, a threshold of 5000/L may be sufficient to prevent spontaneous hemorrhage. For invasive procedures, 50,000/L platelets is the usual target level.

Platelets are given either as pools prepared RDs or as SDAPs from a single donor. In an unsensitized patient without increased platelet consumption [splenomegaly, fever, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)], two units of transfused RD per square-meter body surface area (BSA) is anticipated to increase the platelet count by approximately 10,000/uL. Patients who have received multiple transfusions may be alloimmunized to many HLA- and platelet-specific antigens and have little or no increase in their posttransfusion platelet counts. Patients who may require multiple transfusions are best served by receiving SDAP and leukocyte-reduced components to lower the risk of alloimmunization.

Refractoriness to platelet transfusion may be evaluated using the corrected count increment (CCI):


where BSA is body surface area measured in square meters. The platelet count performed 1 h after the transfusion is acceptable if the CCI is 10 x 109/mL, and after 18〞24 h an increment of 7.5 x 109/mL is expected. Patients who have suboptimal responses are likely to have received multiple transfusions and have antibodies directed against class I HLA antigens. Refractoriness can be investigated by detecting anti-HLA antibodies in the recipient's serum. Patients who are sensitized will often react with 100% of the lymphocytes used for the HLA-antibody screen, and HLA-matched SDAPs should be considered for those patients who require transfusion. Although ABO-identical HLA-matched SDAPs provide the best chance for increasing the platelet count, locating these products is difficult. Platelet cross-matching is available in some centers. Additional clinical causes for a low platelet CCI include fever, bleeding, splenomegaly, DIC, or medications in the recipient.

Fresh-Frozen Plasma

FFP contains stable coagulation factors and plasma proteins: fibrinogen, antithrombin, albumin, as well as proteins C and S. Indications for FFP include correction of coagulopathies, including the rapid reversal of warfarin; supplying deficient plasma proteins; and treatment of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. FFP should not be routinely used to expand blood volume. FFP is an acellular component and does not transmit intracellular infections, e.g., CMV. Patients who are IgA-deficient and require plasma support should receive FFP from IgA-deficient donors to prevent anaphylaxis (see below).

Cryoprecipitate

Cryoprecipitate is a source of fibrinogen, factor VIII, and von Willebrand factor (vWF). It is ideal for supplying fibrinogen to the volume-sensitive patient. When factor VIII concentrates are not available, cryoprecipitate may be used since each unit contains approximately 80 units of factor VIII. Cryoprecipitate may also supply vWF to patients with dysfunctional (type II) or absent (type III) von Willebrand disease.

Plasma Derivatives

Plasma from thousands of donors may be pooled to derive specific protein concentrates, including albumin, intravenous immunoglobulin, antithrombin, and coagulation factors. In addition, donors who have high-titer antibodies to specific agents or antigens provide hyperimmune globulins, such as anti-D (RhoGam, WinRho), and antisera to hepatitis B virus (HBV), varicella-zoster virus, CMV, and other infectious agents.
 
Adverse Reactions to Blood Transfusion

Adverse reactions to transfused blood components occur despite multiple tests, inspections, and checks. Fortunately, the most common reactions are not life threatening, although serious reactions can present with mild symptoms and signs. Some reactions can be reduced or prevented by modified (filtered, washed, or irradiated) blood components. When an adverse reaction is suspected, the transfusion should be stopped and reported to the blood bank for investigation.

Transfusion reactions may result from immune and nonimmune mechanisms. Immune-mediated reactions are often due to preformed donor or recipient antibody; however, cellular elements may also cause adverse effects. Nonimmune causes of reactions are due to the chemical and physical properties of the stored blood component and its additives.

Transfusion-transmitted viral infections are increasingly rare due to improved screening and testing. As the risk of viral infection is reduced, the relative risk of other reactions increases, such as hemolytic transfusion reactions and sepsis from bacterially contaminated components. Pretransfusion quality assurance improvements further increase the safety of transfusion therapy. Infections, like any adverse transfusion reaction, must be brought to the attention of the blood bank for appropriate studies (Table 113每3).

Table 113每3 Risks of Transfusion Complications

 
 
  Frequency, Episodes: Unit 
Reactions  
Febrile (FNHTR)

Allergic

Delayed hemolytic

TRALI

Acute hemolytic

Fatal hemolytic

Anaphylactic
  1每4:100

 1每4:100

 1:1000

 1:5000

 1:12,000

 1:100,000

 1:150,000
 
Infectionsa  
Hepatitis B

Hepatitis C

HIV-1, -2

HTLV-I and -II

Malaria
  1:220,000

 1:1,800,000

 1:2,300,000

 1:2,993,000

1:4,000,000
 
Other complications  
RBC allosensitization

HLA allosensitization

Graft-versus-host disease
  1:100

 1:10

Rare
 
 


aInfectious agents rarely associated with transfusion, theoretically possible or of unknown risk include West Nile virus, hepatitis A virus, parvovirus B-19, Babesia microti (babesiosis), Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Anaplasma phagocytophilum (human granulocytic ehrlichiosis), Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas disease), Treponema pallidum, and human herpesvirus-8.

Abbreviations: FNHTR, febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reaction; TRALI, transfusion-related acute lung injury; HTLV, human T lymphotropic virus; RBC, red blood cell.
 

Immune-Mediated Reactions

Acute Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions

Immune-mediated hemolysis occurs when the recipient has preformed antibodies that lyse donor erythrocytes. The ABO isoagglutinins are responsible for the majority of these reactions, although alloantibodies directed against other RBC antigens, i.e., Rh, Kell, and Duffy, may result in hemolysis.

Acute hemolytic reactions may present with hypotension, tachypnea, tachycardia, fever, chills, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, chest and/or flank pain, and discomfort at the infusion site. Monitoring the patient's vital signs before and during the transfusion is important to identify reactions promptly. When acute hemolysis is suspected, the transfusion must be stopped immediately, intravenous access maintained, and the reaction reported to the blood bank. A correctly labeled posttransfusion blood sample and any untransfused blood should be sent to the blood bank for analysis. The laboratory evaluation for hemolysis includes the measurement of serum haptoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and indirect bilirubin levels.

The immune complexes that result in RBC lysis can cause renal dysfunction and failure. Diuresis should be induced with intravenous fluids and furosemide or mannitol. Tissue factor released from the lysed erythrocytes may initiate DIC. Coagulation studies including prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), fibrinogen, and platelet count should be monitored in patients with hemolytic reactions.

Errors at the patient's bedside, such as mislabeling the sample or transfusing the wrong patient, are responsible for the majority of these reactions. The blood bank investigation of these reactions includes examination of the pre- and posttransfusion samples for hemolysis and repeat typing of the patient samples; direct antiglobulin test (DAT), sometimes called the direct Coombs test, of the posttransfusion sample; repeating the cross-matching of the blood component; and checking all clerical records for errors. DAT detects the presence of antibody or complement bound to RBCs in vivo.

Delayed Hemolytic and Serologic Transfusion Reactions

Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions (DHTRs) are not completely preventable. These reactions occur in patients previously sensitized to RBC alloantigens who have a negative alloantibody screen due to low antibody levels. When the patient is transfused with antigen-positive blood, an anamnestic response results in the early production of alloantibody that binds donor RBCs. The alloantibody is detectable 1每2 weeks following the transfusion, and the posttransfusion DAT may become positive due to circulating donor RBCs coated with antibody or complement. The transfused, alloantibody-coated erythrocytes are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system. These reactions are detected most commonly in the blood bank when a subsequent patient sample reveals a positive alloantibody screen or a new alloantibody in a recently transfused recipient.

No specific therapy is usually required, although additional RBC transfusions may be necessary. Delayed serologic transfusion reactions are similar to DHTR, as the DAT is positive and alloantibody is detected; however, RBC clearance is not increased.

Febrile Nonhemolytic Transfusion Reaction

The most frequent reaction associated with the transfusion of cellular blood components is a febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR). These reactions are characterized by chills and rigors and a 1∼C rise in temperature. FNHTR is diagnosed when other causes of fever in the transfused patient are ruled out. Antibodies directed against donor leukocyte and HLA antigens may mediate these reactions; thus, multiply transfused patients and multiparous women are felt to be at increased risk. Although anti-HLA antibodies may be demonstrated in the recipient's serum, investigation is not routinely done because of the mild nature of most FNHTR. The use of leukocyte-reduced blood products may prevent or delay sensitization to leukocyte antigens and thereby reduce the incidence of these febrile episodes. Cytokines released from cells within stored blood components may mediate FNHTR; thus, leukoreduction before storage may prevent these reactions.

Allergic Reactions

Urticarial reactions are related to plasma proteins found in transfused components. Mild reactions may be treated symptomatically by temporarily stopping the transfusion and administering antihistamines (diphenhydramine, 50 mg orally or intramuscularly). The transfusion may be completed after the signs and/or symptoms resolve. Patients with a history of allergic transfusion reaction should be premedicated with an antihistamine. Cellular components can be washed to remove residual plasma for the extremely sensitized patient.

Anaphylactic Reaction

This severe reaction presents after transfusion of only a few milliliters of the blood component. Symptoms and signs include difficulty breathing, coughing, nausea and vomiting, hypotension, bronchospasm, loss of consciousness, respiratory arrest, and shock. Treatment includes stopping the transfusion, maintaining vascular access, and administering epinephrine (0.5每1 mL of 1:1000 dilution subcutaneously). Glucocorticoids may be required in severe cases.

Patients who are IgA-deficient, <1% of the population, may be sensitized to this Ig class and are at risk for anaphylactic reactions associated with plasma transfusion. Individuals with severe IgA deficiency should therefore receive only IgA-deficient plasma and washed cellular blood components. Patients who have anaphylactic or repeated allergic reactions to blood components should be tested for IgA deficiency.

Graft-versus-Host Disease

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a frequent complication of allogeneic stem cell transplantation, in which lymphocytes from the donor attack and cannot be eliminated by an immunodeficient host. Transfusion-related GVHD is mediated by donor T lymphocytes that recognize host HLA antigens as foreign and mount an immune response, which is manifested clinically by the development of fever, a characteristic cutaneous eruption, diarrhea, and liver function abnormalities. GVHD can also occur when blood components that contain viable T lymphocytes are transfused to immunodeficient recipients or to immunocompetent recipients who share HLA antigens with the donor (e.g., a family donor). In addition to the aforementioned clinical features of GVHD, transfusion-associated GVHD (TA-GVHD) is characterized by marrow aplasia and pancytopenia. TA-GVHD is highly resistant to treatment with immunosuppressive therapies, including glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, antithymocyte globulin, and ablative therapy followed by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Clinical manifestations appear at 8每10 days, and death occurs at 3每4 weeks posttransfusion.

TA-GVHD can be prevented by irradiation of cellular components (minimum of 2500 cGy) before transfusion to patients at risk. Patients at risk for TA-GVHD include fetuses receiving intrauterine transfusions, selected immunocompetent (e.g., lymphoma patients) or immunocompromised recipients, recipients of donor units known to be from a blood relative, and recipients who have undergone marrow transplantation. Directed donations by family members should be discouraged (they are not less likely to transmit infection); lacking other options, the blood products from family members should always be irradiated.

Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury

Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) presents as acute respiratory distress, either during or within 6 h of transfusing the patient. The recipient develops symptoms of respiratory compromise and signs of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, including bilateral interstitial infiltrates on chest x-ray. Treatment is supportive, and patients usually recover without sequelae. TRALI usually results from the transfusion of donor plasma that contains high-titer anti-HLA antibodies that bind recipient leukocytes. The leukocytes aggregate in the pulmonary vasculature and release mediators that increase capillary permeability. Testing the donor's plasma for anti-HLA antibodies can support this diagnosis. The implicated donors are frequently multiparous women, and transfusion of their plasma component should be avoided.

Posttransfusion Purpura

This reaction presents as thrombocytopenia 7每10 days after platelet transfusion and occurs predominantly in women. Platelet-specific antibodies are found in the recipient's serum, and the most frequently recognized antigen is HPA-1a found on the platelet glycoprotein IIIa receptor. The delayed thrombocytopenia is due to the production of antibodies that react to both donor and recipient platelets. Additional platelet transfusions can worsen the thrombocytopenia and should be avoided. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin may neutralize the effector antibodies, or plasmapheresis can be used to remove the antibodies.

Alloimmunization

A recipient may become alloimmunized to a number of antigens on cellular blood elements and plasma proteins. Alloantibodies to RBC antigens are detected during pretransfusion testing, and their presence may delay finding antigen-negative cross-match-compatible products for transfusion. Women of childbearing age who are sensitized to certain RBC antigens (i.e., D, c, E, Kell, or Duffy) are at risk for bearing a fetus with hemolytic disease of the newborn. Matching for D antigen is the only pretransfusion selection test to prevent RBC alloimmunization.

Alloimmunization to antigens on leukocytes and platelets can result in refractoriness to platelet transfusions. Once alloimmunization has developed, HLA-compatible platelets from donors who share similar antigens with the recipient may be difficult to find. Hence, prudent transfusion practice is directed at preventing sensitization through the use of leukocyte-reduced cellular components, as well as limiting antigenic exposure by the judicious use of transfusions and use of SDAPs.

Nonimmunologic Reactions

Fluid Overload

Blood components are excellent volume expanders, and transfusion may quickly lead to volume overload. Monitoring the rate and volume of the transfusion and using a diuretic can minimize this problem.

Hypothermia

Refrigerated (4∼C) or frozen (每18∼C or below) blood components can result in hypothermia when rapidly infused. Cardiac dysrhythmias can result from exposing the sinoatrial node to cold fluid. Use of an in-line warmer will prevent this complication.

Electrolyte Toxicity

RBC leakage during storage increases the concentration of potassium in the unit. Neonates and patients in renal failure are at risk for hyperkalemia. Preventive measures, such as using fresh or washed RBCs, are warranted for neonatal transfusions because this complication can be fatal.

Citrate, commonly used to anticoagulate blood components, chelates calcium and thereby inhibits the coagulation cascade. Hypocalcemia, manifested by circumoral numbness and/or tingling sensation of the fingers and toes, may result from multiple rapid transfusions. Because citrate is quickly metabolized to bicarbonate, calcium infusion is seldom required in this setting. If calcium or any other intravenous infusion is necessary, it must be given through a separate line.

Iron Overload

Each unit of RBCs contains 200每250 mg of iron. Symptoms and signs of iron overload affecting endocrine, hepatic, and cardiac function are common after 100 units of RBCs have been transfused (total-body iron load of 20 g). Preventing this complication by using alternative therapies (e.g., erythropoietin) and judicious transfusion is preferable and cost effective. Chelating agents, such as deferoxamine and deferasirox, are available, but the response though is often suboptimal.

Hypotensive Reactions

Transient hypotension may be noted among transfused patients who take angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Since blood products contain bradykinin that is normally degraded by ACE, patients on ACE inhibitors may have increased bradykinin levels that cause hypotension in the recipient. The blood pressure typically returns to normal without intervention.

Immunomodulation

Transfusion of allogeneic blood is immunosuppressive. Multiply transfused renal transplant recipients are less likely to reject the graft, and transfusion may result in poorer outcomes in cancer patients and increase the risk of infections. Transfusion-related immunomodulation is thought to be mediated by transfused leukocytes. Leukocyte-depleted cellular products may cause less immunosuppression, though controlled data have not been obtained and are unlikely to be obtained as the blood supply becomes universally leukocyte-depleted.

Infectious Complications

The blood supply is initially screened by selecting healthy donors without high-risk lifestyles, medical conditions, or exposure to transmissible pathogens, such as intravenous drug use or visiting malaria endemic areas. Multiple tests performed on donated blood to detect the presence of infectious agents using nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT) or evidence of prior infections by testing for antibodies to pathogens further reduce the risk of transfusion-acquired infections.

Viral Infections

Hepatitis C virus Blood donations are tested for antibodies to HCV and HCV RNA. The risk of acquiring HCV through transfusion is now calculated to be approximately 1 in 2,000,000 units. Infection with HCV may be asymptomatic or lead to chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis, and liver failure.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Donated blood is tested for antibodies to HIV-1, HIV-1 p24 antigen, and HIV RNA using NAT. Approximately a dozen seronegative donors have been shown to harbor HIV RNA. The risk of HIV-1 infection per transfusion episode is 1 in 2 million. Antibodies to HIV-2 are also measured in donated blood. No cases of HIV-2 infection have been reported in the United States since 1992.

Hepatitis B virus

Donated blood is screened for HBV using assays for hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg). NAT testing is not practical because of slow viral replication and lower levels of viremia. The risk of transfusion-associated HBV infection is several times greater than for HCV. Vaccination of individuals who require long-term transfusion therapy can prevent this complication.

Other hepatitis viruses

Hepatitis A virus is rarely transmitted by transfusion; infection is typically asymptomatic and does not lead to chronic disease. Other transfusion-transmitted viruses〞TTV, SEN-V, and GBV-C〞do not cause chronic hepatitis or other disease states. Routine testing does not appear to be warranted.

West nile virus

Transfusion-transmitted WNV infections were documented in 2002. This RNA virus can be detected using NAT; routine screening began in 2003. WNV infections range in severity from asymptomatic to fatal, with the older population at greater risk.

Cytomegalovirus

This ubiquitous virus infects 50% of the general population and is transmitted by the infected "passenger" WBCs found in transfused PRBCs or platelet components. Cellular components that are leukocyte-reduced have a decreased risk of transmitting CMV, regardless of the serologic status of the donor. Groups at risk for CMV infections include immunosuppressed patients, CMV-seronegative transplant recipients, and neonates; these patients should receive leukocyte-depleted components or CMV seronegative products.

Human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV) type I

Assays to detect HTLV-I and -II are used to screen all donated blood. HTLV-I is associated with adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma and tropical spastic paraparesis in a small percentage of infected persons (Chap. 188). The risk of HTLV-I infection via transfusion is 1 in 641,000 transfusion episodes. HTLV-II is not clearly associated with any disease.

Parvovirus B-19

Blood components and pooled plasma products can transmit this virus, the etiologic agent of erythema infectiosum, or fifth disease, in children. Parvovirus B-19 shows tropism for erythroid precursors and inhibits both erythrocyte production and maturation. Pure red cell aplasia, presenting either as acute aplastic crisis or chronic anemia with shortened RBC survival, may occur in individuals with an underlying hematologic disease, such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia (Chap. 107). The fetus of a seronegative woman is at risk for developing hydrops from this virus.

Bacterial Contamination

The relative risk of transfusion-transmitted bacterial infection has increased as the absolute risk of viral infections has dramatically decreased.

Most bacteria do not grow well at cold temperatures; thus, PRBCs and FFP are not common sources of bacterial contamination. However, some gram-negative bacteria can grow at 1∼ to 6∼C. Yersinia, Pseudomonas, Serratia, Acinetobacter, and Escherichia species have all been implicated in infections related to PRBC transfusion. Platelet concentrates, which are stored at room temperature, are more likely to contain skin contaminants such as gram-positive organisms, including coagulase-negative staphylococci. It is estimated that 1 in 1000〞2000 platelet components is contaminated with bacteria. The risk of death due to transfusion-associated sepsis has been calculated at 1 in 17,000 for single-unit platelets derived from whole blood donation and 1 in 61,000 for apheresis product. Since 2004, blood banks have instituted methods to detect contaminated platelet components.

Recipients of transfusion contaminated with bacteria may develop fever and chills, which can progress to septic shock and DIC. These reactions may occur abruptly, within minutes of initiating the transfusion, or after several hours. The onset of symptoms and signs is often sudden and fulminant, which distinguishes bacterial contamination from an FNHTR. The reactions, particularly those related to gram-negative contaminants, are the result of infused endotoxins formed within the contaminated stored component.

When these reactions are suspected, the transfusion must be stopped immediately. Therapy is directed at reversing any signs of shock, and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given. The blood bank should be notified to identify any clerical or serologic error. The blood component bag should be sent for culture and Gram stain.

Other Infectious Agents

Various parasites, including those causing malaria, babesiosis, and Chagas disease, can be transmitted by blood transfusion. Geographic migration and travel of donors shift the incidence of these rare infections. Other agents implicated in transfusion transmission include dengue, chikungunya virus, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, and yellow fever vaccine virus and the list will grow. Tests for some pathogens are available, such as Trypanosoma cruzi, but not universally required. These infections should be considered in the transfused patient in the appropriate clinical setting.
 
Alternatives to Transfusion

Alternatives to allogeneic blood transfusions that avoid homologous donor exposures with attendant immunologic and infectious risks remain attractive. Autologous blood is the best option when transfusion is anticipated. However, the cost-benefit ratio of autologous transfusion remains high. No transfusion is a zero-risk event; clerical errors and bacterial contamination remain potential complications even with autologous transfusions. Additional methods of autologous transfusion in the surgical patient include preoperative hemodilution, recovery of shed blood from sterile surgical sites, and postoperative drainage collection. Directed or designated donation from friends and family of the potential recipient has not been safer than volunteer donor component transfusions. Such directed donations may in fact place the recipient at higher risk for complications such as GVHD and alloimmunization.

Granulocyte and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors are clinically useful to hasten leukocyte recovery in patients with leukopenia related to high-dose chemotherapy. Erythropoietin stimulates erythrocyte production in patients with anemia of chronic renal failure and other conditions, thus avoiding or reducing the need for transfusion. This hormone can also stimulate erythropoiesis in the autologous donor to enable additional donation.
 
Further Readings

Brecher ME, Hay SN: Bacterial contamination of blood components. Clin Microbiol Rev 18:195, 2005[PMID: 15653826] 

 
Chaiwat O, Lang JD: Early packed red blood cell transfusion and acute respiratory distress syndrome after trauma. Anesthesiology 110;351, 2009 

 
Gerber DR: Transfusion of packed red blood cells in patient with ischemic heart disease. Crit Care Med 36:1068, 2008[PMID: 18379229] 

 
Hendrickson JE, Hillyer CD: Noninfectious serious hazards for transfusion. Anesth Analg 108:759, 2009[PMID: 19224780] 

 
Lange MM et al: Leucocyte depletion of perioperative blood transfusion does not affect long-term survival and recurrence in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Br J Surg 96;734, 2009 

 
Petersen LR, Busch MP: Transfusion-transmitted arboviruses. Vox Sang 98:495, 2010[PMID: 19951309] 

 
Slichter SJ, Kaufman RM: Dose of prophylactic platelet transfusions and prevention of hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 362;600, 2010 

 
Triulzi DJ: Transfusion-related acute lung injury: current concepts for the clinician. Anesth Analg 108;770, 2009 

 
Vamvakas EC, Blajchman MA: Transfusion-related mortality: The ongoing risks of allogeneic blood transfusion and the available strategies for their prevention. Blood 113;3406, 2009 

 
〞〞〞 et al: The Technical Manual, 16th ed. Arlington, VA, American Association of Blood Banks, 2008 
 
 

^^
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation: Introduction

Bone marrow transplantation was the original term used to describe the collection and transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells, but with the demonstration that the peripheral blood and umbilical cord blood are also useful sources of stem cells, hematopoietic cell transplantation has become the preferred generic term for this process. The procedure is usually carried out for one of two purposes: (1) to replace an abnormal but nonmalignant lymphohematopoietic system with one from a normal donor or (2) to treat malignancy by allowing the administration of higher doses of myelosuppressive therapy than would otherwise be possible. The use of hematopoietic cell transplantation has been increasing, both because of its efficacy in selected diseases and because of increasing availability of donors. The Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (http://www.cibmtr.org) estimates that about 65,000 transplants are performed each year.
 
The Hematopoietic Stem Cell

Several features of the hematopoietic stem cell make transplantation clinically feasible, including its remarkable regenerative capacity, its ability to home to the marrow space following intravenous injection, and the ability of the stem cell to be cryopreserved (Chap. 66). Transplantation of a single stem cell can replace the entire lymphohematopoietic system of an adult mouse. In humans, transplantation of a few percent of a donor's bone marrow volume regularly results in complete and sustained replacement of the recipient's entire lymphohematopoietic system, including all red cells, granulocytes, B and T lymphocytes, and platelets, as well as cells comprising the fixed macrophage population, including Kupffer cells of the liver, pulmonary alveolar macrophages, osteoclasts, Langerhans cells of the skin, and brain microglial cells. The ability of the hematopoietic stem cell to home to the marrow following intravenous injection is mediated, in part, by an interaction between stromal cell每derived factor 1 (SDF1) produced by marrow stromal cells and the alpha-chemokine receptor CXCR4 found on stem cells. Homing is also influenced by the interaction of cell-surface molecules, termed selectins, on bone marrow endothelial cells with ligands, termed integrins, on early hematopoietic cells. Human hematopoietic stem cells can survive freezing and thawing with little, if any, damage, making it possible to remove and store a portion of the patient's own bone marrow for later reinfusion following treatment of the patient with high-dose myelotoxic therapy.
 
Categories of Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation

Hematopoietic cell transplantation can be described according to the relationship between the patient and the donor and by the anatomic source of stem cells. In ~1% of cases, patients have identical twins who can serve as donors. With the use of syngeneic donors, there is no risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) which often complicates allogeneic transplantation, and unlike the use of autologous marrow, there is no risk that the stem cells are contaminated with tumor cells.

Allogeneic transplantation involves a donor and a recipient who are not genetically identical. Following allogeneic transplantation, immune cells transplanted with the stem cells or developing from them can react against the patient, causing GVHD. Alternatively, if the immunosuppressive preparative regimen used to treat the patient before transplant is inadequate, immunocompetent cells of the patient can cause graft rejection. The risks of these complications are greatly influenced by the degree of matching between donor and recipient for antigens encoded by genes of the major histocompatibility complex.

The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules are responsible for binding antigenic proteins and presenting them to T cells. The antigens presented by HLA molecules may derive from exogenous sources (e.g., during active infections) or may be endogenous proteins. If individuals are not HLA-matched, T cells from one individual will react strongly to the mismatched HLA, or "major antigens," of the second. Even if the individuals are HLA-matched, the T cells of the donor may react to differing endogenous or "minor antigens" presented by the HLA of the recipient. Reactions to minor antigens tend to be less vigorous. The genes of major relevance to transplantation include HLA-A, -B, -C, and -D; they are closely linked and therefore tend to be inherited as haplotypes, with only rare crossovers between them. Thus, the odds that any one full sibling will match a patient are one in four, and the probability that the patient has an HLA-identical sibling is 1 每 (0.75)n, where n equals the number of siblings.

With current techniques, the risk of graft rejection is 1每3%, and the risk of severe, life-threatening acute GVHD is ~15% following transplantation between HLA-identical siblings. The incidence of graft rejection and GVHD increases progressively with the use of family member donors mismatched for one, two, or three antigens. While survival following a one-antigen mismatched transplant is not markedly altered, survival following two- or three-antigen mismatched transplants is significantly reduced, and such transplants should be performed only as part of clinical trials.

Since the formation of the National Marrow Donor Program and other registries, it has become possible to identify HLA-matched unrelated donors for many patients. The genes encoding HLA antigens are highly polymorphic, and thus the odds of any two unrelated individuals being HLA-identical are extremely low, somewhat less than 1 in 10,000. However, by identifying and typing >14 million volunteer donors, HLA-matched donors can now be found for ~50% of patients for whom a search is initiated. It takes, on average, 3每4 months to complete a search and schedule and initiate an unrelated donor transplant. With improvements in HLA- typing and supportive care measures, survival following matched unrelated donor transplantation is essentially the same as that seen with HLA-matched siblings.

Autologous transplantation involves the removal and storage of the patient's own stem cells with subsequent reinfusion after the patient receives high-dose myeloablative therapy. Unlike allogeneic transplantation, there is no risk of GVHD or graft rejection with autologous transplantation. On the other hand, autologous transplantation lacks a graft-versus-tumor (GVT) effect, and the autologous stem cell product can be contaminated with tumor cells, which could lead to relapse. A variety of techniques have been developed to "purge" autologous products of tumor cells. Some use antibodies directed at tumor-associated antigens plus complement, antibodies linked to toxins, or antibodies conjugated to immunomagnetic beads. In vitro incubation with certain chemotherapeutic agents such as 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide and long-term culture of bone marrow have also been shown to diminish tumor cell numbers in stem cell products. Another technique is positive selection of stem cells using antibodies to CD34, with subsequent column adherence or flow techniques to select normal stem cells while leaving tumor cells behind. All these approaches can reduce the number of tumor cells from 1000- to 10,000-fold and are clinically feasible; however, no prospective randomized trials have yet shown that any of these approaches results in a decrease in relapse rates or improvements in disease-free or overall survival.

Bone marrow aspirated from the posterior and anterior iliac crests has traditionally been the source of hematopoietic stem cells for transplantation. Typically, anywhere from 1.5 to 5 x 108 nucleated marrow cells per kilogram are collected for allogeneic transplantation. Several studies have found improved survival in the settings of both matched sibling and unrelated transplantation by transplanting higher numbers of bone marrow cells.

Hematopoietic stem cells circulate in the peripheral blood but in very low concentrations. Following the administration of certain hematopoietic growth factors, including granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and during recovery from intensive chemotherapy, the concentration of hematopoietic progenitor cells in blood, as measured either by colony-forming units or expression of the CD34 antigen, increases markedly. This has made it possible to harvest adequate numbers of stem cells from the peripheral blood for transplantation. Donors are typically treated with 4 or 5 days of hematopoietic growth factor, following which stem cells are collected in one or two 4-h pheresis sessions. In the autologous setting, transplantation of >2.5 x 106 CD34 cells per kilogram, a number that can be collected in most circumstances, leads to rapid and sustained engraftment in virtually all cases. In the 10每20% of patients who fail to mobilize sufficient CD34+ cells with growth factor alone, the addition of plerixafor, an antagonist of CXCR4, may be useful. Compared to the use of autologous marrow, use of peripheral blood stem cells results in more rapid hematopoietic recovery, with granulocytes recovering to 500/L by day 12 and platelets recovering to 20,000/L by day 14. While this more rapid recovery diminishes the morbidity rate of transplantation, no studies show improved survival.

Hesitation in studying the use of peripheral blood stem cells for allogeneic transplantation was because peripheral blood stem cell products contain as much as 1 log more T cells than are contained in the typical marrow harvest; in animal models, the incidence of GVHD is related to the number of T cells transplanted. Nonetheless, clinical trials have shown that the use of growth factor每mobilized peripheral blood stem cells from HLA-matched family members leads to faster engraftment without an increase in acute GVHD. Chronic GVHD may be increased with peripheral blood stem cells, but in trials conducted so far, this has been more than balanced by reductions in relapse rates and nonrelapse mortality rates, with the use of peripheral blood stem cells resulting in improved overall survival. Randomized trials are now evaluating the use of peripheral blood versus bone marrow for matched unrelated donor transplantation.

Umbilical cord blood contains a high concentration of hematopoietic progenitor cells, allowing for its use as a source of stem cells for transplantation. Cord blood transplantation from family members has been explored in the setting where the immediate need for transplantation precludes waiting the 9 or so months generally required for the baby to mature to the point of donating marrow. Use of cord blood results in slower engraftment and peripheral count recovery than seen with marrow but a low incidence of GVHD, perhaps reflecting the low number of T cells in cord blood. Several banks have been developed to harvest and store cord blood for possible transplantation to unrelated patients from material that would otherwise be discarded. A summary of the first 562 unrelated cord blood transplants, facilitated by the New York Blood Center, reported engraftment in ~85% of patients but at a slower pace than seen with marrow. Severe GVHD was seen in 23% of patients. The risk of graft failure and transplant-related mortality were related to the dose of cord blood cells per kilogram, thus limiting the application of single cord blood transplantation for the treatment of larger adolescent and adult patients. Subsequent trials suggest that the use of double cord transplants diminishes the risk of graft failure and early mortality even though only one of the donors ultimately engrafts.
 
The Transplant Preparative Regimen

The treatment regimen administered to patients immediately preceding transplantation is designed to eradicate the patient's underlying disease and, in the setting of allogeneic transplantation, immunosuppress the patient adequately to prevent rejection of the transplanted marrow. The appropriate regimen therefore depends on the disease setting and source of marrow. For example, when transplantation is performed to treat severe combined immunodeficiency and the donor is a histocompatible sibling, no treatment is needed because no host cells require eradication and the patient is already too immunoincompetent to reject the transplanted marrow. For aplastic anemia, there is no large population of cells to eradicate, and high-dose cyclophosphamide plus antithymocyte globulin are sufficient to immunosuppress the patient adequately to accept the marrow graft. In the setting of thalassemia and sickle cell anemia, high-dose busulfan is frequently added to cyclophosphamide in order to eradicate hyperplastic host hematopoiesis. A variety of different regimens have been developed to treat malignant diseases. Most of these regimens include agents that have high activity against the tumor in question at conventional doses and have myelosuppression as their predominant dose-limiting toxicity. Therefore, these regimens commonly include busulfan, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, thiotepa, carmustine, etoposide, and total-body irradiation in various combinations.

Although high-dose treatment regimens have typically been used in transplantation, the understanding that much of the antitumor effect of transplantation derives from an immunologically mediated GVT response has led investigators to ask if reduced-intensity conditioning regimens might be effective and more tolerable. Evidence for a GVT effect comes from studies showing that posttransplant relapse rates are lowest in patients who develop acute and chronic GVHD, higher in those without GVHD, and higher still in recipients of T cell每depleted allogeneic or syngeneic marrow. The demonstration that complete remissions can be obtained in many patients who have relapsed posttransplant by simply administering viable lymphocytes from the original donor further strengthens the argument for a potent GVT effect. Accordingly, a variety of less-intensive nonmyeloablative regimens have been studied, ranging in intensity from the very minimum required to achieve engraftment (e.g., fludarabine plus 200 cGy total-body irradiation) to regimens of more immediate intensity (e.g., fludarabine plus melphalan). Studies to date document that engraftment can be readily achieved with less toxicity than seen with conventional transplantation. Furthermore, the severity of acute GVHD appears to be decreased because less tissue damage is done by the lower doses of drugs in the preparative regimen. Complete sustained responses have been documented in many patients, particularly those with more indolent hematologicmalignancies. The role of reduced-intensity conditioning in any disease, however, has not been fully defined.

The Transplant Procedure

Marrow is usually collected from the donor's posterior and sometimes anterior iliac crests, with the donor under general or spinal anesthesia. Typically, 10每15 mL/kg of marrow is aspirated, placed in heparinized media, and filtered through 0.3- and 0.2-mm screens to remove fat and bony spicules. The collected marrow may undergo further processing depending on the clinical situation, such as the removal of red cells to prevent hemolysis in ABO-incompatible transplants, the removal of donor T cells to prevent GVHD, or attempts to remove possible contaminating tumor cells in autologous transplantation. Marrow donation is safe, with only very rare complications reported.

Peripheral blood stem cells are collected by leukapheresis after the donor has been treated with hematopoietic growth factors or, in the setting of autologous transplantation, sometimes after treatment with a combination of chemotherapy and growth factors. Stem cells for transplantation are generally infused through a large-bore central venous catheter. Such infusions are usually well tolerated, although occasionally patients develop fever, cough, or shortness of breath. These symptoms usually resolve with slowing of the infusion. When the stem cell product has been cryopreserved using dimethyl sulfoxide, patients more often experience short-lived nausea or vomiting due to the odor and taste of the cryoprotectant.

Engraftment

Peripheral blood counts usually reach their nadir several days to a week posttransplant as a consequence of the preparative regimen; then cells produced by the transplanted stem cells begin to appear in the peripheral blood. The rate of recovery depends on the source of stem cells, the use of posttransplant growth factors, and the form of GVHD prophylaxis employed. If marrow is the source of stem cells, recovery to 100 granulocytes/L occurs by day 16 and to 500/L by day 22. Use of G-CSF每mobilized peripheral blood stem cells speeds the rate of recovery by ~1 week when compared to marrow, whereas engraftment following cord blood transplantation is typically delayed by ~1 week compared to marrow. Use of a myeloid growth factor (G-CSF or GM-CSF) posttransplant can accelerate recovery by 3每5 days, while use of methotrexate to prevent GVHD delays engraftment by a similar period. Following allogeneic transplantation, engraftment can be documented using fluorescence in situ hybridization of sex chromosomes if donor and recipient are sex-mismatched, HLA-typing if HLA-mismatched, or restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis if sex- and HLA-matched.

Complications Following Hematopoietic Cell Transplant

Early Direct Chemoradiotoxicities

The transplant preparative regimen may cause a spectrum of acute toxicities that vary according to intensity of the regimen and the specific agents used, but frequently results in nausea, vomiting, and mild skin erythema (Fig. 114-1). Regimens that include high-dose cyclophosphamide can result in hemorrhagic cystitis, which can usually be prevented by bladder irrigation or with the sulfhydryl compound mercaptoethanesulfonate (MESNA); rarely, acute hemorrhagic carditis is seen. Most high-dose preparative regimens will result in oral mucositis, which typically develops 5每7 days posttransplant and often requires narcotic analgesia. Use of a patient-controlled analgesic pump provides the greatest patient satisfaction and results in a lower cumulative dose of narcotic. Keratinocyte growth factor (palifermin) can shorten the duration of mucositis by several days following autologous transplantation. Patients begin losing their hair 5每6 days posttransplant and by 1 week are usually profoundly pancytopenic.

Figure 114-1

 
 
 
Major syndromes complicating marrow transplantation. VOD, venoocclusive disease; GVHD, graft-versus-host disease; HSV, herpes simplex virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus. The size of the shaded area roughly reflects the risk of the complication.
 
 

Depending on the intensity of the conditioning regimen, 3每10% of patients will develop sinusoidal obstruction syndrome of the liver, a syndrome that results from direct cytotoxic injury to hepatic-venular and sinusoidal endothelium, with subsequent deposition of fibrin and the development of a local hypercoagulable state. This chain of events leads to the clinical symptoms of tender hepatomegaly, ascites, jaundice, and fluid retention. These symptoms can develop any time during the first month posttransplant, with the peak incidence at day 16. Predisposing factors include prior exposure to intensive chemotherapy, pretransplant hepatitis of any cause, and use of more intense conditioning regimens. The mortality rate of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome is ~30%, with progressive hepatic failure culminating in a terminal hepatorenal syndrome. Both thrombolytic and antithrombotic agents, such as tissue plasminogen activator, heparin, and prostaglandin E, have been studied as therapy, but none has proven of consistent major benefit in controlled trials, and all have significant toxicity. Early studies with defibrotide, a polydeoxyribonucleotide, seem encouraging.

Although most pneumonias developing posttransplant are caused by infectious agents, in ~5% of patients a diffuse interstitial pneumonia will develop that is thought to be the result of direct toxicity of high-dose preparative regimens. Bronchoalveolar lavage typically shows alveolar hemorrhage, and biopsies are typically characterized by diffuse alveolar damage, although some cases may have a more clearly interstitial pattern. High-dose glucocorticoids or antitumor necrosis factor therapies are sometimes used as treatment, although randomized trials testing their utility have not been reported.

Late Direct Chemoradiotoxicities

Late complications of the preparative regimen include decreased growth velocity in children and delayed development of secondary sex characteristics. These complications can be partly ameliorated with the use of appropriate growth and sex hormone replacement. Most men become azoospermic, and most postpubertal women will develop ovarian failure, which should be treated. Thyroid dysfunction, usually well compensated, is sometimes seen. Cataracts develop in 10每20% of patients and are most common in patients treated with total-body irradiation and those who receive glucocorticoid therapy posttransplant for treatment of GVHD. Aseptic necrosis of the femoral head is seen in 10% of patients and is particularly frequent in those receiving chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Both acute and late chemoradiotoxicities (except those due to glucocorticoids) are considerably less frequent in recipients of reduced- compared to high-dose preparative regimens.

Graft-versus-Host Disease

GVHD is the result of allogeneic T cells that are transferred with the donor's stem cell inoculum reacting with antigenic targets on host cells. GVHD developing within the first 3 months posttransplant is termed acute GVHD, while GVHD developing or persisting beyond 3 months posttransplant is termed chronic GVHD. Acute GVHD most often first becomes apparent 2每4 weeks posttransplant and is characterized by an erythematous maculopapular rash; persistent anorexia or diarrhea, or both; and by liver disease with increased serum levels of bilirubin, alanine and aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase. Since many conditions can mimic acute GVHD, diagnosis usually requires skin, liver, or endoscopic biopsy for confirmation. In all these organs, endothelial damage and lymphocytic infiltrates are seen. In skin, the epidermis and hair follicles are damaged; in liver, the small bile ducts show segmental disruption; and in intestines, destruction of the crypts and mucosal ulceration may be noted. A commonly used rating system for acute GVHD is shown in Table 114每1. Grade I acute GVHD is of little clinical significance, does not affect the likelihood of survival, and does not require treatment. In contrast, grades II to IV GVHD are associated with significant symptoms and a poorer probability of survival, and they require aggressive therapy. The incidence of acute GVHD is higher in recipients of stem cells from mismatched or unrelated donors, in older patients, and in patients unable to receive full doses of drugs used to prevent the disease.

Table 114每1 Clinical Staging and Grading of Acute Graft-versus-Host Disease

 
 
Clinical Stage  Skin  Liver〞Bilirubin, mol/L (mg/dL)  Gut  
1 Rash <25% body surface 34每51 (2每3) Diarrhea 500每1000 mL/d 
2 Rash 25每50% body surface 51每103 (3每6) Diarrhea 1000每1500 mL/d 
3 Generalized erythroderma 103每257 (6每15) Diarrhea >1500 mL/d 
4 Desquamation and bullae >257 (>15) Ileus 
Overall Clinical Grade  Skin Stage  Liver Stage  Gut Stage  
I 1每2 0 0 
II 1每3 1 1 
III 1每3 2每3 2每3 
IV 2每4 2每4 2每4 
 

 

One general approach to the prevention of GVHD is the administration of immunosuppressive drugs early after transplant. Combinations of methotrexate and either cyclosporine or tacrolimus are among the most effective and widely used regimens. Prednisone, anti每T cell antibodies, mycophenolate mofetil, and other immunosuppressive agents have also been or are being studied in various combinations. A second general approach to GVHD prevention is removal of T cells from the stem cell inoculum. While effective in preventing GVHD, T cell depletion is associated with an increased incidence of graft failure and of tumor recurrence posttransplant; as yet, little evidence suggests that T-cell depletion improves cure rates in any specific setting.

Despite prophylaxis, significant acute GVHD will develop in ~30% of recipients of stem cells from matched siblings and in as many as 60% of those receiving stem cells from unrelated donors. The disease is usually treated with glucocorticoids, additional immunosuppressants or monoclonal antibodies targeted against T cells or T cell subsets.

Between 20 and 50% of patients surviving >6 months after allogeneic transplantation will develop chronic GVHD. The disease is more common in older patients, in recipients of mismatched or unrelated stem cells, and in those with a preceding episode of acute GVHD. The disease resembles an autoimmune disorder with malar rash, sicca syndrome, arthritis, obliterative bronchiolitis, and bile duct degeneration and cholestasis. Single-agent prednisone or cyclosporine is standard treatment at present, although trials of other agents are under way. In most patients, chronic GVHD resolves, but it may require 1每3 years of immunosuppressive treatment before these agents can be withdrawn without the disease recurring. Because patients with chronic GVHD are susceptible to significant infection, they should receive prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and all suspected infections should be investigated and treated aggressively.

Graft Failure

While complete and sustained engraftment is usually seen posttransplant, occasionally marrow function either does not return or, after a brief period of engraftment, is lost. Graft failure after autologous transplantation can be the result of inadequate numbers of stem cells being transplanted, damage during ex vivo treatment or storage, or exposure of the patient to myelotoxic agents posttransplant. Infections with cytomegalovirus (CMV) or human herpesvirus type 6 have also been associated with loss of marrow function. Graft failure after allogeneic transplantation can also be due to immunologic rejection of the graft by immunocompetent host cells. Immunologically based graft rejection is more common following use of less-immunosuppressive preparative regimens, in recipients of T cell每depleted stem cell products, and in patients receiving grafts from HLA-mismatched donors or cord blood.

Treatment of graft failure usually involves removing all potentially myelotoxic agents from the patient's regimen and attempting a short trial of a myeloid growth factor. Persistence of lymphocytes of host origin in allogeneic transplant recipients with graft failure indicates immunologic rejection. Reinfusion of donor stem cells in such patients is usually unsuccessful unless preceded by a second immunosuppressive preparative regimen. Standard high-dose preparative regimens are generally tolerated poorly if administered within 100 days of a first transplant because of cumulative toxicities. However, use of regimens combining, for example, anti-CD3 antibodies with high-dose glucocorticoids, fludarabine plus low-dose total-body irradiation, or cyclophosphamide plus antithymocyte globulin, has been effective in some cases.

Infection

Posttransplant patients, particularly recipients of allogeneic transplantation, require unique approaches to the problem of infection. Early after transplantation, patients are profoundly neutropenic, and because the risk of bacterial infection is so great, most centers initiate antibiotic treatment once the granulocyte count falls to <500/L. Fluconazole prophylaxis at a dose of 200每400 mg/kg per day reduces the risk of candidal infections. Patients seropositive for herpes simplex should receive acyclovir prophylaxis. One approach to infection prophylaxis is shown in Table 114每2. Despite these prophylactic measures, most patients will develop fever and signs of infection posttransplant. The management of patients who become febrile despite bacterial and fungal prophylaxis is a difficult challenge and is guided by individual aspects of the patient and by the institution's experience.

Table 114每2 Approach to Infection Prophylaxis in Allogeneic Transplant Recipients

 
 
Organism    Approach  
Bacterial Levofloxacin 750 mg PO or IV daily 
Fungal Fluconazole 400 mg PO qd to day 75 posttransplant 
Pneumocystis carinii  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 1 double-strength tablet PO bid

2 days/week until day 180 or off immunosuppression
 
Viral     
  Herpes simplex Acyclovir 800 mg PO bid to day 30 
  Varicella-zoster Acyclovir 800 mg PO bid to day 365 
  Cytomegalovirus Ganciclovir 5 mg/kg IV bid for 7 days, then 5 (mg/kg)/d 5 days/week to day 100 
 

 

The general problem of infection in the immunocompromised host is discussed in Chap. 132.

Once patients engraft, the incidence of bacterial infection diminishes; however, patients, particularly allogeneic transplant recipients, remain at significant risk of infection. During the period from engraftment until about 3 months posttransplant, the most common causes of infection are gram-positive bacteria, fungi (particularly Aspergillus), and viruses including CMV. CMV infection, which in the past was frequently seen and often fatal, can be prevented in seronegative patients transplanted from seronegative donors by the use of either seronegative blood products or products from which the white blood cells have been removed. In seropositive patients or patients transplanted from seropositive donors, the use of ganciclovir, either as prophylaxis beginning at the time of engraftment or initiated when CMV first reactivates as evidenced by development of antigenemia or viremia, can significantly reduce the risk of CMV disease. Foscarnet is effective for some patients who develop CMV antigenemia or infection despite the use of ganciclovir or who cannot tolerate the drug.

Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, once seen in 5每10% of patients, can be prevented by treating patients with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 1 week pretransplant and resuming the treatment once patients have engrafted.

The risk of infection diminishes considerably beyond 3 months after transplant unless chronic GVHD develops, requiring continuous immunosuppression. Most transplant centers recommend continuing trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis while patients are receiving any immunosuppressive drugs and also recommend careful monitoring for late CMV reactivation. In addition, many centers recommend prophylaxis against varicella zoster, using acyclovir for 1 year posttransplant. Patients should be revaccinated against tetanus, diphtheria, haemophilus influenza, polio, and pneumococcal pneumonia starting at 12 months posttransplant and against measles, mumps, and rubella at 24 months.
 
Treatment of Specific Diseases Using Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation

Treatment: Nonmalignant Diseases

Immunodeficiency Disorders

By replacing abnormal stem cells with cells from a normal donor, hematopoietic cell transplantation can cure patients of a variety of immunodeficiency disorders including severe combined immunodeficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome. The widest experience has been with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, where cure rates of 90% can be expected with HLA-identical donors and success rates of 50每70% have been reported using haplotype-mismatched parents as donors (Table 114每3).

Table 114每3 Estimated 5-Year Survival Rates Following Transplantation*

 
 
Disease  Allogeneic, %  Autologous, %  
Severe combined immunodeficiency 90 N/A 
Aplastic anemia 90 N/A 
Thalassemia 90 N/A 
Acute myeloid leukemia     
  First remission 55每60 50 
  Second remission 40 30 
Acute lymphocytic leukemia     
  First remission 50 40 
  Second remission 40 30 
Chronic myeloid leukemia     
  Chronic phase 70 ID 
  Accelerated phase 40 ID 
  Blast crisis 15 ID 
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia 50 ID 
Myelodysplasia 45 ID 
Multiple myeloma 30 35 
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma     
  First relapse/second remission 40 40 
Hodgkin's disease     
  First relapse/second remission 40 50 
Breast cancer     
  High-risk stage II N/A 70 
  Stage IV N/A 15 
 


*These estimates are generally based on data reported by the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry. The analysis has not been reviewed by their Advisory Committee.

Abbreviations: N/A, not applicable; ID, insufficient data.
 

Aplastic Anemia

Transplantation from matched siblings after a preparative regimen of high-dose cyclophosphamide and antithymocyte globulin can cure up to 90% of patients age <40 years with severe aplastic anemia. Results in older patients and in recipients of mismatched family member or unrelated marrow are less favorable; therefore, a trial of immunosuppressive therapy is generally recommended for such patients before considering transplantation. Transplantation is effective in all forms of aplastic anemia including, for example, the syndromes associated with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and Fanconi's anemia. Patients with Fanconi's anemia are abnormally sensitive to the toxic effects of alkylating agents and so less intensive preparative regimens must be used in their treatment (Chap. 107).

Hemoglobinopathies

Marrow transplantation from an HLA-identical sibling following a preparative regimen of busulfan and cyclophosphamide can cure 70每90% of patients with thalassemia major. The best outcomes can be expected if patients are transplanted before they develop hepatomegaly or portal fibrosis and if they have been given adequate iron chelation therapy. Among such patients, the probabilities of 5-year survival and disease-free survival are 95 and 90%, respectively. Although prolonged survival can be achieved with aggressive chelation therapy, transplantation is the only curative treatment for thalassemia. Transplantation is being studied as a curative approach to patients with sickle cell anemia. Two-year survival and disease-free survival rates of 90 and 80%, respectively, have been reported following matched sibling transplantation. Decisions about patient selection and the timing of transplantation remain difficult, but transplantation represents a reasonable option for younger patients who suffer repeated crises or other significant complications and who have not responded to other interventions (Chap. 104).

Other Nonmalignant Diseases

Theoretically, hematopoietic cell transplantation should be able to cure any disease that results from an inborn error of the lymphohematopoietic system. Transplantation has been used successfully to treat congenital disorders of white blood cells such as Kostmann's syndrome, chronic granulomatous disease, and leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Congenital anemias such as Blackfan-Diamond anemia can also be cured with transplantation. Infantile malignant osteopetrosis is due to an inability of the osteoclast to resorb bone, and since osteoclasts derive from the marrow, transplantation can cure this rare inherited disorder.

Hematopoietic cell transplantation has been used as treatment for a number of storage diseases caused by enzymatic deficiencies, such as Gaucher's disease, Hurler's syndrome, Hunter's syndrome, and infantile metachromatic leukodystrophy. Transplantation for these diseases has not been uniformly successful, but treatment early in the course of these diseases, before irreversible damage to extramedullary organs has occurred, increases the chance for success.

Transplantation is being explored as a treatment for severe acquired autoimmune disorders. These trials are based on studies demonstrating that transplantation can reverse autoimmune disorders in animal models and on the observation that occasional patients with coexisting autoimmune disorders and hematologicmalignancies have been cured of both with transplantation.

Treatment: Malignant Diseases

Acute Leukemia

Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation cures 15每20% of patients who do not achieve complete response from induction chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is the only form of therapy that can cure such patients. Cure rates of 30每35% are seen when patients are transplanted in second remission or in first relapse. The best results with allogeneic transplantation are achieved when applied during first remission, with disease-free survival rates averaging 55每60%. Meta-analyses of studies comparing matched related donor transplantation to chemotherapy for adult AML patients age <60 years show a survival advantage with transplantation. This advantage is greatest for those with unfavorable-risk AML and lost in those with favorable-risk disease. The role of autologous transplantation in the treatment of AML is less well defined. The rates of disease recurrence with autologous transplantation are higher than those seen after allogeneic transplantation, and cure rates are somewhat less.

Similar to patients with AML, adults with acute lymphocytic leukemia who do not achieve a complete response to induction chemotherapy can be cured in 15每20% of cases with immediate transplantation. Cure rates improve to 30每50% in second remission, and therefore transplantation can be recommended for adults who have persistent disease after induction chemotherapy or who have subsequently relapsed. Transplantation in first remission results in cure rates about 55%. Transplantation appears to offer a clear advantage over chemotherapy for patients with high-risk disease, such as those with Philadelphia chromosome每positive disease. Debate continues about whether adults with standard-risk disease should be transplanted in first remission or whether transplantation should be reserved until relapse. Autologous transplantation is associated with a higher relapse rate but a somewhat lower risk of nonrelapse mortality when compared to allogeneic transplantation. There is no obvious role of autologous transplantation for ALL in first remission, and for second-remission patients, most experts recommend use of allogeneic stem cells if an appropriate donor is available.

Chronic Leukemia

Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation is the only therapy shown to cure a substantial portion of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Five-year disease-free survival rates are 15每20% for patients transplanted for blast crisis, 25每50% for accelerated-phase patients, and 60每70% for chronic-phase patients, with cure rates as high as 80% at selected centers. However, with the availability of imatinib mesylate, a remarkably effective, relatively nontoxic oral agent, most physicians favor reserving transplantation for those who fail to achieve a complete cytogenetic response with imatinib, relapse after an initial response, or are intolerant of the drug (Chap. 109).

Allogeneic transplantation using high-dose preparative regimen was rarely used for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in large part because of the chronic nature of the disease and because of the age profile of patients. In those cases where it was studied, complete remissions were achieved in the majority of patients, with disease-free survival rates of ~50% at 3 years, despite the advanced stage of the disease at the time of transplant. The marked antitumor effects have resulted in the increased use and study of allogeneic transplantation using reduced-intensity conditioning for the treatment of CLL.

Myelodysplasia

Between 40 and 50% of patients with myelodysplasia appear to be cured with allogeneic transplantation. Results are better among younger patients and those with less advanced disease. However, some patients with myelodysplasia can live for extended periods without intervention, and so transplantation is generally recommended only for patients with disease categorized as intermediate risk I or greater according to the International Prognostic Scoring System (Chap. 107).

Lymphoma

Patients with disseminated intermediate- or high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma who have not been cured by first-line chemotherapy and are transplanted in first relapse or second remission can still be cured in 40每50% of cases. This represents a clear advantage over results obtained with conventional-dose salvage chemotherapy. It is unsettled whether patients with high-risk disease benefit from transplantation in first remission. Most experts favor the use of autologous rather than allogeneic transplantation for patients with intermediate- or high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, because fewer complications occur with this approach and survival appears equivalent. For patients with recurrent disseminated indolent non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, autologous transplantation results in high response rates and improved progression-free survival compared to salvage chemotherapy. However, late relapses are seen after transplantation. The role of autologous transplantation in the initial treatment of patients is under study. Reduced-intensity conditioning regimens followed by allogeneic transplantation result in high response rates in patients with indolent lymphomas, but the exact role of this approach remains to be defined.

The role of transplantation in Hodgkin's disease is similar to that in intermediate- and high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. With transplantation, 5-year disease-free survival is 20每30% in patients who never achieve a first remission with standard chemotherapy and up to 70% for those transplanted in second remission. Transplantation has no defined role in first remission in Hodgkin's disease.

Myeloma

Patients with myeloma who have progressed on first-line therapy can sometimes benefit from allogeneic or autologous transplantation. Autologous transplantation has been studied as part of the initial therapy of patients, and both disease-free survival and overall survival were improved with this approach in randomized trials. The use of autologous transplantation followed by nonmyeloablative allogeneic transplantation is the subject of ongoing research.

Solid Tumors

Among women with metastatic breast cancer, 15每20% disease-free survival rates at 3 years have been reported, with better results seen in younger patients who have responded completely to standard-dose therapy before undergoing transplantation. Randomized trials have not shown superior survival for patients treated for metastatic disease with high-dose chemotherapy plus stem cell support. Randomized trials evaluating transplantation as treatment for primary breast cancer have yielded mixed results. No role for autologous transplantation has been established in the treatment of breast cancer.

Patients with testicular cancer who have failed first-line chemotherapy have been treated with autologous transplantation; ~10每20% of such patients apparently have been cured with this approach.

The use of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell support is being studied for several other solid tumors, including neuroblastoma and pediatric sarcomas. As in most other settings, the best results have been obtained in patients with limited amounts of disease and where the remaining tumor remains sensitive to conventional-dose chemotherapy. Few randomized trials of transplantation in these diseases have been completed.

Partial and complete responses have been reported following nonmyeloablative allogeneic transplantation for some solid tumors, most notably renal cell cancers. The GVT effect, well documented in the treatment of hematologicmalignancies, may apply to selected solid tumors under certain circumstances.

Posttransplant Relapse

Patients who relapse following autologous transplantation sometimes respond to further chemotherapy and may be candidates for possible allogeneic transplantation, particularly if the remission following the initial autologous transplant was long. Several options are available for patients who relapse following allogeneic transplantation. Of particular interest are the response rates seen with infusion of unirradiated donor lymphocytes. Complete responses in as many as 75% of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia, 40% in myelodysplasia, 25% in AML, and 15% in myeloma have been reported. Major complications of donor lymphocyte infusions include transient myelosuppression and the development of GVHD. These complications depend on the number of donor lymphocytes given and the schedule of infusions, with less GVHD seen with lower dose, fractionated schedules.
 
Further Readings

Appelbaum FR: Hematopoietic-cell transplantation at 50. N Engl J Med 357:1472, 2007[PMID: 17928594] 

 
Gyurkocza B et al: Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation: The state of the art. Expert Rev Hematol 3:285, 2010[PMID: 20871781] 

 
Koreth J et al: Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for acute myeloid leukemia in first complete remission: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective clinical trials. JAMA 301(22):2349, 2009[PMID: 19509382] 

 
Lee SJ et al: High-resolution donor-recipient HLA matching contributes to the success of unrelated donor marrow transplantation. Blood 110:4576, 2007[PMID: 17785583] 

 
Tomblyn M et al: Guidelines for preventing infectious complications among hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients: A global perspective. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 15:1143, 2009[PMID: 19747629] 
 
 

^^
Disorders of Platelets and Vessel Wall: Introduction

Hemostasis is a dynamic process in which the platelet and the blood vessel wall play key roles. Platelets become activated upon adhesion to von Willebrand factor (VWF) and collagen in the exposed subendothelium after injury. Platelet activation is also mediated through shear forces imposed by blood flow itself, particularly in areas where the vessel wall is diseased, and is also affected by the inflammatory state of the endothelium. The activated platelet surface provides the major physiologic site for coagulation factor activation, which results in further platelet activation and fibrin formation. Genetic and acquired influences on the platelet and vessel wall, as well as on the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems, determine whether normal hemostasis, or bleeding or clotting symptoms, will result.

The Platelet

Platelets are released from the megakaryocyte, likely under the influence of flow in the capillary sinuses. The normal blood platelet count is 150,000每450,000/L. The major regulator of platelet production is the hormone thrombopoietin (TPO), which is synthesized in the liver. Synthesis is increased with inflammation and specifically by interleukin 6. TPO binds to its receptor on platelets and megakaryocytes, by which it is removed from the circulation. Thus a reduction in platelet and megakaryocyte mass increases the level of TPO, which then stimulates platelet production. Platelets circulate with an average life span of 7 to 10 days. Approximately one-third of the platelets reside in the spleen, and this number increases in proportion to splenic size, although the platelet count rarely decreases to <40,000/L as the spleen enlarges. Platelets are physiologically very active, but are anucleate, and thus have limited capacity to synthesize new proteins.

Normal vascular endothelium contributes to preventing thrombosis by inhibiting platelet function (Chap. 58). When vascular endothelium is injured, these inhibitory effects are overcome, and platelets adhere to the exposed intimal surface primarily through VWF, a large multimeric protein present in both plasma and in the extracellular matrix of the subendothelial vessel wall. Platelet adhesion results in the generation of intracellular signals that lead to activation of the platelet glycoprotein (Gp) IIb/IIIa (IIb3) receptor and resultant platelet aggregation.

Activated platelets undergo release of their granule contents, which include nucleotides, adhesive proteins, growth factors, and procoagulants that serve to promote platelet aggregation and blood clot formation and influence the environment of the forming clot. During platelet aggregation, additional platelets are recruited to the site of injury, leading to the formation of an occlusive platelet thrombus. The platelet plug is stabilized by the fibrin mesh that develops simultaneously as the product of the coagulation cascade.

The Vessel Wall

Endothelial cells line the surface of the entire circulatory tree, totaling 1每6 x 1013 cells, enough to cover a surface area equivalent to about six tennis courts. The endothelium is physiologically active, controlling vascular permeability, flow of biologically active molecules and nutrients, blood cell interactions with the vessel wall, the inflammatory response, and angiogenesis.

The endothelium normally presents an antithrombotic surface (Chap. 58) but rapidly becomes prothrombotic when stimulated, which promotes coagulation, inhibits fibrinolysis, and activates platelets. In many cases, endothelium-derived vasodilators are also platelet inhibitors (e.g., nitric oxide) and, conversely, endothelium-derived vasoconstrictors (e.g., endothelin) can also be platelet activators. The net effect of vasodilation and inhibition of platelet function is to promote blood fluidity, whereas the net effect of vasoconstriction and platelet activation is to promote thrombosis. Thus, blood fluidity and hemostasis is regulated by the balance of antithrombotic/prothrombotic and vasodilatory/vasoconstrictor properties of endothelial cells.
 
Disorders of Platelets

Thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytopenia results from one or more of three processes: (1) decreased bone marrow production; (2) sequestration, usually in an enlarged spleen; and/or (3) increased platelet destruction. Disorders of production may be either inherited or acquired. In evaluating a patient with thrombocytopenia, a key step is to review the peripheral blood smear and to first rule out "pseudothrombocytopenia," particularly in a patient without an apparent cause for the thrombocytopenia. Pseudothrombocytopenia (Fig. 115-1B) is an in vitro artifact resulting from platelet agglutination via antibodies (usually IgG, but also IgM and IgA) when the calcium content is decreased by blood collection in ethylenediamine tetraacetic (EDTA) [the anticoagulant present in tubes (purple top) used to collect blood for complete blood counts (CBCs)]. If a low platelet count is obtained in EDTA-anticoagulated blood, a blood smear should be evaluated and a platelet count determined in blood collected into sodium citrate (blue top tube) or heparin (green top tube), or a smear of freshly obtained unanticoagulated blood, such as from a finger stick, can be examined.

Figure 115-1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Photomicrographs of peripheral blood smears: A. Normal peripheral blood. B. Platelet clumping in pseudothrombocytopenia. C. Abnormal large platelet in autosomal dominant macrothrombocytopenia. D. Schistocytes and decreased platelets in microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
 
 

Approach to the Patient: Thrombocytopenia

The history and physical examination, results of the CBC, and review of the peripheral blood smear are all critical components in the initial evaluation of thrombocytopenic patients (Fig. 115-2). The overall health of the patient and whether he or she is receiving drug treatment will influence the differential diagnosis. A healthy young adult with thrombocytopenia will have a much more limited differential diagnosis than an ill hospitalized patient who is receiving multiple medications. Except in unusual inherited disorders, decreased platelet production usually results from bone marrow disorders that also affect red blood cell (RBC) and/or white blood cell (WBC) production. Because myelodysplasia can present with isolated thrombocytopenia, the bone marrow should be examined in patients presenting with isolated thrombocytopenia who are older than 60 years of age. While inherited thrombocytopenia is rare, any prior platelet counts should be retrieved and a family history regarding thrombocytopenia obtained. A careful history of drug ingestion should be obtained, including nonprescription and herbal remedies, as drugs are the most common cause of thrombocytopenia.

Figure 115-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for evaluating the thrombocytopenic patient.
 
 

The physical examination can document an enlarged spleen, evidence of chronic liver disease, and other underlying disorders. Mild to moderate splenomegaly may be difficult to appreciate in many individuals due to body habitus and/or obesity but can be easily assessed by abdominal ultrasound. A platelet count of approximately 5000每10,000 is required to maintain vascular integrity in the microcirculation. When the count is markedly decreased, petechiae first appear in areas of increased venous pressure, the ankles and feet in an ambulatory patient. Petechiae are pin-point, nonblanching hemorrhages and are usually a sign of a decreased platelet number and not platelet dysfunction. Wet purpura, blood blisters that form on the oral mucosa, are thought to denote an increased risk of life-threatening hemorrhage in the thrombocytopenic patient. Excessive bruising is seen in disorders of both platelet number and function.

Infection-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Many viral and bacterial infections result in thrombocytopenia and are the most common noniatrogenic cause of thrombocytopenia. This may or may not be associated with laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), which is most commonly seen in patients with systemic infections with gram-negative bacteria. Infections can affect both platelet production and platelet survival. In addition, immune mechanisms can be at work, as in infectious mononucleosis and early HIV infection. Late in HIV infection, pancytopenia and decreased and dysplastic platelet production is more common. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in children usually follows a viral infection and almost always resolves spontaneously. This association of infection with ITP is less clear in adults.

Bone marrow examination is often requested for evaluation of occult infections. A study evaluating the role of bone marrow examination in fever of unknown origin in HIV-infected patients found that for 86% of patients, the same diagnosis was established by less-invasive techniques, notably blood culture. In some instances, however, the diagnosis can be made earlier; thus, a bone marrow examination and culture is recommended when the diagnosis is needed urgently or when other, less invasive methods have been unsuccessful.

Drug-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Many drugs have been associated with thrombocytopenia. A predictable decrease in platelet count occurs after treatment with many chemotherapeutic drugs due to bone marrow suppression (Chap. 85). Other, commonly used drugs that cause isolated thrombocytopenia are listed in Table 115每1, but all drugs should be suspect in a patient with thrombocytopenia without an apparent cause and should be stopped, or substituted, if possible. A helpful website, Platelets on the Internet (http://www.ouhsc.edu/platelets/index.html), lists drugs and supplements reported to have caused thrombocytopenia and the level of evidence supporting the association. Although not as well studied, herbal and over-the-counter preparations may also result in thrombocytopenia and should be discontinued in patients who are thrombocytopenic.

Table 115每1 Drugs Reported as Definitely or Probably Causing Isolated Thrombocytopenia*

 
 
Abciximab Ibuprofen 
Acetaminophen Iopanoic acid 
Aminoglutethimide Levamisole 
Aminosalicylic acid Linezolid 
Amiodarone Meclofenamate 
Amphotericin B Methicillin 
Ampicillin Methyldopa 
Carbamazepine Nalidixic acid 
Chlorpropamide Naproxen 
Danazol Oxyphenbutazone 
Captopril Phenytoin 
Cimetidine Piperacillin 
Diatrizoate meglumine (Hypaque Meglumine?) Procainamide 
Diclofenac Quinine 
Digoxin Quinidine 
Dipyridamole Rifampin 
Eptifibatide Simvastatin 
Ethambutol Sulfa-containing drugs 
Famotidine Tamoxifen 
Fluconazole Tirofiban 
Furosemide Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 
Glyburide Valproic acid 
Gold Vancomycin 
Hydrochlorothiazide   
Imipenem/Cilastatin   
 


*Reported in 2 patients

Source: Data from http://www.ouhsc.edu/platelets/index.html.
 

Classic drug-dependent antibodies are antibodies that react with specific platelet surface antigens, and result in thrombocytopenia only when the drug is present. Many drugs are capable of inducing these antibodies, but for some reason they are more common with quinine and sulfonamides. Drug-dependent antibody binding can be demonstrated by laboratory assays, showing antibody binding in the presence of, but not without, the drug present in the assay. The thrombocytopenia typically occurs after a period of initial exposure (median length 21 days), or upon reexposure, and usually resolves in 7每10 days after drug withdrawal. The thrombocytopenia caused by the platelet GpIIbIIIa inhibitory drugs, such as abciximab, differs in that it may occur within 24 h of initial exposure. This appears to be due to the presence of naturally occurring antibodies that cross-react with the drug bound to the platelet.

Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Drug-induced thrombocytopenia due to heparin differs from that seen with other drugs in two major ways. (1) The thrombocytopenia is not usually severe, with nadir counts rarely <20,000/L. (2) Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is not associated with bleeding and, in fact, markedly increases the risk of thrombosis. HIT results from antibody formation to a complex of the platelet-specific protein platelet factor 4 (PF4) and heparin. The antiheparin/PF4 antibody can activate platelets through the FcRIIa receptor and also activate monocytes and endothelial cells. Many patients exposed to heparin develop antibodies to heparin/PF4, but do not appear to have adverse consequences. A fraction of those who develop antibodies will develop HIT, and a portion of those (up to 50%) will develop thrombosis (HITT).

HIT can occur after exposure to low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) as well as unfractionated heparin (UFH), although it is about 10 times more common with the latter. Most patients develop HIT after exposure to heparin for 5每14 days (Fig. 115-3). It occurs before 5 days in those who were exposed to heparin in the prior few weeks or months (<~100 days) and have circulating antiheparin/PF4 antibodies. Rarely, thrombocytopenia and thrombosis begin several days after all heparin has been stopped (termed delayed-onset HIT). The 4 T's have been recommended to be used in a diagnostic algorithm for HIT: thrombocytopenia, timing of platelet count drop, thrombosis and other sequelae such as localized skin reactions, and other causes of thrombocytopenia not evident. A new scoring model based on broad expert opinion [the HIT Expert Probability (HEP) Score] has improved operating characteristics and should provide better utility as a scoring system.

Figure 115-3

 
 
 
Time course of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) development after heparin exposure. The timing of development after heparin exposure is a critical factor in determining the likelihood of HIT in a patient. HIT occurs early after heparin exposure in the presence of preexisting heparin/platelet factor 4 (PF4) antibodies, which disappear from circulation by ~100 days following a prior exposure. Rarely, HIT may occur later after heparin exposure (termed delayed-onset HIT). In this setting, heparin/PF4 antibody testing is usually markedly positive. HIT can occur after exposure to either unfractionated (UFH) or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).
 
 

Laboratory Testing for HIT

HIT (anti-heparin/PF4) antibodies can be detected using two types of assays. The most widely available is an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) with PF4/polyanion complex as the antigen. Since many patients develop antibodies but do not develop clinical HIT, the test has a low specificity for the diagnosis of HIT. This is especially true in patients who have undergone cardiopulmonary bypass surgery, where approximately 50% of patients develop these antibodies postoperatively. IgG-specific ELISAs increase specificity but may decrease sensitivity. The other assay is a platelet activation assay, which measures the ability of the patient's serum to activate platelets in the presence of heparin in a concentration-dependent manner. This test has lower sensitivity but higher specificity than the ELISA. However, HIT remains a clinical diagnosis.

Treatment: Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia

Early recognition is key in treatment of HIT, with prompt discontinuation of heparin and use of alternative anticoagulants. Thrombosis is a common complication of HIT, even after heparin discontinuation, and can occur in both the venous and arterial systems. Patients with higher anti-heparin/PF4 antibody titers have a higher risk of thrombosis. In patients diagnosed with HIT, imaging studies to evaluate the patient for thrombosis (at least lower extremity duplex Dopplers) are recommended. Patients requiring anticoagulation should be switched from heparin to an alternative anticoagulant. The direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) argatroban and lepirudin are effective in HITT. The DTI bivalirudin and the antithrombin-binding pentasaccharide fondaparinux are also effective but not yet approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication. Danaparoid, a mixture of glycosoaminoglycans with anti-Xa activity, has been used extensively for the treatment of HITT; it is no longer available in the United States but is in other countries. HIT antibodies cross-react with LMWH, and these preparations should not be used in the treatment of HIT.

Because of the high rate of thrombosis in patients with HIT, anticoagulation should be strongly considered, even in the absence of thrombosis. In patients with thrombosis, patients can be transitioned to warfarin, with treatment usually for 3每6 months. In patients without thrombosis, the duration of anticoagulation needed is undefined. An increased risk of thrombosis is present for at least 1 month after diagnosis; however, most thromboses occur early, and whether thrombosis occurs later if the patient is initially anticoagulated is unknown. Options include continuing anticoagulation until a few days after platelet recovery or for one month. Introduction of warfarin alone in the setting of HIT or HITT may precipitate thrombosis, particularly venous gangrene, presumably due to clotting activation and severely reduced levels of proteins C and S. Warfarin therapy, if started, should be overlapped with a DTI or fonda parinux, and started after resolution of the thrombocytopenia and lessening of the prothrombotic state.

Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura (ITP)

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP; also termed idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura) is an acquired disorder in which there is immune-mediated destruction of platelets and possibly inhibition of platelet release from the megakaryocyte. In children, it is usually an acute disease, most commonly following an infection, and with a self-limited course. In adults, it usually runs a more chronic course. ITP is termed secondary if it is associated with an underlying disorder; autoimmune disorders, particularly systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and infections, such as HIV and hepatitis C, are common causes. The association of ITP with Helicobacter pylori infection is unclear.

ITP is characterized by mucocutaneous bleeding and a low, often very low, platelet count, with an otherwise normal peripheral blood cells and smear. Patients usually present either with ecchymoses and petechiae, or with thrombocytopenia incidentally found on a routine CBC. Mucocutaneous bleeding, such as oral mucosa, gastrointestinal, or heavy menstrual bleeding, may be present. Rarely, life-threatening, including central nervous system, bleeding can occur. Wet purpura (blood blisters in the mouth) and retinal hemorrhages may herald life-threatening bleeding.

Laboratory Testing in ITP

Laboratory testing for antibodies (serologic testing) is usually not helpful due to the low sensitivity and specificity of the current tests. Bone marrow examination can be reserved for older adults (usually >60 years) or those who have other signs or laboratory abnormalities not explained by ITP, or in patients who do not respond to initial therapy. The peripheral blood smear may show large platelets, with otherwise normal morphology. Depending on the bleeding history, iron deficiency anemia may be present.

Laboratory testing is performed to evaluate for secondary causes of ITP and should include testing for HIV infection and hepatitis C (and other infections if indicated); serologic testing for SLE, serum protein electrophoresis, and immunoglobulin levels to potentially detect hypogammaglobulinemia; selective testing for IgA deficiency or monoclonal gammopathies and, if anemia is present, direct antiglobulin testing (Coombs test) to rule out combined autoimmune hemolytic anemia with ITP (Evans syndrome).

Treatment: Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura

The treatment of ITP utilizes drugs that decrease reticuloendothelial uptake of the antibody-bound platelet, decrease antibody production, and/or increase platelet production. The diagnosis of ITP does not necessarily mean that treatment must be instituted. Patients with platelet counts greater than 30,000/L appear not to have increased mortality related to the thrombocytopenia.

Initial treatment in patients without significant bleeding symptoms, severe thrombocytopenia (<5000/L), or signs of impending bleeding (such as retinal hemorrhage or large oral mucosal hemorrhages) can be instituted as an outpatient using single agents. Traditionally, this has been prednisone at 1 mg/kg, although Rh0(D) immune globulin therapy (WinRho SDF), at 50每75 g/kg, is also being used in this setting. Rh0(D) immune globulin must be used only in Rh-positive patients as the mechanism of action is production of limited hemolysis, with antibody-coated cells "saturating" the Fc receptors, inhibiting Fc receptor function. Monitoring patients for 8 h postinfusion is now advised by the FDA because of the rare complication of severe intravascular hemolysis. Intravenous gamma globulin (IVIgG), which is pooled, primarily IgG antibodies, also blocks the Fc receptor system, but appears to work primarily through different mechanism(s). IVIgG has more efficacy than anti-Rh0(D) in postsplenectomized patients. IVIgG is dosed at 2 g/kg total, given in divided doses over 2每5 days. Side effects are usually related to the volume of infusion and infrequently include aseptic meningitis and renal failure. All immunoglobulin preparations are derived from human plasma and undergo treatment for viral inactivation.

For patients with severe ITP and/or symptoms of bleeding, hospital admission and combined-modality therapy is given using high-dose glucocorticoids with IVIgG or anti-Rh0D therapy, and, as needed, additional immunosuppressive agents. Rituximab, an anti-CD20 (B cell) antibody, has shown efficacy in the treatment of refractory ITP.

Splenectomy has been used for treatment of patients who relapse after glucocorticoids are tapered. Splenectomy remains an important treatment option; however, more patients than previously thought will go into a remission over time. Observation, if the platelet count is high enough, or intermittent treatment with anti-Rh0(D) or IVIgG may be a reasonable approach to see if the ITP will resolve. Vaccination against encapsulated organisms (especially pneumococcus, but also meningococcus and Haemophilus influenzae, depending on patient age and potential exposure) is recommended before splenectomy. Accessory spleen(s) are a very rare cause of relapse.

Thrombopoietin receptor agonists are now available for the treatment of ITP. This approach stems from the finding that many patients with ITP do not have increased TPO levels, as was previously hypothesized. TPO levels reflect megakaryocyte mass, which is usually normal in ITP. TPO levels are not increased in the setting of platelet destruction. Two agents, one administered subcutaneously (romiplostim) and another orally (eltrombopag), have shown response in many patients with refractory ITP. Roles for these agents in ITP treatment are not fully defined but given the chronicity of treatment, they are generally reserved for patients with refractory disease

Inherited Thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytopenia is rarely inherited, either as an isolated finding or as part of a syndrome, and may be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked pattern. Many forms of autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia are now known to be associated with mutations in the nonmuscle myosin heavy chain MYH9 gene. Interestingly, these include the May-Hegglin anomaly, and Sebastian, Epstein's, and Fechtner syndromes, all of which have distinct distinguishing features. A common feature of these disorders is large platelets (Fig. 115-1C). Autosomal recessive disorders include congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopenia with absent radii, and Bernard Soulier syndrome. The latter is primarily a functional platelet disorder due to absence of GPIb-IX-V, the VWF adhesion receptor. X-linked disorders include Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and a dyshematopoietic syndrome resulting from a mutation in GATA-1, an important transcriptional regulator of hematopoiesis.

Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura and Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic microangiopathies are a group of disorders characterized by thrombocytopenia, a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia evident by fragmented RBCs (Fig. 115-1D) and laboratory evidence of hemolysis, and microvascular thrombosis. They include thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), as well as syndromes complicating bone marrow transplantation, certain medications and infections, pregnancy and vasculitis. In DIC, while thrombocytopenia and microangiopathy are seen, a coagulopathy predominates, with consumption of clotting factors and fibrinogen resulting in an elevated prothrombin time (PT), and often activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). The PT and aPTT are characteristically normal in TTP or HUS.

Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP)

TTP and HUS were previously considered overlap syndromes. However, in the past few years the pathophysiology of inherited and idiopathic TTP has become better understood and clearly differs from HUS. TTP was first described in 1924 by Eli Moschcowitz and characterized by a pentad of findings that include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal failure, neurologic findings, and fever. The full-blown syndrome is less commonly seen now, probably due to earlier diagnosis. The introduction of treatment with plasma exchange markedly improved the prognosis in patients, with a decrease in mortality from 85每100% to 10每30%.

The pathogenesis of inherited (Upshaw-Schulman syndrome) and idiopathic TTP is related to a deficiency of, or antibodies to, the metalloprotease ADAMTS13, that cleaves VWF. VWF is normally secreted as ultra-large multimers, which are then cleaved by ADAMTS13. The persistence of ultra-large VWF molecules is thought to contribute to pathogenic platelet adhesion and aggregation (Fig. 115-4). This defect alone, however, is not sufficient to result in TTP as individuals with a congenital absence of ADAMTS13 develop TTP only episodically. Additional provocative factors have not been defined. The level of ADAMTS13 activity, as well as antibodies, can now be detected by laboratory assays. However, assays with sufficient sensitivity and specificity to direct clinical management have yet to be clearly defined.

Figure 115-4

 
 
 
Pathogenesis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). Normally the ultra-high-molecular-weight multimers of von Willebrand factor (VWF) produced by the endothelial cells are processed into smaller multimers by a plasma metalloproteinase called ADAMTS13. In TTP the activity of the protease is inhibited, and the ultra-high-molecular-weight multimers of VWF initiate platelet aggregation and thrombosis.
 
 

Idiopathic TTP appears to be more common in women than in men. No geographic or racial distribution has been defined. TTP is more common in patients with HIV infection and in pregnant women. TTP in pregnancy is not clearly related to ADAMTS13. Medication-related microangiopathic hemolytic anemia may be secondary to antibody formation (ticlopidine and possibly clopidogrel) or direct endothelial toxicity (cyclosporine, mitomycin C, tacrolimus, quinine), although this is not always so clear, and fear of withholding treatment, as well as lack of other treatment alternatives, results in broad application of plasma exchange. However, withdrawal, or reduction in dose, of endothelial toxic agents usually decreases the microangiopathy.

Treatment: Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura

TTP is a devastating disease if not diagnosed and treated promptly. In patients presenting with new thrombocytopenia, with or without evidence of renal insufficiency and other elements of classic TTP, laboratory data should be obtained to rule out DIC and to evaluate for evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Findings to support the TTP diagnosis include an increased lactate dehydrogenase and indirect bilirubin, decreased haptoglobin, and increased reticulocyte count, with a negative direct antiglobulin test. The peripheral smear should be examined for evidence of schistocytes (Fig. 115-1D). Polychromasia is usually also present due to the increased number of young red blood cells, and nucleated RBCs are often present, which is thought to be due to infarction in the microcirculatory system of the bone marrow.

Plasma exchange remains the mainstay of treatment of TTP. ADAMTS 13 antibody-mediated TTP (idiopathic TTP) appears to respond best to plasma exchange. Plasma exchange is continued until the platelet count is normal and signs of hemolysis are resolved for at least 2 days. While never evaluated in clinical trial, the use of glucocorticoids seems a reasonable approach, but should only be used as an adjunct to plasma exchange. Additionally, other immunomodulatory therapies have been reported to be successful in refractory or relapsing TTP, including rituximab, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and splenectomy. The role of rituximab in the treatment of this disorder needs to be defined. A significant relapse rate is noted, 25每45% within 30 days of initial "remission," and 12每40% with late relapses. Relapses may be more frequent in patients with severe ADAMTS 13 deficiency at presentation.

Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome

HUS is a syndrome characterized by acute renal failure, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. It is seen predominantly in children and in most cases is preceded by an episode of diarrhea, often hemorrhagic in nature. Escherichia coli O157:H7 is the most frequent, although not only, etiologic serotype. HUS not associated with diarrhea (termed DHUS) is more heterogeneous in presentation and course. Some children who develop DHUS have been found to have mutations in genes encoding factor H, a soluble complement regulator, and membrane cofactor protein that is mainly expressed in the kidney.

Treatment: Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome

Treatment of HUS is primarily supportive. In D+HUS, many (~40%) children require at least some period of support with dialysis; however, the overall mortality is <5%. In D每HUS, the mortality is higher, approximately 26%. Plasma infusion or plasma exchange has not been shown to alter the overall course. ADAMTS13 levels are generally reported to be normal in HUS, although occasionally they have been reported to be decreased. As ADAMTS13 assays improve, they may help in defining a subset that better fit a TTP diagnosis, and may respond to plasma exchange.

Thromobcytosis

Thrombocytosis is almost always due either to (1) iron deficiency; (2) inflammation, cancer, or infection (reactive thrombocytosis); or (3) an underlying myeloproliferative process [essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera) (Chap. 108)] or, rarely, the 5q- myelodysplastic process (Chap. 107). Patients presenting with an elevated platelet count should be evaluated for underlying inflammation or malignancy, and iron deficiency should be ruled out. Thrombocytosis in response to acute or chronic inflammation has not been associated with an increased thrombotic risk. In fact, patients with markedly elevated platelet counts (>1.5 million), usually seen in the setting of a myeloproliferative disorder, have an increased risk of bleeding. This appears to be due, at least in part, to acquired von Willebrand disease (VWD) due to platelet-VWF adhesion and removal.

Qualitative Disorders of Platelet Function

Inherited Disorders of Platelet Function

Inherited platelet function disorders are thought to be relatively rare, although the prevalence of mild disorders of platelet function is unclear, in part because our testing for such disorders is suboptimal. Rare qualitative disorders include the autosomal recessive disorders Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (absence of the platelet GpIIbIIIa receptor) and Bernard Soulier syndrome (absence of the platelet GpIb-IX-V receptor). Both are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and present with bleeding symptoms in childhood.

Platelet storage pool disorder (SPD) is the classic autosomal dominant qualitative platelet disorder. This results from abnormalities of platelet granule formation. It is also seen as a part of inherited disorders of granule formation, such as Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. Bleeding symptoms in SPD are variable, but often are mild. The most common inherited disorders of platelet function are disorders that prevent normal secretion of granule content. Few of the abnormalities have been dissected at the molecular level but these are likely due to multiple abnormalities. They are usually described as secretion defects. Bleeding symptoms are usually mild in nature.

Treatment: Inherited Disorders of Platelet Dysfunction

Bleeding symptoms or prevention of bleeding in patients with severe platelet dysfunction frequently requires platelet transfusion. Care is taken to limit the risk of alloimmunization by limiting exposure, using apheresis leuko-depleted platelets for transfusion. Platelet disorders associated with milder bleeding symptoms frequently respond to desmopressin [1-deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP)]. DDAVP increases plasma VWF and FVIII levels; it may also have a direct effect on platelet function. Particularly for mucosal bleeding symptoms, antifibrinolytic therapy (epsilon-aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid) is used alone or in conjunction with DDAVP or platelet therapy.

Acquired Disorders of Platelet Function

Acquired platelet dysfunction is common, usually due to medications, either intentionally as with antiplatelet therapy, or unintentionally as with high-dose penicillins. Acquired platelet dysfunction occurs in uremia. This is likely multifactorial but the resultant effect is defective adhesion and activation. The platelet defect is improved most by dialysis but may also be improved by increasing the hematocrit to 27每32%, giving DDAVP (0.3 g/kg), or use of conjugated estrogens. Platelet dysfunction also occurs with cardiopulmonary bypass due to the effect of the artificial circuit on platelets, and bleeding symptoms respond to platelet transfusion. Platelet dysfunction seen with underlying hematologic disorders can result from nonspecific interference by circulating paraproteins or intrinsic platelet defects in myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic syndromes.

von Willebrand Disease

VWD vvVis the most common inherited bleeding disorder. Estimates from laboratory data suggest a prevalence of approximately 1%, but data based on symptomatic individuals suggest that it is closer to 0.1% of the population. VWF serves two roles: (1) as the major adhesion molecule that tethers the platelet to the exposed subendothelium; and (2) as the binding protein for FVIII, resulting in significant prolongation of the FVIII half-life in circulation. The platelet-adhesive function of VWF is critically dependent on the presence of large VWF multimers, while FVIII binding is not. Most of the symptoms of VWD are "platelet-like" except in more severe VWD when the FVIII is low enough to produce symptoms similar to those found in Factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia A).

VWD has been classified into three major types, with four subtypes of type 2 (Table 115每2; Fig. 115-5). By far the most common type of VWD is type 1 disease, with a parallel decrease in VWF protein, VWF function, and FVIII levels, accounting for at least 80% of cases. Patients have predominantly mucosal bleeding symptoms, although postoperative bleeding can also be seen. Bleeding symptoms are very uncommon in infancy and usually manifest later in childhood with excessive bruising and epistaxis. Since these symptoms occur commonly in childhood, the clinician should particularly note bruising at sites unlikely to be traumatized and/or prolonged epistaxis requiring medical attention. Menorrhagia is a common manifestation of VWD. Menstrual bleeding resulting in anemia should warrant an evaluation for VWD and, if negative, functional platelet disorders. Frequently, mild type 1 VWD first manifests with dental extractions, particularly wisdom tooth extraction, or tonsillectomy.

Table 115每2 Laboratory Diagnosis of von Willebrand Disease

 
 
Type aPTT VWF Antigen VWF Activity FVIII Activity Multimer 
1 Nl or     Normal distribution, decreased in quantity 
2A Nl or      Loss of high- and intermediate-MW multimers 
2Ba  Nl or      Loss of high-MW multimers 
2M Nl or      Normal distribution, decreased in quantity 
2N  Nl or b  Nl or b   Normal distribution 
3     Absent 
 


aUsually also decreased platelet count.

bFor type 2N, in the homozygous state, FVIII is very low; in the heterozygous state, only seen in conjunction with type 1 VWD.

Abbreviations: aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; F, Factor; MW, molecular weight; Nl, normal; VWF, von Willebrand factor.
 
Figure 115-5

 
 
 
Pattern of inheritance and laboratory findings in von Willebrand disease. The assays of platelet function include a coagulation assay of Factor VIII bound and carried by von Willebrand factor (VWF), abbreviated as VIII; immunoassay of total VWF protein (VWF:Ag); bioassay of the ability of patient plasma to support ristocetin-induced agglutination of normal platelets (VWF:RCoF); and ristocetin-induced aggregation of patient platelets, abbreviated RIPA. The multimer pattern illustrates the protein bands present when plasma is electrophoresed in a polyacrylamide gel. The II-1 and II-2 columns refer to the phenotypes of the second-generation offspring.
 
 

Not all patients with low VWF levels have bleeding symptoms. Whether patients bleed or not will depend on the overall hemostatic balance they have inherited, along with environmental influences and the type of hemostatic challenges they experience. Although the inheritance of VWD is autosomal, many factors modulate both VWF levels and bleeding symptoms. These have not all been defined, but include blood type, thyroid hormone status, race, stress, exercise, and hormonal (both endogenous and exogenous) influences. Patients with type O blood have VWF protein levels of approximately one-half that of patients with AB blood type; and, in fact, the normal range for patients with type O blood overlaps that which has been considered diagnostic for VWD. A mildly decreased VWF level should perhaps be viewed more as a risk factor for bleeding than as an actual disease.

Patients with Type 2 VWD have functional defects; thus, the VWF antigen measurement is significantly higher than the test of function. For types 2A, 2B and 2M, VWF activity is decreased, measured as ristocetin cofactor or collagen-binding activity. In type 2A VWD, the impaired function is due either to increased susceptibility to cleavage by ADAMTS13, resulting in loss of intermediate and high-molecular-weight multimers, or to decreased secretion of these multimers by the cell. Type 2B VWD results from gain of function mutations that result in increased spontaneous binding of VWF to platelets in circulation, with subsequent clearance of this complex by the reticuloendothelial system. The resulting VWF in the patients' plasma lacks the highest- molecular-weight multimers, and the platelet count is usually modestly reduced. Type 2M occurs as a consequence of a group of mutations that cause dysfunction of the molecule but do not affect multimer structure.

Type 2N VWD is due to mutations in VWF that preclude binding of FVIII. As FVIII is stabilized by binding to VWF, the FVIII in patients with type 2N VWD has a very short half-life, and the FVIII level is markedly decreased. This is sometimes termed autosomal hemophilia. Type 3 VWD, or severe VWD, describes patients with virtually no VWF protein and FVIII levels <10%. Patients experience mucosal and joint postoperative symptoms as well as other bleeding symptoms. Some patients with type 3 VWD, particularly those with large VWF gene deletions, are at risk of developing antibodies to infused VWF.

Acquired VWD is a rare disorder, most commonly seen in patients with underlying lymphoproliferative disorders, including monoclonal gammopathies of underdetermined significance (MGUS), multiple myeloma, and Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia. It is seen most commonly in the setting of MGUS and should be suspected in patients, particularly elderly patients, with a new onset of severe mucosal bleeding symptoms. Laboratory evidence of acquired VWD is found in some patients with aortic valvular disease. Heyde's syndrome (aortic stenosis with gastrointestinal bleeding) is attributed to the presence of angiodysplasia of the gastrointestinal tract in patients with aortic stenosis. However, the shear stress on blood passing through the stenotic aortic valve appears to produce a change in VWF, making it susceptible to serum proteases. Consequently, large multimer forms are lost, leading to an acquired type 2 VWD, but return when the stenotic valve is replaced.

Treatment: von Willebrand Disease

The mainstay of treatment for type 1 VWD is 1-deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP, or desmopressin), which results in release of VWF and FVIII from endothelial stores. DDAVP can be given intravenously or by a high concentration intranasal spray (1.5 mg/mL). The peak activity when given intravenously is approximately 30 minutes, while it is 2 h when given intranasally. The usual dose is 0.3 g/kg intravenously or 2 squirts (1 in each nostril) for patients >50 kg (1 squirt for those <50 kg). It is recommended that patients with VWD be tested with DDAVP to assess their response before using it. In patients who respond well (increase in values of two- to fourfold), it can be used for procedures with minor to moderate risk of bleeding. Depending on the procedure, additional doses may be needed; it is usually given every 12每24 h. Less frequent dosing may result in less tachyphylaxis, which occurs when synthesis cannot compensate for the released stores. The major side effect of DDAVP is hyponatremia due to decreased free water clearance. This occurs most commonly in the very young and the very old, but fluid restriction should be advised for all patients for the 24 h following each dose.

Some patients with types 2A and 2M VWD respond to DDAVP such that it can be used for minor procedures. For the other subtypes, for type 3 disease, and for major procedures requiring longer periods of normal hemostasis, VWF replacement can be given. Virally inactivated VWF-containing factor concentrates are thought to be safer than cryoprecipitate as the replacement product.

Antifibrinolytic therapy using either -aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid is an important therapy, either alone or in an adjunctive capacity, particularly for the prevention or treatment of mucosal bleeding. These agents are particularly useful in prophylaxis for dental procedures, with DDAVP for dental extractions and tonsillectomy, menorrhagia, and prostate procedures. It is contraindicated in the setting of upper urinary tract bleeding, due to the risk of ureteral obstruction.
 
Disorders of the Vessel Wall

The vessel wall is an integral part of hemostasis, and separation of a fluid phase is artificial, particularly in disorders such as TTP or HIT that clearly involve the endothelium as well. Inflammation localized to the vessel wall, such as vasculitis, or inherited connective tissue disorders are abnormalities inherent to the vessel wall.

Metabolic and Inflammatory Disorders

Acute febrile illnesses may result in vascular damage. This can result from immune complexes containing viral antigens or the viruses themselves. Certain pathogens, such as the rickettsiae causing Rocky Mountain spotted fever, replicate in endothelial cells and damage them. Vascular purpura may occur in patients with polyclonal gammopathies but more commonly in those with monoclonal gammopathies, including Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, multiple myeloma, and cryoglobulinemia. Patients with mixed cryoglobulinemia develop a more extensive maculopapular rash due to immune complex每mediated damage to the vessel wall.

Patients with scurvy (vitamin C deficiency) develop painful episodes of perifollicular skin bleeding as well as more systemic bleeding symptoms. Vitamin C is needed to synthesize hydroxyproline, an essential constituent of collagen. Patients with Cushing's syndrome or on chronic glucocorticoid therapy develop skin bleeding and easy bruising due to atrophy of supporting connective tissue. A similar phenomenon is seen with aging, where following minor trauma, blood spreads superficially under the epidermis. This has been termed senile purpura. It is most common on skin that has been previously damaged by sun exposure.

Henoch-Sch?nlein, or anaphylactoid, purpura is a distinct, self-limited type of vasculitis that occurs in children and young adults. Patients have an acute inflammatory reaction with IgA and complement components in capillaries, mesangial tissues, and small arterioles leading to increased vascular permeability and localized hemorrhage. The syndrome is often preceded by an upper respiratory infection, commonly with streptococcal pharyngitis, or is triggered by drug or food allergies. Patients develop a purpuric rash on the extensor surfaces of the arms and legs, usually accompanied by polyarthralgias or arthritis, abdominal pain, and hematuria from focal glomerulonephritis. All coagulation tests are normal but renal impairment may occur. Glucocorticoids can provide symptomatic relief but do not alter the course of the illness.

Inherited Disorders of the Vessel Wall

Patients with inherited disorders of the connective tissue matrix, such as Marfan's syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum, frequently report easy bruising. Inherited vascular abnormalities can result in increased bleeding. This is notably seen in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT, or Osler-Weber-Rendu disease), a disorder where abnormal telangiectatic capillaries result in frequent bleeding episodes, primarily from the nose and gastrointestinal tract. Arteriovenous malformation (AVM) in the lung, brain, and liver may also occur in HHT. The telangiectasia can often be visualized on the oral and nasal mucosa. Signs and symptoms develop over time. Expistaxis begins, on average, at the age of 12 and occurs in >95% of affected individuals by middle age. Two genes involved in the pathogenesis are eng (endoglin) on chromosome 9q33-34 (so-called HHT type 1), associated with pulmonary AVM in 40% of cases; and alk1 (activin-receptor-like kinase 11) on chromosome 12q13, associated with a much lower risk of pulmonary AVM.
 
Acknowledgment

Robert Handin, MD, contributed this chapter in the 16th edition and some materials from his chapter are included here.
 
Further Readings

Arepally GM, Ortel TL: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Annu Rev Med 61:77, 2010[PMID: 20059332] 

 
Aster RH et al: Drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia: Pathogenesis, diagnosis and management. J Thromb Haemost 7:911, 2009[PMID: 19344362] 

 
Bussel JB: Traditional and new approaches to the management of immune thrombocytopenia: Issues of when and who to treat. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 23:1329, 2009[PMID: 19932437] 

 
Diagnosis, Evaluation and Management of von Willebrand Disease. NIH Publication #08-5832. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 2007, www.nhlbi.nih.gov 

 
Hayward CPM: Diagnostic approach to platelet function disorders. Trans Apher Sci 38:65, 2008[PMID: 18291723] 

 
Israels SJ et al: Inherited disorders of platelet function and challenges to diagnosis of mucocutaneous bleeding. Haemophilia 16:152, 2010[PMID: 20590875] 

 
Kremer Hovinga JA et al: Survival and relapse in patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood 115:1500, 2010 

 
Rice TW, Wheeler AP: Coagulopathy in critically ill patients. Chest 136:1622, 2009[PMID: 19995764] 
 
 

^^
Coagulation Disorders: Introduction

Deficiencies of coagulation factors have been recognized for centuries. Patients with genetic deficiencies of plasma coagulation factors exhibit life-long recurrent bleeding episodes into joints, muscles, and closed spaces, either spontaneously or following an injury. The most common inherited factor deficiencies are the hemophilias, X-linked diseases caused by deficiency of factor (F) VIII (hemophilia A) or factor IX (FIX, hemophilia B). Rare congenital bleeding disorders due to deficiencies of other factors, including FII (prothrombin), FV, FVII, FX, FXI, FXIII, and fibrinogen are commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive manner (Table 116每1). Advances in characterization of the molecular bases of clotting factor deficiencies have contributed to better understanding of the disease phenotypes and may eventually allow more targeted therapeutic approaches through the development of small molecules, recombinant proteins, or cell and gene-based therapies.

Table 116每1 Genetic and Laboratory Characteristics of Inherited Coagulation Disorders

 
 
Clotting Factor Deficiency Inheritance Prevalence in General Population Laboratory Abnormalitya  Minimum Hemostatic Levels Treatment Plasma Half-Life 
aPTT PT TT 
Fibrinogen AR 1 in 1,000,000 + + + 100 mg/dL Cryoprecipitate 2每4 d 
Prothrombin AR 1 in 2,000,000 + + 每 20每30% FFP/PCC 3每4 d 
Factor V AR 1 in 1,000,000 +/每 +/每 每 15每20% FFP 36 h 
Factor VII AR 1 in 500,000 每 + 每 15每20% FFP/PCC 4每6 h 
Factor VIII X-linked 1 in 5,000 + 每 每 30% FVIII concentrates 8每12 h 
Factor IX X-linked 1 in 30,000 + 每 每 30% FIX concentrates 18每24 h 
Factor X AR 1 in 1,000,000 +/每 +/每 每 15每20% FFP/PCC 40每60 h 
Factor XI AR 1 in 1,000,000 + 每 每 15每20% FFP 40每70 h 
Factor XII AR ND + 每 每 b
  b
  60 h 
HK AR ND + 每 每 b
  b
  150 h 
Prekallikrein AR ND + 每 每 b
  b
  35 h 
Factor XIII AR 1 in 2,000,000 每 每 +/每 2每5% Cryoprecipi-tate 11每14 d 
 


aValues within normal range (每) or prolonged (+).

bNo risk for bleeding; treatment is not indicated.

Abbreviations: aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; AR, autosomal recessive; FFP, fresh-frozen plasma; HK, high-molecular-weight kininogen; ND, not determined; PCC, prothrombin complex concentrates; PT, prothrombin time; TT, thrombin time.
 

Commonly used tests of hemostasis provide the initial screening for clotting factor activity (Fig. 116-1), and disease phenotype often correlates with the level of clotting activity. An isolated abnormal prothrombin time (PT) suggests FVII deficiency, whereas a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) indicates most commonly hemophilia or FXI deficiency (Fig. 116-1). The prolongation of both PT and aPTT suggests deficiency of FV, FX, FII, or fibrinogen abnormalities. The addition of the missing factor at a range of doses to the subject's plasma will correct the abnormal clotting times; the result is expressed as a percentage of the activity observed in normal subjects.

Figure 116-1

 
 
 
Coagulation cascade and laboratory assessment of clotting factor deficiency by activated partial prothrombin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin time (TT).
 
 

Acquired deficiencies of plasma coagulation factors are more frequent than congenital disorders; the most common disorders include hemorrhagic diathesis of liver disease, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and vitamin K deficiency. In these disorders, blood coagulation is hampered by the deficiency of more than one clotting factor, and the bleeding episodes are the result of perturbation of both primary (coagulation) and secondary (e.g., platelet and vessel wall interactions) hemostasis.

The development of antibodies to coagulation plasma proteins, clinically termed inhibitors, is a relatively rare disease that often affects hemophilia A or B and FXI-deficient patients on repetitive exposure to the missing protein to control bleeding episodes. Inhibitors also occur among subjects without genetic deficiency of clotting factors (e.g., in the postpartum setting as a manifestation of underlying autoimmune or neoplastic disease or idiopathically). Rare cases of inhibitors to thrombin or FV have been reported in patients receiving topical bovine thrombin preparation as a local hemostatic agent in complex surgeries. The diagnosis of inhibitors is based on the same tests as those used to diagnose inherited plasma coagulation factor deficiencies. However, the addition of the missing protein to the plasma of a subject with an inhibitor does not correct the abnormal aPTT and/or PT tests. This is the major laboratory difference between deficiencies and inhibitors. Additional tests are required to measure the specificity of the inhibitor and its titer.

The treatment of these bleeding disorders often requires replacement of the deficient protein using recombinant or purified plasma-derived products or fresh-frozen plasma (FFP). Therefore, it is imperative to arrive at a proper diagnosis to optimize patient care without unnecessary exposure to suboptimal treatment and the risks of bloodborne disease.
 
Hemophilia

Pathogenesis and Clinical Manifestations

Hemophilia is an X-linked recessive hemorrhagic disease due to mutations in the F8 gene (hemophilia A or classic hemophilia) or F9 gene (hemophilia B). The disease affects 1 in 10,000 males worldwide, in all ethnic groups; hemophilia A represents 80% of all cases. Male subjects are clinically affected; women, who carry a single mutated gene, are generally asymptomatic. Family history of the disease is absent in 30% of cases and in these cases, 80% of the mothers are carriers of the de novo mutated allele. More than 500 different mutations have been identified in the F8 or F9 genes of patients with hemophilia A or B, respectively. One of the most common hemophilia A mutations results from an inversion of the intron 22 sequence, and it is present in 40% of cases of severe hemophilia A. Advances in molecular diagnosis now permit precise identification of mutations, allowing accurate diagnosis of women carriers of the hemophilia gene in affected families.

Clinically, hemophilia A and hemophilia B are indistinguishable. The disease phenotype correlates with the residual activity of FVIII or FIX and can be classified as severe (<1%), moderate (1每5%), or mild (6每30%). In the severe and moderate forms, the disease is characterized by bleeding into the joints (hemarthrosis), soft tissues, and muscles after minor trauma or even spontaneously. Patients with mild disease experience infrequent bleeding that is usually secondary to trauma. Among those with residual FVIII or FIX activity >25% of normal, the disease is discovered only by bleeding after major trauma or during routine presurgery laboratory tests. Typically, the global tests of coagulation show only an isolated prolongation of the aPTT assay. Patients with hemophilia have normal bleeding times and platelet counts. The diagnosis is made after specific determination of FVIII or FIX clotting activity.

Early in life, bleeding may present after circumcision or rarely as intracranial hemorrhages. The disease is more evident when children begin to walk or crawl. In the severe form, the most common bleeding manifestations are the recurrent hemarthroses, which can affect every joint but mainly affect knees, elbows, ankles, shoulders, and hips. Acute hemarthroses are painful, and clinical signs are local swelling and erythema. To avoid pain, the patient may adopt a fixed position, which leads eventually to muscle contractures. Very young children unable to communicate verbally show irritability and a lack of movement of the affected joint. Chronic hemarthroses are debilitating, with synovial thickening and synovitis in response to the intraarticular blood. After a joint has been damaged, recurrent bleeding episodes result in the clinically recognized "target joint," which then establishes a vicious cycle of bleeding, resulting in progressive joint deformity that in critical cases requires surgery as the only therapeutic option. Hematomas into the muscle of distal parts of the limbs may lead to external compression of arteries, veins, or nerves that can evolve to a compartment syndrome.

Bleeding into the oropharyngeal spaces, central nervous system (CNS), or the retroperitoneum is life threatening and requires immediate therapy. Retroperitoneal hemorrhages can accumulate large quantities of blood with formation of masses with calcification and inflammatory tissue reaction (pseudotumor syndrome) and also result in damage to the femoral nerve. Pseudotumors can also form in bones, especially long bones of the lower limbs. Hematuria is frequent among hemophilia patients, even in the absence of genitourinary pathology. It is often self-limited and may not require specific therapy.

Treatment: Hemophilia

Without treatment, severe hemophilia has a limited life expectancy. Advances in the blood fractionation industry during World War II resulted in the realization that plasma could be used to treat hemophilia, but the volumes required to achieve even modest elevation of circulating factor levels limit the utility of plasma infusion as an approach to disease management. The discovery in the 1960s that the cryoprecipitate fraction of plasma was enriched for FVIII, and the eventual purification of FVIII and FIX from plasma, led to the introduction of home infusion therapy with factor concentrates in the 1970s. The availability of factor concentrates resulted in a dramatic improvement in life expectancy and in quality of life for people with severe hemophilia. However, the contamination of the blood supply with hepatitis viruses and, subsequently HIV, resulted in widespread transmission of these bloodborne infections within the hemophilia population; complications of HIV and of hepatitis C are now the leading causes of death among U.S. adults with severe hemophilia. The introduction of viral inactivation steps in the preparation of plasma-derived products in the mid-1980s greatly reduced the risk of HIV and hepatitis, and the risks were further reduced by the successful production of recombinant FVIII and FIX proteins, both licensed in the 1990s. It is uncommon for hemophilic patients born after 1985 to have contracted either hepatitis or HIV, and for these individuals, life expectancy is in the range of age 65 years.

Factor replacement therapy for hemophilia can be provided either in response to a bleeding episode or as a prophylactic treatment. Primary prophylaxis is defined as a strategy for maintaining the missing clotting factor at levels 1% or higher on a regular basis in order to prevent bleeds, especially the onset of hemarthroses. Hemophilic boys receiving regular infusions of FVIII (3 days/week) or FIX (2 days/week) can reach puberty without detectable joint abnormalities.

Prophylaxis has become gradually more common in young patients. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that 51% of children with severe hemophilia who are younger than age 6 years receive prophylaxis, increasing considerably from 33% in 1995. Although highly recommended, the high cost and difficulties in accessing peripheral veins in young patients and the potential infectious and thrombotic risks of long-term central vein catheters are important limiting factors for many patients.

General considerations regarding the treatment of bleeds in hemophilia include (1) the need to begin the treatment as soon as possible because symptoms often precede objective evidence of bleeding; because of the superior efficacy of early therapeutic intervention, classic symptoms of bleeding into the joint in a reliable patient, headaches, or automobile or other accidents require prompt replacement and further laboratory investigation; and (2) the need to avoid drugs that hamper platelet function, such as aspirin or aspirin-containing drugs; to control pain, drugs such as ibuprofen or propoxyphene are preferred.

Factor VIII and FIX are dosed in units. One unit is defined as amount of FVIII (100 ng/mL) or FIX (5 g/mL) in 1 mL of normal plasma. One unit of FVIII per kilogram of body weight increases the plasma FVIII level by 2%. One can calculate the dose needed to increase FVIII levels to 100% in a 70-kg severe hemophilia patient (<1%) using the simple formula below. Thus, 3500 units of FVIII will raise the circulating level to 100%.

    FVIII dose (IU) = Target FVIII levels 每 FVIII baseline levels x body weight (kg) x 0.5 unit/kg

The doses for FIX replacement are different from those for FVIII, because FIX recovery postinfusion is usually only 50% of the predicted value. Therefore, the formula for FIX replacement is

    FIX dose (IU) = Target FIX levels 每 FIX baseline levels x body weight (kg) x 1 unit/kg

The FVIII half-life of 8每12 h requires injections twice a day to maintain therapeutic levels, whereas FIX half-life is longer, 24 h, so that once-a-day injection is sufficient. In specific situations such as postsurgery, continuous infusion of factor may be desirable because of its safety in achieving sustained factor levels at a lower total cost.

Cryoprecipitate is enriched with FVIII protein (each bag contains 80 IU of FVIII) and was commonly used for the treatment of hemophilia A decades ago; it is still in use in some developing countries, but because of the risk of bloodborne diseases, this product should be avoided in hemophilia patients when factor concentrates are available.

Mild bleeds such as uncomplicated hemarthroses or superficial hematomas require initial therapy with factor levels of 30每50%. Additional doses to maintain levels of 15每25% for 2 or 3 days are indicated for severe hemarthroses, especially when these episodes affect the "target joint." Large hematomas, or bleeds into deep muscles, require factor levels of 50% or even higher if the clinical symptoms do not improve, and factor replacement may be required for a period of 1 week or longer. The control of serious bleeds including those that affect the oropharyngeal spaces, CNS, and the retroperitoneum require sustained protein levels of 50每100% for 7每10 days. Prophylactic replacement for surgery is aimed at achieving normal factor levels (100%) for a period of 7每10 days; replacement can then be tapered depending on the extent of the surgical wounds. Oral surgery is associated with extensive tissue damage that usually requires factor replacement for 1每3 days coupled with oral antifibrinolytic drugs.

Nontranfusion Therapy in Hemophilia

DDAVP (1-Amino-8-D-Arginine Vasopressin).

DDAVP is a synthetic vasopressin analog that causes a transient rise in FVIII and von Willebrand factor (vWF), but not FIX, through a mechanism involving release from endothelial cells. Patients with moderate or mild hemophilia A should be tested to determine if they respond to DDAVP before a therapeutic application. DDAVP at doses of 0.3 g/kg body weight, over a 20-min period, is expected to raise FVIII levels by two- to threefold over baseline, peaking between 30 and 60 min postinfusion. DDAVP does not improve FVIII levels in severe hemophilia A patients, since there are no stores to release. Repeated dosing of DDAVP results in tachyphylaxis, since the mechanism is an increase in release rather than de novo synthesis of FVIII and vWF. More than three consecutive doses become ineffective and if further therapy is indicated, FVIII replacement is required to achieve hemostasis.

Antifibrinolytic Drugs.

Bleeding in the gums, gastrointestinal tract, and during oral surgery requires the use of oral antifibrinolytic drugs such as -amino caproic acid (EACA) or tranexamic acid to control local hemostasis. The duration of the treatment depending on the clinical indication is 1 week or longer. Tranexamic acid is given at doses of 25 mg/kg three to four times a day. EACA treatment requires a loading dose of 200 mg/kg (maximum of 10 g) followed by 100 mg/kg per dose (maximum 30 g/d) every 6 h. These drugs are not indicated to control hematuria because of the risk of formation of an occlusive clot in the lumen of genitourinary tract structures.

Complications

Inhibitor Formation.

The formation of alloantibodies to FVIII or FIX is currently the major complication of hemophilia treatment. The prevalence of inhibitors to FVIII is estimated to be between 5 and 10% of all cases and 20% of severe hemophilia A patients. Inhibitors to FIX are detected in only 3每5% of all hemophilia B patients. The high-risk group for inhibitor formation includes severe deficiency (>80% of all cases of inhibitors), familial history of inhibitor, African descent, mutations in the FVIII or FIX gene resulting in deletion of large coding regions, or gross gene rearrangements. Inhibitors usually appear early in life, at a median of 2 years of age, and after 10 cumulative days of exposure. However, intensive replacement therapy such as for major surgery, intracranial bleeding, or trauma increases the risk of inhibitor formation for patients of all ages that requires close laboratory monitoring in the following weeks.

The clinical diagnosis of an inhibitor is suspected when patients do not respond to factor replacement at therapeutic doses. Inhibitors increase both morbidity and mortality in hemophilia. Because early detection of an inhibitor is critical to a successful correction of the bleeding or to eradication of the antibody, most hemophilia centers perform annual screening for inhibitors. The laboratory test required to confirm the presence of an inhibitor is an aPTT with a mix (with normal plasma). In most hemophilia patients, a 1:1 mix with normal plasma completely corrects the aPTT. In inhibitor patients, the aPTT on a 1:1 mix is abnormally prolonged, because the inhibitor neutralizes the FVIII clotting activity of the normal plasma. The Bethesda assay uses a similar principle and defines the specificity of the inhibitor and its titer. The results are expressed in Bethesda units (BU), in which 1 BU is the amount of antibody that neutralizes 50% of the FVIII or FIX present in normal plasma after 2 h of incubation at 37∼C. Clinically, inhibitor patients are classified as low responders or high responders, which provides guidelines for optimal therapy. Therapy for inhibitor patients has two goals, the control of acute bleeding episodes and the eradication of the inhibitor. For the control of bleeding episodes, low responders, those with titer <5 BU, respond well to high doses of human or porcine FVIII (50每100 U/kg), with minimal or no increase in the inhibitor titers. However, high-responder patients, those with initial inhibitor titer >10 BU or an anamnestic response in the antibody titer to >10 BU even if low titer initially, do not respond to FVIII or FIX concentrates. The control of bleeding episodes in high-responder patients can be achieved by using concentrates enriched for prothrombin, FVII, FIX, FX [prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs) or activated PCCs], and more recently by recombinant activated factor VII (FVIIa) (Fig. 116-1). The rates of therapeutic success have been higher for FVIIa than for PCC or aPCC. For eradication of the inhibitory antibody, immunosuppression alone is not effective. The most effective strategy is the immune tolerance induction (ITI) based on daily infusion of missing protein until the inhibitor disappears, typically requiring periods longer than 1 year, with success rates in the range of 60%. The management of patients with severe hemophilia A and inhibitors resistant to ITI is challenging. The use of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) combined with FVIII was thought to be effective. Although this therapy may reduce the inhibitor titers, sustained eradication is uncommon and may require two to three infusions weekly of FVIII concentrates.

Infectious Diseases.

Hepatitis C viral (HCV) infection is the major cause of morbidity and the second leading cause of death in hemophilia patients exposed to older clotting factor concentrates. The vast majority of young patients treated with plasma-derived products from 1970 to 1985 became infected with HCV. It has been estimated that >80% of patients older than 20 years of age are HCV antibody positive as of 2006. The comorbidity of the underlying liver disease in hemophilia patients is clear when these individuals require invasive procedures; correction of both genetic and acquired (secondary to liver disease) deficiencies may be needed. Infection with HIV also swept the population of patients using plasma-derived concentrates 2 decades ago. Co-infection of HCV and HIV, present in almost 50% of hemophilia patients, is an aggravating factor for the evolution of liver disease. The response to HCV antiviral therapy in hemophilia is restricted to <30% of patients and even poorer among those with both HCV and HIV infection. End-stage liver disease requiring organ transplantation may be curative for both the liver disease and for hemophilia.

Emerging Clinical Problems in Aging Hemophilia Patients.

There has been continuous improvement of the management of hemophilia since the increase in the population of adults living beyond middle age in the developing world. The life expectancy of a patient with severe hemophilia is only 10 years shorter than the general male population. In patients with mild or moderate hemophilia, life expectancy is approaching that of the male population without coagulopathy. Elderly hemophilia patients have different problems compared to the younger generation; they have more severe arthropathy and chronic pain due to suboptimal treatment, and high rates of HCV and/or HIV infections.

Early data indicate that mortality from coronary artery disease is lower in hemophilia patients than the general male population. The underlying hypocoagulability probably provides a protective effect against thrombus formation, but it does not prevent the development of atherogenesis. Similar to the general population, these patients are exposed to cardiovascular risk factors such as age, obesity, and smoking. Moreover, physical inactivity, hypertension, and chronic renal disease are commonly observed in hemophilia patients. In HIV patients on combined antiretroviral therapy, there may be a further increase in the risk of cardiovascular disease. Therefore, these patients should be carefully considered for preventive and therapeutic approaches to minimize the risk of cardiovascular disease.

Excessive replacement therapy should be avoided, and it is prudent to slowly infuse factor concentrates. Continuous infusion of clotting factor is preferable to bolus dosing in patients with cardiovascular risk factors undergoing invasive procedures. The management of an acute ischemic event and coronary revascularization should include the collaboration of hematologists and internists. The early assumption that hemophilia would protect against occlusive vascular disease may change in this aging population.

Cancer is a common cause of mortality in aging hemophilia patients as they are at risk for HIV- and HCV-related malignancies. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most prevalent primary liver cancer and a common cause of death in HIV-negative patients. The recommendations for cancer screening for the general population should be the same for age-matched hemophilia patients. Among those with high-risk HCV, a semiannual or annual ultrasound and  fetoprotein is recommended for HCC. Screening for urogenital neoplasm in the presence of hematuria or hematochezia may be delayed due to the underlying bleeding disease, thus preventing early intervention. Multidisciplinary interaction should facilitate the attempts to ensure optimal cancer prevention and treatment recommendations for those with hemophilia.

Management of Carriers of Hemophilia.

Usually hemophilia carriers, with factor levels of 50% of normal, have not been considered to be at risk for bleeding. However, a wide range of values (22每116%) have been reported due to random inactivation of the X chromosomes (lyonization). Therefore, it is important to measure the factor level of carriers to recognize those at risk of bleeding and to optimize preoperative and postoperative management. During pregnancy, both FVIII and FIX levels increase gradually until delivery. FVIII levels increase approximately two- to threefold compared to nonpregnant women, whereas a FIX increase is less pronounced. After delivery, there is a rapid fall in the pregnancy-induced rise of maternal clotting factor levels. This represents an imminent risk of bleeding that can be prevented by infusion of factor concentrate to levels of 50每70% for 3 days in the setting of vaginal delivery and up to 5 days for cesarean section. In mild cases, the use of DDAVP and/or antifibrinolytic drugs is recommended.

Factor XI Deficiency

Factor XI is a zymogen of an active serine protease (FIXa) in the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation that activates FIX (Fig. 116-1). There are two pathways for the formation of FXIa. In an aPTT-based assay, the protease is the result of activation by FXIIa in conjunction with high-molecular-weight kininogen and kallikrein. In vivo data suggest that thrombin is the physiologic activator of FXI. The generation of thrombin by the tissue-factor/factor VIIa pathway activates FXI on the platelet surface that contributes to additional thrombin generation after the clot has formed and thus augments resistance to fibrinolysis through a thrombin-activated fibrinolytic inhibitor (TAFI).

Factor XI deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder that occurs in the general population at a frequency of one in a million. However, the disease is highly prevalent among Ashkenazi and Iraqi Jewish populations, reaching a frequency of 6% as heterozygotes and 0.1 to 0.3% as homozygotes. More than 65 mutations in the FXI gene have been reported, whereas fewer mutations (two to three) are found among affected Jewish populations.

Normal FXI clotting activity levels range from 70 to 150 U/dL. In heterozygous patients with moderate deficiency, FXI ranges from 20 to 70 U/dL, whereas in homozygous or double heterozygote patients, FXI levels are <1每20 U/dL. Patients with FXI levels <10% of normal have a high risk of bleeding, but the disease phenotype does not always correlate with residual FXI clotting activity. A family history is indicative of the risk of bleeding in the propositus. Clinically, the presence of mucocutaneous hemorrhages such as bruises, gum bleeding, epistaxis, hematuria, and menorrhagia are common, especially following trauma. This hemorrhagic phenotype suggests that tissues rich in fibrinolytic activity are more susceptible to FXI deficiency. Postoperative bleeding is common but not always present, even among patients with very low FXI levels.

FXI replacement is indicated in patients with severe disease required to undergo a surgical procedure. A negative history of bleeding complications following invasive procedures does not exclude the possibility of an increased risk for hemorrhage.

Treatment: Factor XI Deficiency

The treatment of FXI deficiency is based on the infusion of FFP at doses of 15 to 20 mL/kg to maintain trough levels ranging from 10 to 20%. Because FXI has a half-life of 40每70 h, the replacement therapy can be given on alternate days. The use of antifibrinolytic drugs is beneficial to control bleeds, with the exception of hematuria or bleeds in the bladder. The development of an FXI inhibitor was observed in 10% of severely FXI-deficient patients who received replacement therapy. Patients with severe FXI deficiency who develop inhibitors usually do not bleed spontaneously. However, bleeding following a surgical procedure or trauma can be severe. In these patients, FFP and FXI concentrates should be avoided. The use of PCC/aPCC or recombinant activated FVII has been effective.
 
Rare Bleeding Disorders

Collectively, the inherited disorders resulting from deficiencies of clotting factors other than FVIII, FIX, and FXI (Table 116每1) represent a group of rare bleeding diseases. The bleeding symptoms in these patients vary from asymptomatic (dysfibrinogenemia or FVII deficiency) to life-threatening (FX or FXIII deficiency). There is no pathognomonic clinical manifestation that suggests one specific disease, but overall, in contrast to hemophilia, hemarthrosis is a rare event and bleeding in the mucosal tract or after umbilical cord clamping is common. Individuals heterozygous for plasma coagulation deficiencies are often asymptomatic. The laboratory assessment for the specific deficient factor following screening with general coagulation tests (Table 116每1) will define the diagnosis.

Replacement therapy using FFP or prothrombin complex concentrates (containing prothrombin, FVII, FIX, and FX) provides adequate hemostasis in response to bleeds or as prophylactic treatment. The use of PCC should be carefully monitored and avoided in patients with underlying liver disease, or those at high risk for thrombosis because of the risk of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.

Familial Multiple Coagulation Deficiencies

There are several bleeding disorders characterized by the inherited deficiency of more than one plasma coagulation factor. To date, the genetic defects in two of these diseases have been characterized and they provide new insights into the regulation of hemostasis by gene- encoding proteins outside blood coagulation.

Combined Deficiency of Fv and Fviii

Patients with combined FV and FVIII deficiency exhibit 5% of residual clotting activity of each factor. Interestingly, the disease phenotype is a mild bleeding tendency, often following trauma. An underlying mutation has been identified in the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC-53) gene, a mannose-binding protein localized in the Golgi apparatus that functions as a chaperone for both FV and FVIII. In other families, mutations in the multiple coagulation factor deficiency 2 (MCFD2) gene have been defined; this gene encodes a protein that forms a Ca2+每dependent complex with ERGIC-53 and provides cofactor activity in the intracellular mobilization of both FV and FVIII.

Multiple Deficiencies of Vitamin K每Dependent Coagulation Factors

Two enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism have been associated with combined deficiency of all vitamin K每dependent proteins, including the procoagulant proteins prothrombin, VII, IX, and X and the anticoagulant proteins C and S. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin that is a cofactor for carboxylation of the gamma carbon of the glutamic acid residues in the vitamin K每dependent factors, a critical step for calcium and phospholipid binding of these proteins (Fig. 116-2). The enzymes -glutamylcarboxylase and epoxide reductase are critical for the metabolism and regeneration of vitamin K. Mutations in the genes encoding the gamma-carboxylase (GGCX) or vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) result in defective enzymes and thus in vitamin K每dependent factors with reduced activity, varying from 1 to 30% of normal. The disease phenotype is characterized by mild to severe bleeding episodes present from birth. Some patients respond to high doses of vitamin K. For severe bleeding, replacement therapy with FFP or PCC may be necessary for achieving full hemostatic control.

Figure 116-2

 
 
 
The vitamin K cycle. Vitamin K is a cofactor for the formation of -carboxyglutamic acid residues on coagulation proteins. Vitamin K每dependent -glutamylcarboxylase, the enzyme that catalyzes the vitamin K epoxide reductase, regenerates reduced vitamin K. Warfarin blocks the action of the reductase and competitively inhibits the effects of vitamin K.
 
 

Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a clinicopathologic syndrome characterized by widespread intravascular fibrin formation in response to excessive blood protease activity that overcomes the natural anticoagulant mechanisms. There are several underlying pathologies associated with DIC (Table 116每2).

Table 116每2 Common Clinical Causes of Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

 
 
Sepsis  Immunologic disorders  
Bacterial: Staphylococci, streptococci, pneumococci, meningococci, gram-negative bacilli
Viral
Mycotic
Parasitic
Rickettsial
 Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction
Organ or tissue transplant rejection
Graft-versus-host disease
 
Trauma and tissue injury  Drugs  
Brain injury (gunshot)
Extensive burns
Fat embolism
Rhabdomyolysis
 Fibrinolytic agents
Aprotinin
Warfarin (especially in neonates with protein C deficiency)
Prothrombin complex concentrates
Recreational drugs (amphetamines)
 
Vascular disorders  Envenomation  
Giant hemangiomas (Kasabach-Merritt syndrome)
Large vessel aneurysms (e.g., aorta)
 Snake
Insects
 
Obstetrical complications  Liver disease  
Abruptio placentae
Amniotic-fluid embolism
Dead fetus syndrome
Septic abortion
 Fulminant hepatic failure
Cirrhosis
Fatty liver of pregnancy
 
Cancer  Miscellaneous  
Adenocarcinoma (prostate, pancreas, etc.)
Hematologicmalignancies (acute promyelocytic leukemia)
 Shock
Respiratory distress syndrome
Massive transfusion
 
 

 

The most common causes are bacterial sepsis, malignant disorders such as solid tumors or acute promyelocytic leukemia, and obstetric causes. DIC is diagnosed in almost one-half of pregnant women with abruptio placentae, or with amniotic fluid embolism. Trauma, particularly to the brain, can also result in DIC. The exposure of blood to phospholipids from damaged tissue, hemolysis, and endothelial damage are all contributing factors to the development of DIC in this setting. Purpura fulminans is a severe form of DIC resulting from thrombosis of extensive areas of the skin; it affects predominantly young children following viral or bacterial infection, particularly those with inherited or acquired hypercoagulability due to deficiencies of the components of the protein C pathway. Neonateshomozygous for protein C deficiency also present high risk for purpura fulminans with or without thrombosis of large vessels.

The central mechanism of DIC is the uncontrolled generation of thrombin by exposure of the blood to pathologic levels of tissue factor (Fig. 116-3). Simultaneous suppression of physiologic anticoagulant mechanisms and abnormal fibrinolysis further accelerate the process. Together, these abnormalities contribute to systemic fibrin deposition in small and midsize vessels. The duration and intensity of the fibrin deposition can compromise the blood supply of many organs, especially the lung, kidney, liver, and brain, with consequent organ failure. The sustained activation of coagulation results in consumption of clotting factors and platelets, which in turn leads to systemic bleeding. This is further aggravated by secondary hyperfibrinolysis. Studies in animals demonstrate that the fibrinolytic system is indeed suppressed at the time of maximal activation of coagulation. Interestingly, in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia, a severe hyperfibrinolytic state often occurs in addition to the coagulation activation. The release of several proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor  play central roles in mediating the coagulation defects in DIC and symptoms associated with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS).

Figure 116-3

 
 
 
The pathophysiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Interactions between coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways result in bleeding and thrombosis in the microcirculation in patients with DIC.
 
 

Clinical manifestations of DIC are related to the magnitude of the imbalance of hemostasis, to the underlying disease, or to both. The most common findings are bleeding ranging from oozing from venipuncture sites, petechiae, and ecchymoses to severe hemorrhage from the gastrointestinal tract, lung, or into the CNS. In chronic DIC, the bleeding symptoms are discrete and restricted to skin or mucosal surfaces. The hypercoagulability of DIC manifests as the occlusion of vessels in the microcirculation and resulting organ failure. Thrombosis of large vessels and cerebral embolism can also occur. Hemodynamic complications and shock are common among patients with acute DIC. The mortality ranges from 30 to >80% depending on the underlying disease, the severity of the DIC, and the age of the patient.

The diagnosis of clinically significant DIC is based on the presence of clinical and/or laboratory abnormalities of coagulation or thrombocytopenia. The laboratory diagnosis of DIC should prompt a search for the underlying disease if it is not already apparent. There is no single test that establishes the diagnosis of DIC. The laboratory investigation should include coagulation tests [aPTT, PT, thrombin time (TT)] and markers of fibrin degradation products (FDPs), in addition to platelet and red cell count and analysis of the blood smear. These tests should be repeated over a period of 6每8 hours because an initially mild abnormality can change dramatically in patients with severe DIC.

Common findings include the prolongation of PT and/or aPTT; platelet counts 100,000/L3, or a rapid decline in platelet numbers; the presence of schistocytes (fragmented red cells) in the blood smear; and elevated levels of FDP. The most sensitive test for DIC is the FDP level. DIC is an unlikely diagnosis in the presence of normal levels of FDP. The D-dimer test is more specific for detection of fibrin〞but not fibrinogen〞degradation products and indicates that the cross-linked fibrin has been digested by plasmin. Because fibrinogen has a prolonged half-life, plasma levels diminish acutely only in severe cases of DIC. High-grade DIC is also associated with levels of antithrombin III or plasminogen activity <60% of normal.

Chronic DIC

Low-grade, compensated DIC can occur in clinical situations including giant hemangioma, metastatic carcinoma, or the dead fetus syndrome. Plasma levels of FDP or d-dimers are elevated. aPTT, PT, and fibrinogen values are within the normal range or high. Mild thrombocytopenia or normal platelet counts are also common findings. Red cell fragmentation is often detected but at a lower degree than in acute DIC.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis between DIC and severe liver disease is challenging and requires serial measurements of the laboratory parameters of DIC. Patients with severe liver disease are at risk for bleeding and manifest laboratory features including thrombocytopenia (due to platelet sequestration, portal hypertension, or hypersplenism), decreased synthesis of coagulation factors and natural anticoagulants, and elevated levels of FDP due to reduced hepatic clearance. However, in contrast to DIC, these laboratory parameters in liver disease do not change rapidly. Other important differential findings include the presence of portal hypertension or other clinical or laboratory evidence of an underlying liver disease.

Microangiopathic disorders such as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura present an acute clinical onset of illness accompanied by thrombocytopenia, red cell fragmentation, and multiorgan failure. However, there is no consumption of clotting factors or hyperfibrinolysis.

Treatment: Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

The morbidity and mortality associated with DIC are primarily related to the underlying disease rather than the complications of the DIC. The control or elimination of the underlying cause should therefore be the primary concern. Patients with severe DIC require control of hemodynamic parameters, respiratory support, and sometimes invasive surgical procedures. Attempts to treat DIC without accompanying treatment of the causative disease are likely to fail.

Management of Hemorrhagic Symptoms

The control of bleeding in DIC patients with marked thrombocytopenia (platelet counts <10,000每20,000/L3) and low levels of coagulation factors will require replacement therapy. The PT (>1.5 times the normal) provides a good indicator of the severity of the clotting factor consumption. Replacement with FFP is indicated (1 unit of FFP increases most coagulation factors by 3% in an adult without DIC). Low levels of fibrinogen (<100 mg/dL) or brisk hyperfibrinolysis will require infusion of cryoprecipitate (plasma fraction enriched for fibrinogen, FVIII, and vWF). The replacement of 10 U of cryoprecipitate for every 2每3 U of FFP is sufficient to correct the hemostasis. The transfusion scheme must be adjusted according to the patient's clinical and laboratory evolution. Platelet concentrates at a dose of 1每2 U/10 kg body weight are sufficient for most DIC patients with severe thrombocytopenia.

Clotting factor concentrates are not recommended for control of bleeding in DIC because of the limited efficacy afforded by replacement of single factors (FVIII or FIX concentrates), and the high risk of products containing traces of aPCCs that further aggravate the disease.

Replacement of Coagulation or Fibrinolysis Inhibitors

Drugs to control coagulation such as heparin, ATIII concentrates, or antifibrinolytic drugs have all been tried in the treatment of DIC. Low doses of continuous infusion heparin (5每10 U/kg per h) may be effective in patients with low-grade DIC associated with solid tumor, acute promyelocytic leukemia, or in a setting with recognized thrombosis. Heparin is also indicated for the treatment of purpura fulminans during the surgical resection of giant hemangiomas and during removal of a dead fetus. In acute DIC, the use of heparin is likely to aggravate bleeding. To date, the use of heparin in patients with severe DIC has no proven survival benefit.

The use of antifibrinolytic drugs, EACA, or tranexamic acid, to prevent fibrin degradation by plasmin may reduce bleeding episodes in patients with DIC and confirmed hyperfibrinolysis. However, these drugs can increase the risk of thrombosis and concomitant use of heparin is indicated. Patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia or those with chronic DIC associated with giant hemangiomas are among the few patients who may benefit from this therapy.

The use of protein C concentrates to treat purpura fulminans associated with acquired protein C deficiency or meningococcemia has been proven efficacious. The results from the replacement of ATIII in early-phase studies are promising but require further study.

Vitamin K Deficiency

Vitamin K每dependent proteins are a heterogenous group, including clotting factor proteins and also proteins found in bone, lung, kidney, and placenta. Vitamin K mediates posttranslational modification of glutamate residues to -carboxylglutamate, a critical step for the activity of vitamin K每dependent proteins for calcium binding and proper assembly to phospholipid membranes (Fig. 116-2). Inherited deficiency of the functional activity of the enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism, notably the GGCX or VKORC1 (see above), results in bleeding disorders. The amount of vitamin K in the diet is often limiting for the carboxylation reaction; thus recycling of the vitamin K is essential to maintain normal levels of vitamin K每dependent proteins. In adults, low dietary intake alone is seldom reason for severe vitamin K deficiency but may become common in association with the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics. Disease or surgical interventions that affect the ability of the intestinal tract to absorb vitamin K, either through anatomic alterations or by changing the fat content of bile salts and pancreatic juices in the proximal small bowel, can result in significant reduction of vitamin K levels. Chronic liver diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis also deplete vitamin K stores. Neonatal vitamin K deficiency and the resulting hemorrhagic disease of the newborn have been almost entirely eliminated by routine administration of vitamin K to all neonates. Prolongation of PT values is the most common and earliest finding in vitamin K每deficient patients due to reduction in prothrombin, FVII, FIX, and FX levels. FVII has the shortest half-life among these factors that can prolong the PT before changes in the aPTT. Parenteral administration of vitamin K at a total dose of 10 mg is sufficient to restore normal levels of clotting factor within 8每10 h. In the presence of ongoing bleeding or a need for immediate correction before an invasive procedure, replacement with FFP or PCC is required. The latter should be avoided in patients with severe underlying liver disorders due to high risk of thrombosis. The reversal of excessive anticoagulant therapy with warfarin or warfarin-like drugs can be achieved by minimal doses of vitamin K (1 mg orally or by intravenous injection) for asymptomatic patients. This strategy can diminish the risk of bleeding while maintaining therapeutic anticoagulation for an underlying prothrombotic state.

In patients with life-threatening bleeds, the use of recombinant factor VIIa in nonhemophilia patients on anticoagulant therapy has been shown to be effective at restoring hemostasis rapidly, allowing emergency surgical intervention. However, patients with underlying vascular disease, vascular trauma and other comorbidities are at risk for thromboembolic complications that affect both arterial and venous systems. Thus, the use of factor VIIa in this setting is limited to administration of low doses given for only a limited number of injections. Close monitoring for vascular complications is highly indicated.

Coagulation Disorders Associated with Liver Failure

The liver is central to hemostasis because it is the site of synthesis and clearance of most procoagulant and natural anticoagulant proteins and of essential components of the fibrinolytic system. Liver failure is associated with a high risk of bleeding due to deficient synthesis of procoagulant factors and enhanced fibrinolysis. Thrombocytopenia is common in patients with liver disease, and may be due to congestive splenomegaly (hypersplenism), or immune-mediated shortened platelet lifespan (primary biliary cirrhosis). In addition, several anatomic abnormalities secondary to underlying liver disease further promote the occurrence of hemorrhage (Table 116每3). Dysfibrinogenemia is a relatively common finding in patients with liver disease due to impaired fibrin polymerization. The development of DIC concomitant to chronic liver disease is not uncommon and may enhance the risk for bleeding. Laboratory evaluation is mandatory for an optimal therapeutic strategy, either to control ongoing bleeding or to prepare patients with liver disease for invasive procedures. Typically, these patients present with prolonged PT, aPTT, and TT depending on the degree of liver damage, thrombocytopenia, and normal or slight increase of FDP. Fibrinogen levels are diminished only in fulminant hepatitis, decompensated cirrhosis or advanced liver disease, or in the presence of DIC. The presence of prolonged TT and normal fibrinogen and FDP levels suggest dysfibrinogenemia. FVIII levels are often normal or elevated in patients with liver failure, and decreased levels suggest superimposing DIC. Because FV is only synthesized in the hepatocyte and is not a vitamin K每dependent protein, reduced levels of FV may be an indicator of hepatocyte failure. Normal levels of FV and low levels of FVII suggest vitamin K deficiency. Vitamin K levels may be reduced in patients with liver failure due to compromised storage in hepatocellular disease, changes in bile acids or cholestasis that can diminish the absorption of vitamin K. Replacement of vitamin K may be desirable (10 mg given by slow intravenous injection) to improve hemostasis.

Table 116每3 Coagulation Disorders and Hemostasis in Liver Disease

 
 
Bleeding  
Portal hypertension 
  Esophageal varices 
Thrombocytopenia 
  Splenomegaly 
  Chronic or acute DIC 
Decreased synthesis of clotting factors 
  Hepatocyte failure 
  Vitamin K deficiency 
Systemic fibrinolysis 
DIC 
Dysfibrinogenemia 
Thrombosis  
Decreased synthesis of coagulation inhibitors: protein C, protein S, antithrombin 
  Hepatocyte failure 
  Vitamin K deficiency (protein C, protein S) 
Failure to clear activated coagulation proteins (DIC) 
Dysfibrinogenemia 
Iatrogenic: Transfusion of prothrombin complex concentrates 
  Antifibrinolytic agents: EACA, tranexamic acid 
 


Abbreviations: DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; EACA, -aminocaproic acid.
 

Treatment with FFP is the most effective to correct hemostasis in patients with liver failure. Infusion of FFP (5每10 mL/kg; each bag contains 200 mL) is sufficient to ensure 10每20% of normal levels of clotting factors but not correction of PT or aPTT. Even high doses of FFP (20 mL/kg) do not correct the clotting times in all patients. Monitoring for clinical symptoms and clotting times will determine if repeated doses are required 8每12 h after the first infusion. Platelet concentrates are indicated when platelet counts are <10,000每20,000/L3 to control an ongoing bleed or immediately before an invasive procedure if counts are <50,000/L3. Cryoprecipitate is indicated only when fibrinogen levels are less than 100 mg/mL; dosing is six bags for a 70-kg patient daily. Prothrombin complex concentrate infusion in patients with liver failure should be avoided due to the high risk of thrombotic complications. The safety of the use of antifibrinolytic drugs to control bleeding in patients with liver failure is not yet well defined and should be avoided.

Liver Disease and Thromboembolism

The clinical bleeding phenotype of hemostasis in patients with stable liver disease is often mild or even asymptomatic. However, as the disease progresses, the hemostatic balance is less stable and more easily disturbed than in healthy individuals. Furthermore, the hemostatic balance is compromised by comorbid complications such as infections and renal failure (Fig. 116-4). Based on the clinical bleeding complications in patients with cirrhosis and laboratory evidence of hypocoagulation such as a prolonged PT/aPTT, it has long been assumed that these patients are protected against thrombotic disease. Cumulative clinical experience, however, has demonstrated that these patients are at risk for thrombosis, especially those with advanced liver disease. Although hypercoagulability could explain the occurrence of venous thrombosis, according to Virchow's triad, hemodynamic changes and damaged vasculature may also be a contributing factor, and both processes may potentially also occur in patients with liver disease. Liver-related thrombosis, in particular, thrombosis of the portal and mesenteric veins, is common in patients with advanced cirrhosis. Hemodynamic changes such as decreased portal flow, and evidence that inherited thrombophilia may enhance the risk for portal vein thrombosis in patients with cirrhosis suggest that hypercoagulability may play a role as well. Patients with liver disease develop deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism at appreciable rates (ranging from 0.5 to 1.9%). The implication of these findings is relevant to the erroneous exclusion of thrombosis in patients with advanced liver disease, even in the presence of prolongation of routine clotting times, and caution should be advised on overcorrection of these laboratory abnormalities.

Figure 116-4

 
 
 
Balance of hemostasis in liver disease. TAFI, thrombin-activated fibriolytic inhibitor; t-PA, tissue plasminogen activator; VWF, von Willebrand factor.
 
 

Acquired Inhibitors of Coagulation Factors

An acquired inhibitor is an immune-mediated disease characterized by the presence of an autoantibody against a specific clotting factor. FVIII is the most common target of antibody formation, but inhibitors to prothrombin, FV, FIX, FX, and FXI are also reported. The disease occurs predominantly in older adults (median age of 60 years), but occasionally in pregnant or postpartum women with no previous history of bleeding. In 50% of the patients with inhibitors, no underlying disease is identified at the time of diagnosis. In the remaining, the causes are automminune diseases, malignancies (lymphomas, prostate cancer), dermatologic diseases, and pregnancy. Bleeding episodes occur commonly in soft tissues, in the gastrointestinal or urinary tracts, and skin. In contrast to hemophilia, hemarthrosis is rare in these patients. Retroperitoneal hemorrhages and other life-threatening bleeding may appear suddenly. The overall mortality in untreated patients ranges from 8 to 22%, and most deaths occur within the first few weeks after presentation. The diagnosis is based on the prolonged aPTT with normal PT and TT. The aPTT remains prolonged after mixture of the test plasma with equal amounts of pooled normal plasma for 2 h at 37∼C. The Bethesda assay using FVIII-deficient plasma as performed for inhibitor detection in hemophilia will confirm the diagnosis. Major bleeding is treated with high doses of human or porcine FVIII, PCC/PCCa, or recombinant FVIIa. High-dose intravenous gamma globulin, and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody have been reported to be effective in patients with autoantibodies to FVIII. In contrast to hemophilia, inhibitors in nonhemophilia patients are sometimes responsive to prednisone alone or in association with cytotoxic therapy (e.g., cyclophosphamide).

Topical plasma-derived bovine and human thrombin are commonly used in the United States and worldwide. These effective hemostatic sealants are used during major surgery such as for cardiovascular, thoracic, neurologic, pelvic, and trauma indications, as well as in the setting of extensive burns. The development of antibody formation to the xenoantigen or its contaminant (bovine clotting protein) has the potential to show cross-reactivity with human clotting factors that may hamper their function and induce bleeding.

Clinical features of these antibodies include bleeding from a primary hemostastatic defect or coagulopathy that sometimes can be life threatening. The clinical diagnosis of these acquired coagulopathies is often complicated by the fact that the bleeding episodes may be detectable during or immediately following major surgery that could be assumed to be due to the procedure itself.

Notably, the risk of this complication is further increased by repeated exposure to topical thrombin preparations. Thus, a careful medical history of previous surgical interventions that may have occurred even decades earlier is critical to assessing risk.

The laboratory abnormalities are reflected by combined prolongation of the aPTT and PT that often fail to improve by transfusion of FFP and vitamin K. The abnormal laboratory tests cannot be corrected by mixing a test with equal parts of normal plasma that denotes the presence of inhibitory antibodies. The diagnosis of a specific antibody is obtained by the determination of the residual activity of human FV or other suspected human clotting factor. There are no commercially available assays specific for bovine thrombin coagulopathy.

There are no established treatment guidelines. Platelet transfusions have been utilized as a source of FV replacement for patients with FV inhibitors. Frequent injections of FFP and vitamin K supplementation may function as co-adjuvant rather than an effective treatment of the coagulopathy itself. Experience with recombinant FVIIa as a bypass agent is limited, and outcomes have been generally poor. Specific treatments to eradicate the antibodies based on immunosuppression with steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, or serial plasmapheresis have been sporadically reported. Patients should be advised to avoid any topical thrombin sealant in the future.

Recently, novel plasma-derived and recombinant human thrombin preparations for topical hemostasis have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. These preparations have demonstrated hemostatic efficacy with reduced immunogenicity compared to the first generation of bovine thrombin products.

The presence of lupus anticoagulant can be associated with venous or arterial thrombotic disease. However, bleeding has also been reported in lupus anticoagulant; it is due to the presence of antibodies to prothrombin, which results in hypoprothrombinemia. Both disorders show a prolonged PTT that do not correct on mixing. To distinguish acquired inhibitors from lupus anticoagulant, note that the dilute Russell's viper venom test and the hexagonal-phase phospholipids test will be negative in patients with an acquired inhibitor and positive in patients with lupus anticoagulants. Moreover, lupus anticoagulant interferes with the clotting activity of many factors (FVIII, FIX, FXII, FXI), whereas acquired inhibitors are specific to a single factor.
 
Further Readings

Caldwell SH et al: Coagulation disorders and hemostasis in liver disease: Pathophysiology and critical assessment of current management. Hepatology 44:1039, 2006[PMID: 17006940] 

 
Franchini M, Mannucci PM: Co-morbidities and quality of life in elderly persons with haemophilia. Br J Haematol 148:522, 2010[PMID: 19958358] 

 
Hoyer LW: Hemophilia A. N Engl J Med 330:39, 1994 

 
Key NS, Negrier C: Coagulation factor concentrates: Past, present, and future. Lancet 370:439, 2007[PMID: 17679021] 

 
Kessler CM, Ortel TL: Recent developments in topical thrombins. Thromb Haemost 101:15, 2009 

 
Levi M, Opal SM: Coagulation abnormalities in critically ill patients. Critical Care 10:222, 2006[PMID: 16879728] 

 
Mannucci PM et al: Recessively inherited coagulation disorders. Blood 104:1243, 2004[PMID: 15138162] 

 
Stafford DW: The vitamin K cycle. J Thromb Haemost 3:1873, 2005[PMID: 16102054] 
 
 

^^
Overview of Thrombosis

General Overview

Thrombosis is defined as "hemostasis in the wrong place,"1 and it is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in a wide range of arterial and venous diseases and patient populations. In 2009 in the United States, an estimated 785,000 people had a new coronary thrombotic event and about 470,000 had a recurrent ischemic episode. Each year, approximately 795,000 people have a new or recurrent stroke. Annually, more than 200,000 new cases of venous thromboembolism are found; 30% of these individuals die within 30 days, with one-fifth having sudden death due to pulmonary embolism.

1 Macfarlane RG. Haemostasis: Introduction. Brit Med Bull 33:183, 1977.

In the nondiseased state, physiologic hemostasis reflects a delicate interplay between factors that promote and inhibit blood clotting, favoring the former. This response is crucial as it prevents uncontrolled hemorrhage and exsanguination following injury. In specific settings, the same processes that regulate normal hemostasis can cause pathological thrombosis leading to arterial or venous occlusion. Importantly, many commonly used therapeutic interventions may also alter the thrombotic每hemostatic balance adversely.

Hemostasis and thrombosis primarily involve the interplay among three factors: the vessel wall, coagulation proteins, and platelets. Many prevalent acute vascular diseases are due to thrombus formation within a vessel, including myocardial infarction, thrombotic cerebrovascular events, and venous thrombosis. Although the end result is vessel occlusion and tissue ischemia, the pathophysiologic processes governing these pathologies have similarities as well as distinct differences. While many of the pathways regulating thrombus formation are similar to those that regulate hemostasis, the processes triggering thrombosis and, often, perpetuating the thrombus are distinct. In venous thrombosis, primary hypercoagulable states reflecting defects in the proteins governing coagulation and/or fibrinolysis or secondary hypercoagulable states involving abnormalities of blood vessels and blood flow lead to thrombosis. By contrast, arterial thrombosis is highly dependent upon the state of the vessel wall, the platelet, and factors related to blood flow.
 
Arterial Thrombosis

Overview of Arterial Thrombosis

In arterial thrombosis, the platelet and abnormalities of the vessel wall typically play a key role in vessel occlusion. Arterial thrombus forms via a series of sequential steps in which platelets adhere to the vessel wall, additional platelets are recruited, and thrombin is activated. The regulation of platelet adhesion, activation, aggregation, and recruitment will be described in detail below. In addition, while the primary function of platelets is regulation of hemostasis, our understanding of their role in other processes, such as immunity and inflammation, continues to grow.

Arterial Thrombosis and Vascular Disease

Arterial thrombosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality both in the United States and, increasingly, worldwide. Coronary heart disease is estimated to cause about 1 of every 5 deaths in the United States. In addition to the 785,000 Americans who will have a new coronary event, an additional 195,000 silent first myocardial infarctions are projected to occur annually. Each year, about 795,000 people experience a new or recurrent stroke, although not all are caused by thrombotic occlusion of the vessel. Approximately 610,000 strokes are first events and 185,000 are recurrent events; it is estimated that 1 of every 18 deaths in the United States is due to stroke.

The Platelet

Many processes in platelets have parallels with other cell types, such as the presence of specific receptors and signaling pathways; however, unlike most cells, platelets lack a nucleus and are unable to adapt to changing biologic settings by altered gene transcription. Platelets sustain limited protein synthetic capacity from megakaryocyte-derived mRNA. Most of the molecules needed to respond to various stimuli, however, are maintained in storage granules and membrane compartments.

Platelets are disc-shaped, very small, anucleate cells (1每5 m in diameter) that circulate in the blood at concentrations of 200每400,000/L, with an average lifespan of 7每10 days. Platelets are derived from megakaryocytes, polyploidal hematopoietic cells found in the bone marrow. The primary regulator of platelet formation is thrombopoietin (TPO). The precise mechanism by which megakaryocytes produce and release fully formed platelets is unclear, but the process likely involves formation of proplatelets, pseudopod-like structures generated by the evagination of the cytoplasm from which platelets bud. Platelet granules are synthesized in megakaryocytes before thrombopoiesis and contain an array of prothrombotic, proinflammatory, and antimicrobial mediators. The two major types of platelet granules, alpha and dense, are distinguished by their size, abundance, and content. Alpha-granules contain soluble coagulation proteins, adhesion molecules, growth factors, integrins, cytokines, and inflammatory modulators. Platelet dense-granules are smaller than alpha-granules and less abundant. While alpha-granules contain proteins that may be more important in the inflammatory response, dense-granules contain high concentrations of small molecules, including ADP and serotonin, that influence platelet aggregation.

Platelet Adhesion

(See Fig. 117-1) The formation of a thrombus is initiated by the adherence of platelets to the damaged vessel wall. Damage exposes subendothelial components responsible for triggering platelet reactivity, including collagen, von Willebrand factor, fibronectin, and other adhesive proteins, such as vitronectin and thrombospondin. The hemostatic response may vary, depending on the extent of damage, the specific proteins exposed, as well as flow conditions. Certain proteins are expressed on the platelet surface that subsequently regulate collagen-induced platelet adhesion, particularly under flow conditions, and include glycoprotein (GP) IV, GPVI, and the integrin 21. The platelet GPIb-IX-V complex adhesive receptor is central both to platelet adhesion and to the initiation of platelet activation. Damage to the blood vessel wall exposes subendothelial von Willebrand factor and collagen to the circulating blood. The GPIb-IX-V complex binds to the exposed von Willebrand factor, causing platelets to adhere (Fig. 117-1). In addition, the engagement of the GPIb-IX-V complex with ligand induces signaling pathways that lead to platelet activation. von Willebrand factor每bound GPIb-IX-V promotes a calcium-dependent conformational change in the GPIIb/IIIa receptor, transforming it from an inactive low-affinity state to an active high-affinity receptor for fibrinogen.

Figure 117-1

 
 
 
Platelet activation and thrombosis. Platelets circulate in an inactive form in the vasculature. Damage to the endothelium and/or external stimuli activates platelets that adhere to the exposed subendothelial von Willebrand factor and collagen. This adhesion leads to activation of the platelet, shape change, and the synthesis and release of TxA2, 5-HT, and ADP. Platelet stimuli causes conformational change in the platelet integrin glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor leading to the high-affinity binding of fibrinogen and the formation of a stable platelet thrombus (TxA2, thromboxane; 5-HT, serotonin).
 
 

Platelet Activation

The activation of platelets is controlled by a variety of surface receptors that regulate various functions in the activation process. Platelet receptors are stimulated by a wide variety of agonists and adhesive proteins that result in variable degrees of activation. In general terms, the stimulation of platelet receptors triggers two specific processes: (1) activation of internal signaling pathways that lead to further platelet activation and granule release and (2) the capacity of the platelet to bind to other adhesive proteins/platelets. Both of these processes contribute to the formation of a thrombus.

Many families and subfamilies of receptors are found on platelets that regulate a variety of platelet functions. These include the seven transmembrane receptor family, which is the main agonist-stimulated receptor family. Several seven transmembrane receptors are found on platelets, including the ADP receptors, prostaglandin receptors, lipid receptors, and chemokine receptors. Receptors for thrombin comprise the major seven transmembrane receptors found on platelets. Among this last group, the first identified was the protease activation receptor 1 (PAR1). The PAR class of receptors has a distinct mechanism of activation that involves specific cleavage of the N-terminus of thrombin, which, in turn, acts as a ligand for the receptor. Other PAR receptors are present on platelets, including PAR2 (not activated by thrombin) and PAR4. Adenosine receptors are responsible for transduction of ADP-induced signaling events, which are initiated by the binding of ADP to purinergic receptors on the platelet surface. There are several distinct ADP receptors, classified as P2X1, P2Y1, and P2Y12 (Fig. 117-2). The activation of both the P2Y12 and P2Y1 receptors is essential for ADP-induced platelet aggregation. The thienopyridine derivatives, clopidogrel and prasugrel, are clinically utilized inhibitors of ADP-induced platelet aggregation.

Figure 117-2

 
 
 
Summary of the coagulation pathways. Specific coagulation factors ("a" indicates activated form) are responsible for the conversion of soluble plasma fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin. This process occurs via a series of linked reactions in which the enzymatically active product subsequently converts the downstream inactive protein into an active serine protease. In addition, the activation of thrombin leads to stimulation of platelets HK, high-molecular-weight kininogen; PK, prekallikrein; TF, tissue factor.
 
 

Platelet Aggregation

Activation of platelets results in a rapid series of signal transduction events, including tyrosine kinase, serine/threonine kinase, and lipid kinase activation. In unstimulated platelets, the major platelet integrin GPIIb/IIIa is maintained in an inactive conformation and functions as a low-affinity adhesion receptor for fibrinogen. This integrin is unique as it is only expressed on platelets. After stimulation, the interaction between fibrinogen and GPIIb/IIIa forms intercellular connections between platelets leading to the formation of a platelet aggregate (Fig. 117-1). A calcium-sensitive conformational change in the extracellular domain of GPIIb/IIIa enables the high-affinity binding of soluble plasma fibrinogen as a result of a complex network of inside-out signaling events. The GPIIb/IIIa receptor serves as a bidirectional conduit with GPIIb/IIIa每mediated signaling (outside-in) occurring immediately after the binding of fibrinogen. This leads to additional intracellular signaling that further stabilizes the platelet aggregate and transforms platelet aggregation from a reversible to an irreversible process (inside-out).

The Role of Platelets and Thrombosis in Inflammation

Inflammation plays an important role during the acute thrombotic phase of acute coronary syndromes. Patients with acute coronary syndromes have not only increased interactions between platelets (homotypic aggregates), but also increased interactions between platelets and leukocytes (heterotypic aggregates) detectable in circulating blood. These latter aggregates form when platelets are activated and adhere to circulating leukocytes. Platelets bind via P-selectin (CD62P) expressed on the surface of activated platelets to the leukocyte receptor, P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1). This association leads to increased expression of CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1) on leukocytes, which itself supports interactions with platelets partially via bivalent fibrinogen linking this integrin with its platelet surface counterpart, GPIIb/IIIa. Platelet surface P-selectin also induces the expression of tissue factor on monocytes, which promotes fibrin formation.

In addition to platelet每monocyte aggregates, the immunomodulator, soluble CD40 ligand (CD40L or CD154), also reflects a link between thrombosis and inflammation. The CD40 ligand is a trimeric transmembrane protein of the tumor necrosis factor family and, with its receptor CD40, is an important contributor to the inflammatory process leading both to thrombosis and atherosclerosis. While many immunologic and vascular cells have been found to express CD40 and/or CD40 ligand, in platelets, CD40 ligand is rapidly translocated to the surface after stimulation and is upregulated in the newly formed thrombus. The surface-expressed CD40 ligand is cleaved from the platelet to generate a soluble fragment (soluble CD40 ligand).

Links have also been established among platelets, infection, immunity, and inflammation. Bacterial infections are associated with a transient increase in the risk of acute thrombotic events, such as acute myocardial infarction and stroke. In addition, platelets contribute significantly to the pathophysiology and high mortality rates of sepsis. The expression, functionality, and signaling pathways of toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been established in platelets. Stimulation of platelet TLR2 directly activates the platelet's thrombotic and inflammatory responses, and live bacteria induce a proinflammatory response in platelets in a TLR2-dependent manner, suggesting a mechanism by which specific bacteria and bacterial components can directly activate platelet-dependent thrombosis.

Genetics of Arterial Thrombosis

Some studies have associated arterial thrombosis with genetic variants (Table 117每2A); however, in the area of genetic variability and platelet function, studies have primarily dealt with pharmacogenetics, the field of pharmacology dealing with the interindividual variability in drug response based on genetic determinants (Table 117每1). This focus has been driven by the wide variability among individuals in terms of response to antithrombotic drugs and the lack of a common explanation for this variance. The best described is the issue of "aspirin resistance," although heterogeneity for other antithrombotics (e.g., clopidogrel) has also been extensively examined. Primarily, platelet-dependent genetic determinants have been defined at the level of (a) drug effect, (b) drug compliance, and (c) drug metabolism. Many candidate platelet genes have been studied for their interaction with antiplatelet and antithrombotic agents.

Table 117每1 Genetic Variation and Pharmacogenetic Responses to Platelet Inhibitors

 
 
Potential Gene Altered Target Therapeutic Class Specific Drug 
P2Y1 and P2Y12CYP2C19, CYP3A4, CYP3A5  ADP receptor inhibitors Clopidogrel, prasugrel 
COX1, COX2  Cyclooxygenase inhibitors Aspirin 
PlA1/A2 INTB3, GPIbA  Receptor inhibitors: Glycoprotein IIb-IIIa receptor inhibitors Abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban 
 

 
Table 117每2 Heritable Causes of Arterial and Venous Thrombosis

 
 
A. Arterial Thrombosis  
Platelet Receptors  
  3 and 2 integrins 
  PlA2 polymorphism
  
  Fc(gamma)RIIA 
  GPIV T13254C polymorphism 
  GPIb 
  Thrombin receptor PAR-1-5061  D 
Redox Enzymes  
  Plasma glutathione peroxidase 
  H2 promoter haplotype 
  Endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
  每786T/C, 每922A/G, 每1468T/A 
  Paraoxonase 
  每107T allele, 192R allele 
Homocysteine  
  Cystathionine -synthase 833T  C 
  5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C  T 
B. Venous Thrombosis  
Procoagulant Proteins  
  Fibrinogen 
  每455G/A, 每854G/A 
  Prothrombin (20210G  A) 
Protein C Anticoagulant Pathway  
  Factor V Leiden: 1691G  A (Arg506Gln) 
  Thrombomodulin 1481C  T (Ala455Val) 
Fibrinolytic Proteins with Known Polymorphisms  
  Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
  7351C/T, 20 099T/C in exon 6, 27 445T/A in intron 10 
  Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) 
  4G/5G insertion/deletion polymorphism at position 每675 
Homocysteine  
  Cystathionine -synthase 833T  C 
  5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C  T 
 

 

Many patients have an inadequate response to the inhibitory effects of aspirin. Heritable factors contribute to the variability; however, ex vivo tests of residual platelet responsiveness after aspirin administration have not provided firm evidence for a pharmacogenetic interaction between aspirin and COX1 or other relevant platelet receptors. As such, currently, there is no clinical indication for genotyping to optimize aspirin's antiplatelet efficiency. For the platelet P2Y12 receptor inhibitor clopidogrel, additional data suggest that genetics may affect the drug's responsiveness and utility. The responsible genetic variant appears not to be the expected P2Y12 receptor but an enzyme responsible for drug metabolism. Clopidogrel is a prodrug, and liver metabolism by specific cytochrome P450 enzymes is required for activation. The genes encoding the CYP-dependent oxidative steps are polymorphic, and carriers of specific alleles of the CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 loci have increased platelet aggregability. Increased platelet activity has also been specifically associated with the CYP2C19*2 allele, which causes loss of platelet function in select patients. As these are common genetic variants, this observation has been shown to be clinically relevant in large studies.
 
Venous Thrombosis

Overview of Venous Thrombosis

Coagulation is the process by which thrombin is activated and soluble plasma fibrinogen is converted into insoluble fibrin. These steps account for both normal hemostasis and the pathophysiologic processes influencing the development of venous thrombosis. The primary forms of venous thrombosis are deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) in the extremities and the subsequent embolization to the lungs (pulmonary embolism), referred to together as venous thromboembolic disease. Venous thrombosis occurs due to heritable causes (Table 117每2B) and acquired causes (Table 117每3).

Table 117每3 Acquired Causes of Venous Thrombosis

 
 
Surgery  
  Neurosurgery 
  Major abdominal surgery 
Malignancy  
  Antiphospholipid syndrome 
Other  
  Trauma 
  Pregnancy 
  Long-haul travel 
  Obesity 
  Oral contraceptives/hormone replacement 
  Myeloproliferative disorders 
  Polycythemia vera 
 

 

Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism

More than 200,000 new cases of venous thromboembolism occur each year. Of these cases, 30% die within 30 days and one-fifth suffer sudden death owing to pulmonary embolism; 30% go on to develop recurrent venous thromboembolism within 10 years. Data from the ARIC study reported a 9% 28-day fatality rate from deep venous thrombosis and a 15% fatality rate from pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary embolism in the setting of cancer has a 25% fatality rate. The mean incidence of first DVT in the general population is 5 per 10,000 person-years; the incidence is similar in males and females and increases dramatically with age from 2 to 3 per 10,000 person-years at 30每49 years of age to 20 at 70每79 years of age.

Overview of the Coagulation Cascade and Its Role in Venous Thrombosis

Coagulation is defined as the formation of fibrin by a series of linked enzymatic reactions in which each reaction product converts the subsequent inactive zymogen into an active serine protease (Fig. 117-2). This coordinated sequence is called the coagulation cascade and is a key mechanism for regulating hemostasis. Central to the function of the coagulation cascade is the principle of amplification: owing to a series of linked enzymatic reactions, a small stimulus can lead to much greater quantities of fibrin, the end product that prevents hemorrhage at the site of vascular injury.

The coagulation cascade is primarily initiated by vascular injury exposing tissue factor to blood components (Fig. 117-2). Tissue factor may also be found in bloodborne cell-derived microparticles and, under pathophysiologic conditions, in leukocytes or platelets. Plasma factor VII (FVII) is the ligand for and is activated (FVIIa) by binding to tissue factor exposed at the site of vessel damage. The binding of FVII/VIIa to tissue factor activates the downstream conversion of factor X (FX) to active FX (FXa). In an alternative reaction, the FVII/FVIIa每tissue factor complex initially converts FIX to FIXa, which then activates FX in conjunction with its cofactor factor VIII (FVIIIa). Factor Xa with its cofactor FVa converts prothrombin to thrombin, which then converts soluble plasma fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin, leading to clot or thrombus formation. Thrombin also activates FXIII to FXIIIa, a transglutaminase that covalently cross-links and stabilizes the fibrin clot.

Several antithrombotic factors also regulate coagulation; these include antithrombin, tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), heparin cofactor II, and protein C/protein S. Under normal conditions, these factors limit the production of thrombin to prevent the perpetuation of coagulation and thrombus formation. Typically, after the clot has caused occlusion at the damaged site and begins to expand toward adjacent uninjured vessel segments, the anticoagulant reactions governed by the normal endothelium become pivotal in limiting the extent of this hemostatically protective clot.

Risk Factors for Venous Thrombosis

The risk factors for venous thrombosis are primarily related to hypercoagulability, which can be genetic (Table 117每2) or acquired, or due to immobilization and venous stasis. Independent predictors for recurrence include increasing age, obesity, malignant neoplasm, and acute extremity paresis. Often, multiple risk factors are present in a single individual. Significant risk is incurred by major orthopedic, abdominal, or neurologic surgeries. Moderate risk is promoted by prolonged bedrest; certain types of cancer, pregnancy, hormone replacement therapy, or oral contraceptive use; and other sedentary conditions such as long-distance plane travel. It has been reported that the risk of developing a venous thromboembolic event doubles after air travel lasting 4 h, although the absolute risk remains low (1 in 6000). The relative risk of venous thromboembolism among pregnant or postpartum women is 4.3, and the overall incidence (absolute risk) is 199.7 per 100,000 woman-years.

Genetics of Venous Thrombosis

(See Table 117每2) Less common causes of venous thrombosis are those due to genetic variants. These abnormalities include loss-of-function mutations of endogenous anticoagulants as well as gain-of-function mutations of procoagulant proteins. Heterozygous antithrombin deficiency and homozygosity of the factor V Leiden mutation significantly increase the risk of venous thrombosis. While homozygousprotein C or protein S deficiencies are rare and may lead to fatal purpura fulminans, heterozygous deficiencies are associated with a moderate risk of thrombosis. Activated protein C impairs coagulation by proteolytic degradation of FVa. Patients resistant to the activity of activated protein C may have a point mutation in the FV gene located on chromosome 1, a mutant denoted factor V Leiden. Mildly increased risk has been attributed to elevated levels of procoagulant factors, as well as low levels of tissue factor pathway inhibitor. Polymorphisms of methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase as well as hyperhomocysteinemia have been shown to be independent risk factors for venous thrombosis, as well as arterial vascular disease; however, many of the initial descriptions of genetic variants and their associations with thromboembolism are being questioned in larger, more current studies.

Fibrinolysis and Thrombosis

Specific abnormalities in the fibrinolytic system have been associated with enhanced thrombosis. Factors such as elevated levels of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) have been associated with decreased fibrinolytic activity and an increased risk of arterial thrombotic disease. Specific genetic variants have been associated with decreased fibrinolytic activity, including the 4G/5G insertion/deletion polymorphism in the (plasminogen activator type 1) PAI-1 gene. Additionally, the 311-bp Alu insertion/deletion in tPA's intron 8 has been associated with enhanced thrombosis; although genetic abnormalities have not been associated consistently with altered function or tPA levels, raising questions about the relevant pathophysiologic mechanism. Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is a carboxypeptidase that regulates fibrinolysis; elevated plasma TAFI levels have been associated with an increased risk of both deep-vein thrombosis and cardiovascular disease.

The metabolic syndrome also is accompanied by altered fibrinolytic activity. This syndrome, which comprises abdominal fat (central obesity), altered glucose and insulin metabolism, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, has been associated with atherothrombosis. The mechanism for enhanced thrombosis appears to be due both to altered platelet function and to a procoagulant and hypofibrinolytic state. One of the most frequently documented prothrombotic abnormalities reported in this syndrome is an increase in plasma levels of PAI-1.
 
The Distinction between Arterial and Venous Thrombosis

Although there is overlap, venous and arterial thrombosis are initiated differently and clot formation progresses by somewhat distinct pathways. In the setting of stasis or states of hypercoagulability, venous thrombosis is activated with the initiation of the coagulation cascade primarily due to exposure of tissue factor; this leads to the formation of thrombin and the subsequent conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. In the artery, thrombin formation also occurs, but thrombosis is primarily promoted by the adhesion of platelets to an injured vessel and stimulated by exposed extracellular matrix (Figs. 117-1 and 117-2). There is wide variation in individual responses to vascular injury, an important determinant of which is the predisposition an individual has to arterial or venous thrombosis. This concept has been supported indirectly in prothrombotic animal models in which there is poor correlation between the propensity to develop venous versus arterial thrombosis.

Despite considerable progress in understanding the role of hypercoagulable states in venous thromboembolic disease, the contribution of hypercoagulability to arterial vascular disease is much less well understood. While specific thrombophilic conditions, such as factor V Leiden and the prothrombin G20210A mutation, are risk factors for DVT, pulmonary embolism, and other venous thromboembolic events, their contribution to arterial thrombosis is less well defined. In fact, to the contrary, many of these thrombophilic factors have not been found to be clinically important risk factors for arterial thrombotic events, such as acute coronary syndromes.

Clinically, although the pathophysiology is distinct, arterial and venous thrombosis do share common risk factors, including age, obesity, cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and metabolic syndrome. Select genetic variants, including those of the glutathione peroxidase gene, have also been associated with arterial and venous thrombo-occlusive disease. Importantly, arterial and venous thrombosis may both be triggered by pathophysiologic stimuli responsible for activating inflammatory and oxidative pathways.

The diagnosis and treatment of ischemic heart disease are discussed in Chap. 243. Stroke diagnosis and management are discussed in Chap. 275. The diagnosis and management of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolus are discussed in Chap. 262.
 
Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank Hannah Iafrati for her assistance with the figures.
 
Further Readings

Alexander K, Peterson ED: Managing the risks of antithrombotics and platelet inhibitors. Circulation 121:1960, 2010[PMID: 20439812] 

 
Dav赤 G, Patrono C: Platelet activation and atherothrombosis. N Engl J Med 13;357:2482, 2007[PMID: 21498593] 

 
Freedman JE: Translational therapeutics at the platelet vascular interface: oxidative stress and platelets. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28:s11, 2008 

 
Furie B, Furie BC: Mechanisms of thrombus formation. N Engl J Med 28;359:938, 2008[PMID: 18753650] 

 
Gurbel PA, Tantry US: Combination antithrombotic therapies. Circulation 121:569, 2010[PMID: 20124137] 

 
Lloyd-Jones D et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics每2009 update. A report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation 119:e21, 2009 

 
Tapson VF: Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 6;358:1037, 2008[PMID: 18322285] 

 
 

^^
Antiplatelet, Anticoagulant, and Fibrinolytic Drugs: Introduction

Arterial and venous thromboses are major causes of morbidity and mortality rates. Arterial thrombosis is the most common cause of acute myocardial infarction (MI), ischemic stroke, and limb gangrene, whereas deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) leads to pulmonary embolism (PE), which can be fatal, and to the postphlebitic syndrome. Most arterial thrombi are superimposed on disrupted atherosclerotic plaque because plaque rupture exposes thrombogenic material in the plaque core to the blood. This material then triggers platelet aggregation and fibrin formation, which results in the generation of a platelet-rich thrombus that can temporarily or permanently occlude blood flow. In contrast to arterial thrombi, venous thrombi rarely form at sites of obvious vascular disruption. Although they can develop after surgical trauma to veins or secondary to indwelling venous catheters, venous thrombi usually originate in the valve cusps of the deep veins of the calf or in the muscular sinuses, where they are triggered by stasis. Sluggish blood flow in these veins reduces the oxygen supply to the avascular valve cusps. Endothelial cells lining these valve cusps become activated and express adhesion molecules on their surface. Tissue factor每bearing leukocytes and microparticles adhere to these activated cells and induce coagulation. Local thrombus formation is exacerbated by reduced clearance of activated clotting factors as a result of impaired blood flow. If the thrombi extend into more proximal veins of the leg, thrombus fragments can dislodge, travel to the lungs, and produce a PE.

Arterial and venous thrombi are composed of platelets and fibrin, but the proportions differ. Arterial thrombi are rich in platelets because of the high shear in the injured arteries. In contrast, venous thrombi, which form under low shear conditions, contain relatively few platelets and are predominantly composed of fibrin and trapped red cells. Because of the predominance of platelets, arterial thrombi appear white, whereas venous thrombi are red in color, reflecting the trapped red cells.

Antithrombotic drugs are used for prevention and treatment of thrombosis. Targeting the components of thrombi, these agents include (1) antiplatelet drugs, (2) anticoagulants, and (3) fibrinolytic agents (Fig. 118-1). With the predominance of platelets in arterial thrombi, strategies to inhibit or treat arterial thrombosis focus mainly on antiplatelet agents, although, in the acute setting, they often include anticoagulants and fibrinolytic agents. Anticoagulants are the mainstay of prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism because fibrin is the predominant component of venous thrombi. Antiplatelet drugs are less effective than anticoagulants in this setting because of the limited platelet content of venous thrombi. Fibrinolytic therapy is used in selected patients with venous thromboembolism. For example, patients with massive or submassive PE can benefit from systemic or catheter-directed fibrinolytic therapy. The latter can also be used as an adjunct to anticoagulants for treatment of patients with extensive iliofemoral-vein thrombosis.

Figure 118-1

 
 
 
Classification of antithrombotic drugs.
 
 
 
Antiplatelet Drugs

Role of Platelets in Arterial Thrombosis

In healthy vasculature, circulating platelets are maintained in an inactive state by nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin released by endothelial cells lining the blood vessels. In addition, endothelial cells also express CD39 on their surface, a membrane-associated ecto-adenosine diphosphatase (ADPase) that degrades ADP released from activated platelets. When the vessel wall is damaged, release of these substances is impaired and subendothelial matrix is exposed. Platelets adhere to exposed collagen via 21 and glycoprotein (GP)V1 and to von Willebrand factor (vWF) via GPIb and GPIIb/IIIa (IIb3)〞receptors that are constitutively expressed on the platelet surface. Adherent platelets undergo a change in shape, secrete ADP from their dense granules, and synthesize and release thromboxane A2. Released ADP and thromboxane A2, which are platelet agonists, activate ambient platelets and recruit them to the site of vascular injury (Fig. 118-2).

Figure 118-2

 
 
 
Coordinated role of platelets and the coagulation system in thrombogenesis. Vascular injury simultaneously triggers platelet activation and aggregation and activation of the coagulation system. Platelet activation is initiated by exposure of subendothelial collagen and von Willebrand factor (vWF), onto which platelets adhere. Adherent platelets become activated and release ADP and thromboxane A2, platelet agonists that activate ambient platelets and recruit them to the site of injury. When platelets are activated, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa on their surface undergoes a conformational change that enables it to ligate fibrinogen and mediate platelet aggregation. Coagulation is triggered by tissue factor exposed at the site of injury. Tissue factor triggers thrombin generation. As a potent platelet agonist, thrombin amplifies platelet recruitment to the site of injury. Thrombin also converts fibrinogen to fibrin, and the fibrin strands then weave the platelet aggregates together to form a platelet/fibrin thrombus.
 
 

Disruption of the vessel wall also exposes tissue factor每expressing cells to the blood. Tissue factor initiates coagulation. Activated platelets potentiate coagulation by binding clotting factors and supporting the assembly of activation complexes that enhance thrombin generation. In addition to converting fibrinogen to fibrin, thrombin also serves as a potent platelet agonist and recruits more platelets to the site of vascular injury.

When platelets are activated, GPIIb/IIIa, the most abundant receptor on the platelet surface, undergoes a conformational change that enables it to bind fibrinogen and, under high shear conditions, vWF. Divalent fibrinogen or multivalent vWF molecules bridge adjacent platelets together to form platelet aggregates. Fibrin strands, generated through the action of thrombin, then weave these aggregates together to form a platelet/fibrin mesh.

Antiplatelet drugs target various steps in this process. The commonly used drugs include aspirin, thienopyridines (clopidogrel, prasugrel, and ticlopidine), dipyridamole, and GPIIb/IIIa antagonists.

Aspirin

The most widely used antiplatelet agent worldwide is aspirin. As a cheap and effective antiplatelet drug, aspirin serves as the foundation of most antiplatelet strategies.

Mechanism of Action

Aspirin produces its antithrombotic effect by irreversibly acetylating and inhibiting platelet cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 (Fig. 118-3), a critical enzyme in the biosynthesis of thromboxane A2. At high doses (1 g/d), aspirin also inhibits COX-2, an inducible COX isoform found in endothelial cells and inflammatory cells. In endothelial cells, COX-2 initiates the synthesis of prostacyclin, a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet aggregation.

Figure 118-3

 
 
 
Site of action of antiplatelet drugs. Aspirin inhibits thromboxane A2 (TXA2) synthesis by irreversibly acetylating cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1). Reduced TXA2 release attenuates platelet activation and recruitment to the site of vascular injury. Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and prasugrel irreversibly block P2Y12, a key ADP receptor on the platelet surface; cangrelor and ticagrelor are reversible inhibitors of P2Y12. Abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban inhibit the final common pathway of platelet aggregation by blocking fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor binding to activated glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa. SCH530348 and E5555 inhibit thrombin-mediated platelet activation by targeting protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1), the major thrombin receptor on human platelets.
 
 

Indications

Aspirin is widely used for secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery, cerebrovascular, or peripheral vascular disease. Compared with placebo, aspirin produces a 25% reduction in the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke. Aspirin is also used for primary prevention in patients whose estimated annual risk of MI is >1%, a point where its benefits are likely to outweigh harms. This includes patients older than age 40 years with two or more major risk factors for cardiovascular disease or those older than age 50 years with one or more such risk factors. Aspirin is equally effective in men and women. In men, aspirin mainly reduces the risk of MI, while in women aspirin lowers the risk of stroke.

Dosages

Aspirin is usually administered at doses of 75每325 mg once daily. Higher doses of aspirin are not more effective than lower aspirin doses, and some analyses suggest reduced efficacy with higher doses. Because the side effects of aspirin are dose-related, daily aspirin doses of 75每100 mg are recommended for most indications. When rapid platelet inhibition is required, an initial aspirin dose of at least 160 mg should be given.

Side Effects

Most common side effects are gastrointestinal and range from dyspepsia to erosive gastritis or peptic ulcers with bleeding and perforation. These side effects are dose-related. Use of enteric-coated or buffered aspirin in place of plain aspirin does not eliminate the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. The overall risk of major bleeding with aspirin is 1每3% per year. The risk of bleeding is increased when aspirin is given in conjunction with anticoagulants, such as warfarin. When dual therapy is used, low-dose aspirin should be given (75每100 mg daily). Eradication of Helicobacter pylori infection and administration of proton pump inhibitors may reduce the risk of aspirin-induced gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with peptic ulcer disease.

Aspirin should not be administered to patients with a history of aspirin allergy characterized by bronchospasm. This problem occurs in 0.3% of the general population but is more common in those with chronic urticaria or asthma, particularly in individuals with nasal polyps or chronic rhinitis. Hepatic and renal toxicity are observed with aspirin overdose.

Aspirin Resistance

Clinical aspirin resistance is defined as the failure of aspirin to protect patients from ischemic vascular events. This is not a helpful definition because it is made after the event occurs. Furthermore, it is not realistic to expect aspirin, which only blocks thromboxane A2每induced platelet activation, to prevent all vascular events.

Aspirin resistance has also been described biochemically as failure of the drug to produce its expected inhibitory effects on tests of platelet function, such as thromboxane A2 synthesis or arachidonic acid每induced platelet aggregation. However, the tests of platelet function used for diagnosis of biochemical aspirin resistance have not been well standardized. Furthermore, these tests are not proven to identify patients at risk of recurrent vascular events. In addition, resistance is not reversed by either giving higher doses of aspirin or adding other antiplatelet drugs. Thus, testing for aspirin resistance remains a research tool.

Thienopyridines

The thienopyridines include ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and prasugrel, drugs that target P2Y12, a key ADP receptor on platelets.

Mechanism of Action

The thienopyridines are structurally related drugs that selectively inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation by irreversibly blocking P2Y12 (Fig. 118-3). Ticlopidine and clopidogrel are prodrugs that require metabolism by the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system to acquire activity. Consequently, when given in usual doses, their onset of action is delayed for several days. Although prasugrel also is a prodrug that requires metabolic activation, its onset of action is more rapid than that of ticlopidine or clopidogrel, and prasugrel produces greater and more predictable inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation. These characteristics reflect the rapid and complete absorption of prasugrel from the gut and its more efficient activation pathways. Whereas nearly all of the absorbed prasugrel undergoes metabolic activation in the liver, only 15% of absorbed clopidogrel is activated; the remainder is inactivated by esterases.

Indications

Like aspirin, ticlopidine is more effective than placebo at reducing the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke in patients with atherosclerotic disease. Because of its delayed onset of action, ticlopidine is not recommended in patients with acute MI. Ticlopidine was used routinely as an adjunct to aspirin after coronary artery stenting and as an aspirin substitute in those intolerant to aspirin. Because clopidogrel is more potent than ticlopidine and has a better safety profile, clopidogrel has replaced ticlopidine.

When compared with aspirin in patients with recent ischemic stroke, MI, or peripheral arterial disease, clopidogrel reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke by 8.7%. Therefore, clopidogrel is more effective than aspirin but is also more expensive. In some patients, clopidogrel and aspirin are combined to capitalize on their capacity to block complementary pathways of platelet activation. For example, the combination of aspirin plus clopidogrel is recommended for at least 4 weeks after implantation of a bare metal stent in a coronary artery and longer in those with a drug-eluting stent. Concerns about late in-stent thrombosis with drug-eluting stents have led some experts to recommend long-term use of clopidogrel plus aspirin for this indication.

The combination of clopidogrel and aspirin is also effective in patients with unstable angina. Thus, in 12,562 such patients, the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke was 9.3% in those randomized to the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin and 11.4% in those given aspirin alone. This 20% relative risk reduction with combination therapy was highly statistically significant. However, combining clopidogrel with aspirin increases the risk of major bleeding to about 2% per year. This bleeding risk persists even if the daily dose of aspirin is 100 mg. Therefore, the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin should only be used when there is a clear benefit. For example, this combination has not proven to be superior to clopidogrel alone in patients with acute ischemic stroke or to aspirin alone for primary prevention in those at risk for cardiovascular events.

Prasugrel was compared with clopidogrel in 13,608 patients with acute coronary syndromes who were scheduled to undergo a percutaneous coronary intervention. The incidence of the primary efficacy endpoint, a composite of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke, was significantly lower with prasugrel than with clopidogrel (9.9% and 12.1%, respectively), mainly reflecting a reduction in the incidence of nonfatal MI. The incidence of stent thrombosis also was significantly lower with prasugrel than with clopidogrel (1.1% and 2.4%, respectively). However, these advantages were at the expense of significantly higher rates of fatal bleeding (0.4% and 0.1%, respectively) and life-threatening bleeding (1.4% and 0.9%, respectively) with prasugrel. Because patients older than age 75 years and those with a history of prior stroke or transient ischemic attack have a particularly high risk of bleeding, prasugrel should generally be avoided in older patients, and the drug is contraindicated in those with a history of cerebrovascular disease. Caution is required if prasugrel is used in patients weighing less than 60 kg or in those with renal impairment.

Dosing

Ticlopidine is given twice daily at a dose of 250 mg. The more potent clopidogrel is given once daily at a dose of 75 mg. Loading doses of clopidogrel are given when rapid ADP receptor blockade is desired. For example, patients undergoing coronary stenting are often given a loading dose of 300 mg, which affects inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation in about 6 h. Loading doses of 600 or 900 mg produce an even more rapid effect. After a loading dose of 60 mg, prasugrel is given once daily at a dose of 10 mg. Patients older than age 75 years or weighing less than 60 kg should receive a lower daily prasugrel dose of 5 mg.

Side Effects

The most common side effects of ticlopidine are gastrointestinal. More serious are the hematologic side effects, which include neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. These side effects usually occur within the first few months of starting treatment. Therefore, blood counts must be carefully monitored when initiating therapy with ticlopidine. Gastrointestinal and hematologic side effects are rare with clopidogrel and prasugrel.

Thienopyridine Resistance

The capacity of clopidogrel to inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation varies among subjects. This variability reflects, at least in part, genetic polymorphisms in the CYP isoenzymes involved in the metabolic activation of clopidogrel. Most important of these is CYP2C19. Clopidogrel-treated patients with the loss-of-function CYP2C19*2 allele exhibit reduced platelet inhibition compared with those with the wild-type CYP2C19*1 allele and experience a higher rate of cardiovascular events. This is important because estimates suggest that up to 25% of whites, 30% of African Americans, and 50% of Asians carry the loss-of-function allele, which would render them resistant to clopidogrel. Even patients with the reduced function CYP2C19*3, *4, or *5 alleles may derive less benefit from clopidogrel than those with the full-function CYP2C19*1 allele. Concomitant administration of clopidogrel and proton pump inhibitors, which are inhibitors of CYP2C19, produces a small reduction in the inhibitory effects of clopidogrel on ADP-induced platelet aggregation. The extent to which this interaction increases the risk of cardiovascular events remains controversial.

In contrast to their effect on the metabolic activation of clopidogrel, CYP2C19 polymorphisms appear to be less important determinants of the activation of prasugrel. Thus, no association was detected between the loss-of-function allele and decreased platelet inhibition or increased rate of cardiovascular events with prasugrel. The observation that genetic polymorphisms affecting clopidogrel absorption or metabolism influence clinical outcomes raises the possibilities that pharmacogenetic profiling may be useful to identify clopidogrel-resistant patients and that point-of-care assessment of the extent of clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition may help detect patients at higher risk for subsequent cardiovascular events. It is unknown whether administration of higher doses of clopidogrel to such patients will overcome this resistance. Instead, prasugrel or newer P2Y12 inhibitors may be better choices for these patients.

Dipyridamole

Dipyridamole is a relatively weak antiplatelet agent on its own, but an extended-release formulation of dipyridamole combined with low-dose aspirin, a preparation known as Aggrenox, is used for prevention of stroke in patients with transient ischemic attacks.

Mechanism of Action

By inhibiting phosphodiesterase, dipyridamole blocks the breakdown of cyclic AMP. Increased levels of cyclic AMP reduce intracellular calcium and inhibit platelet activation. Dipyridamole also blocks the uptake of adenosine by platelets and other cells. This produces a further increase in local cyclic AMP levels because the platelet adenosine A2 receptor is coupled to adenylate cyclase (Fig. 118-4).

Figure 118-4

 
 
 
Mechanism of action of dipyridamole. Dipyridamole increases levels of cyclic AMP in platelets by (1) blocking the reuptake of adenosine and (2) inhibiting phosphodiesterase-mediated cyclic AMP degradation. By promoting calcium uptake, cyclic AMP reduces intracellular levels of calcium. This, in turn, inhibits platelet activation and aggregation.
 
 

Dosing

Aggrenox is given twice daily. Each capsule contains 200 mg of extended-release dipyridamole and 25 mg of aspirin.

Side Effects

Because dipyridamole has vasodilatory effects, it must be used with caution in patients with coronary artery disease. Gastrointestinal complaints, headache, facial flushing, dizziness, and hypotension can also occur. These symptoms often subside with continued use of the drug.

Indications

Dipyridamole plus aspirin was compared with aspirin or dipyridamole alone, or with placebo, in patients with an ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack. The combination reduced the risk of stroke by 22.1% compared with aspirin and by 24.4% compared with dipyridamole. A second trial compared dipyridamole plus aspirin with aspirin alone for secondary prevention in patients with ischemic stroke. Vascular death, stroke, or MI occurred in 13% of patients given combination therapy and in 16% of those treated with aspirin alone. Based on these data, Aggrenox was often used for stroke prevention. Another trial randomized 20,332 patients with noncardioembolic ischemic stroke to either Aggrenox or clopidogrel. The primary efficacy endpoint of recurrent stroke occurred in 9.0% of those given Aggrenox and in 8.8% of patients treated with clopidogrel. Although this difference was not statistically significant, the study failed to meet the prespecified margin to claim noninferiority of Aggrenox relative to clopidogrel. These results have dampened enthusiasm for the use of Aggrenox.

Because of its vasodilatory effects and the paucity of data supporting the use of dipyridamole in patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease, Aggrenox should not be used for stroke prevention in such patients. Clopidogrel is a better choice in this setting.

GPIIb/IIIA Receptor Antagonists

As a class, parenteral GPIIb/IIIa receptor antagonists have an established niche in patients with acute coronary syndromes. The three agents in this class are abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban.

Mechanism of Action

A member of the integrin family of adhesion receptors, GPIIb/IIIa is found on the surface of platelets and megakaryocytes. With about 80,000 copies per platelet, GPIIb/IIIa is the most abundant receptor. Consisting of a noncovalently linked heterodimer, GPIIb/IIIa is inactive on resting platelets. When platelets are activated, inside-outside signal transduction pathways trigger a conformational activation of the receptor. Once activated, GPIIb/IIIa binds adhesive molecules, such as fibrinogen and, under high shear conditions, vWF. Binding is mediated by the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) sequence found on the  chains of fibrinogen and on vWF, and by the Lys-Gly-Asp (KGD) sequence located within a unique dodecapeptide domain on the  chains of fibrinogen. Once bound, fibrinogen and/or vWF bridge adjacent platelets together to induce platelet aggregation.

Although abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban all target the GPIIb/IIIa receptor, they are structurally and pharmacologically distinct (Table 118-1). Abciximab is a Fab fragment of a humanized murine monoclonal antibody directed against the activated form of GPIIb/IIIa. Abciximab binds to the activated receptor with high affinity and blocks the binding of adhesive molecules. In contrast to abciximab, eptifibatide and tirofiban are synthetic small molecules. Eptifibatide is a cyclic heptapeptide that binds GPIIb/IIIa because it incorporates the KGD motif, whereas tirofiban is a nonpeptidic tyrosine derivative that acts as an RGD mimetic. Abciximab has a long half-life and can be detected on the surface of platelets for up to 2 weeks. Eptifibatide and tirofiban have shorter half-lives.

Table 118-1 Features of GPIIb/IIIA Antagonists

 
 
Feature Abciximab Eptifibatide Tirofiban 
Description Fab fragment of humanized mouse monoclonal antibody Cyclical KGD-containing heptapeptide Nonpeptidic RGD mimetic 
Specific for GPIIb/IIIa No Yes Yes 
Plasma half-life Short (min) Long (2.5 h) Long (2.0 h) 
Platelet-bound half-life Long (days) Short (s) Short (s) 
Renal clearance No Yes Yes 
 

 

In addition to targeting the GPIIb/IIIa receptor, abciximab also inhibits the closely related v3 receptor, which binds vitronectin, and M2, a leukocyte integrin. In contrast, eptifibatide and tirofiban are specific for GPIIb/IIIa. Inhibition of v3 and M2 may endow abciximab with anti-inflammatory and/or antiproliferative properties that extend beyond platelet inhibition.

Dosing

All of the GPIIb/IIIa antagonists are given as an IV bolus followed by an infusion. Because they are cleared by the kidneys, the doses of eptifibatide and tirofiban must be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency.

Side Effects

In addition to bleeding, thrombocytopenia is the most serious complication. Thrombocytopenia is immune-mediated and is caused by antibodies directed against neoantigens on GPIIb/IIIa that are exposed upon antagonist binding. With abciximab, thrombocytopenia occurs in up to 5% of patients. Thrombocytopenia is severe in 1% of these individuals. Thrombocytopenia is less common with the other two agents, occurring in 1% of patients.

Indications

Abciximab and eptifibatide are used in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions, particularly those with acute MI. Tirofiban is used in high-risk patients with unstable angina. Eptifibatide also can be used for this indication.

New Antiplatelet Agents

New agents in advanced stages of development include cangrelor and ticagrelor, direct-acting reversible P2Y12 antagonists, and SCH530348 (vorapaxar) and E5555 (atopaxar), orally active inhibitors of protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1), the major thrombin receptor on platelets (Fig. 118-3). Cangrelor is an adenosine analogue that binds reversibly to P2Y12 and inhibits its activity. The drug has a half-life of 3每6 min and is given intravenously as a bolus followed by an infusion. When stopped, platelet function recovers within 60 min. Trials comparing cangrelor with placebo during percutaneous coronary interventions or comparing cangrelor with clopidogrel after such procedures revealed little or no advantages of cangrelor. Consequently, identification of a role for cangrelor requires additional studies.

Ticagrelor is an orally active, reversible inhibitor of P2Y12. The drug is given twice daily and it not only has a more rapid onset and offset of action than clopidogrel but also produces greater and more predictable inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation. When compared with clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes, ticagrelor produced a greater reduction in the primary efficacy endpoint, a composite of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke at 1 year (9.8% and 11.7%, respectively; p = .001). This difference reflected a significantly greater reduction in cardiovascular death (4.0% and 5.1%, respectively; p = .001) and MI (5.8% and 6.9%, respectively; p = .005) with ticagrelor than with clopidogrel. Rates of stroke were similar with ticagrelor and clopidogrel (1.5% and 1.3%, respectively) and there were no differences in the rates of major bleeding. When minor bleeding was added to the major bleeding results, however, ticagrelor showed an increase relative to clopidogrel (16.1% and 14.6%, respectively; p = 0.008). Ticagrelor also was superior to clopidogrel in the acute coronary syndrome patients who underwent percutaneous coronary interventions or aortocoronary bypass surgery. Although not yet licensed, ticagrelor is the first new antiplatelet drug to demonstrate a greater reduction in cardiovascular death than clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes.

SCH530348, an orally active inhibitor of PAR-1, is under investigation as an adjunct to aspirin or aspirin plus clopidogrel. Two large phase III trials are underway. E5555, a second oral PAR-1 antagonist, is earlier in development.
 
Anticoagulants

There are both parenteral and oral anticoagulants. Currently available parenteral anticoagulants include heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), and fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide. The only available oral anticoagulants are the vitamin K antagonists, of which warfarin is the agent most often used in North America.

Dabigatran etexilate, an oral thrombin inhibitor, and rivaroxaban, an oral Factor Xa inhibitor, are licensed in Europe and Canada for short-term thromboprophylaxis after elective hip or knee replacement surgery. Dabigatran etexilate was licensed in the United States and Canada as an alternative to warfarin for stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation.

Parenteral Anticoagulants

Heparin

Heparin is a sulfated polysaccharide and is isolated from mammalian tissues rich in mast cells. Most commercial heparin is derived from porcine intestinal mucosa and is a polymer of alternating D-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine residues.

Mechanism of Action

Heparin acts as an anticoagulant by activating antithrombin (previously known as antithrombin III) and accelerating the rate at which antithrombin inhibits clotting enzymes, particularly thrombin and factor Xa. Antithrombin, the obligatory plasma cofactor for heparin, is a member of the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) superfamily. Synthesized in the liver and circulating in plasma at a concentration of 2.6 ㊣ 0.4 M, antithrombin acts as a suicide substrate for its target enzymes.

To activate antithrombin, heparin binds to the serpin via a unique pentasaccharide sequence that is found on one-third of the chains of commercial heparin (Fig. 118-5). The remainder of the heparin chains that lack this pentasaccharide sequence have little or no anticoagulant activity. Once bound to antithrombin, heparin induces a conformational change in the reactive center loop of antithrombin that renders it more readily accessible to its target proteases. This conformational change enhances the rate at which antithrombin inhibits Factor Xa by at least two orders of magnitude but has little effect on the rate of thrombin inhibition by antithrombin. To catalyze thrombin inhibition, heparin serves as a template that binds antithrombin and thrombin simultaneously. Formation of this ternary complex brings the enzyme in close apposition to the inhibitor, thereby promoting the formation of a stable covalent thrombin-antithrombin complex.

Figure 118-5

 
 
 
 
 
Mechanism of action of heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), and fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide. A. Heparin binds to antithrombin via its pentasaccharide sequence. This induces a conformational change in the reactive center loop of antithrombin that accelerates its interaction with factor Xa. To potentiate thrombin inhibition, heparin must simultaneously bind to antithrombin and thrombin. Only heparin chains composed of at least 18 saccharide units, which corresponds to a molecular weight of 5400, are of sufficient length to perform this bridging function. With a mean molecular weight of 15,000, all of the heparin chains are long enough to do this. B. LMWH has greater capacity to potentiate factor Xa inhibition by antithrombin than thrombin because, with a mean molecular weight of 4500每5000, at least half of the LMWH chains are too short to bridge antithrombin to thrombin. C. The pentasaccharide only accelerates factor Xa inhibition by antithrombin because the pentasaccharide is too short to bridge antithrombin to thrombin.
 
 

Only pentasaccharide-containing heparin chains composed of at least 18 saccharide units (which correspond to a molecular weight of 5400) are of sufficient length to bridge thrombin and antithrombin together. With a mean molecular weight of 15,000, and a range of 5000每30,000, almost all of the chains of unfractionated heparin are long enough to effect this bridging function. Consequently, by definition, heparin has equal capacity to promote the inhibition of thrombin and factor Xa by antithrombin and is assigned an anti-factor Xa to anti-factor IIa (thrombin) ratio of 1:1.

Heparin causes the release of tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) from the endothelium. A factor Xa每dependent inhibitor of tissue factor每bound factor VIIa, TFPI may contribute to the antithrombotic activity of heparin. Longer heparin chains induce the release of more TFPI than shorter chains.

Pharmacology

Heparin must be given parenterally. It is usually administered SC or by continuous IV infusion. When used for therapeutic purposes, the IV route is most often employed. If heparin is given SC for treatment of thrombosis, the dose of heparin must be high enough to overcome the limited bioavailability associated with this method of delivery.

In the circulation, heparin binds to the endothelium and to plasma proteins other than antithrombin. Heparin binding to endothelial cells explains its dose-dependent clearance. At low doses, the half-life of heparin is short because it binds rapidly to the endothelium. With higher doses of heparin, the half-life is longer because heparin is cleared more slowly once the endothelium is saturated. Clearance is mainly extrarenal; heparin binds to macrophages, which internalize and depolymerize the long heparin chains and secrete shorter chains back into the circulation. Because of its dose-dependent clearance mechanism, the plasma half-life of heparin ranges from 30 to 60 min with bolus IV doses of 25 and 100 U/kg, respectively.

Once heparin enters the circulation, it binds to plasma proteins other than antithrombin, a phenomenon that reduces its anticoagulant activity. Some of the heparin-binding proteins found in plasma are acute-phase reactants whose levels are elevated in ill patients. Others, such as high-molecular-weight multimers of vWF, are released from activated platelets or endothelial cells. Activated platelets also release platelet factor 4 (PF4), a highly cationic protein that binds heparin with high affinity. The large amounts of PF4 found in the vicinity of platelet-rich arterial thrombi can neutralize the anticoagulant activity of heparin. This phenomenon may attenuate heparin's capacity to suppress thrombus growth.

Because the levels of heparin-binding proteins in plasma vary from person to person, the anticoagulant response to fixed or weight-adjusted doses of heparin is unpredictable. Consequently, coagulation monitoring is essential to ensure that a therapeutic response is obtained. This is particularly important when heparin is administered for treatment of established thrombosis because a subtherapeutic anticoagulant response may render patients at risk for recurrent thrombosis, whereas excessive anticoagulation increases the risk of bleeding.

Monitoring the Anticoagulant Effect

Heparin therapy can be monitored using the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) or anti-factor Xa level. Although the aPTT is the test most often employed for this purpose, there are problems with this assay. aPTT reagents vary in their sensitivity to heparin, and the type of coagulometer used for testing can influence the results. Consequently, laboratories must establish a therapeutic aPTT range with each reagent-coagulometer combination by measuring the aPTT and anti-factor Xa level in plasma samples collected from heparin-treated patients. For most of the aPTT reagents and coagulometers in current use, therapeutic heparin levels are achieved with a two- to threefold prolongation of the aPTT.

Anti-factor Xa levels also can be used to monitor heparin therapy. With this test, therapeutic heparin levels range from 0.3 to 0.7 units/mL. Although this test is gaining in popularity, anti-factor Xa assays have yet to be standardized, and results can vary widely between laboratories.

Up to 25% of heparin-treated patients with venous thromboembolism require >35,000 units/d to achieve a therapeutic aPTT. These patients are considered heparin resistant. It is useful to measure anti-factor Xa levels in heparin-resistant patients because many will have a therapeutic anti-factor Xa level despite a subtherapeutic aPTT. This dissociation in test results occurs because elevated plasma levels of fibrinogen and factor VIII, both of which are acute-phase proteins, shorten the aPTT but have no effect on anti-factor Xa levels. Heparin therapy in patients who exhibit this phenomenon is best monitored using anti-factor Xa levels instead of the aPTT. Patients with congenital or acquired antithrombin deficiency and those with elevated levels of heparin-binding proteins may also need high doses of heparin to achieve a therapeutic aPTT or anti-factor Xa level. If there is good correlation between the aPTT and the anti-factor Xa levels, either test can be used to monitor heparin therapy.

Dosing

For prophylaxis, heparin is usually given in fixed doses of 5000 units SC two or three times daily. With these low doses, coagulation monitoring is unnecessary. In contrast, monitoring is essential when the drug is given in therapeutic doses. Fixed-dose or weight-based heparin nomograms are used to standardize heparin dosing and to shorten the time required to achieve a therapeutic anticoagulant response. At least two heparin nomograms have been validated in patients with venous thromboembolism and reduce the time required to achieve a therapeutic aPTT. Weight-adjusted heparin nomograms have also been evaluated in patients with acute coronary syndromes. After an IV heparin bolus of 5000 units or 70 units/kg, a heparin infusion rate of 12每15 units/kg per hour is usually administered. In contrast, weight-adjusted heparin nomograms for patients with venous thromboembolism use an initial bolus of 5000 units or 80 units/kg, followed by an infusion of 18 units/kg per hour. Thus, patients with venous thromboembolism appear to require higher doses of heparin to achieve a therapeutic aPTT than do patients with acute coronary syndromes. This may reflect differences in the thrombus burden. Heparin binds to fibrin, and the fibrin content of extensive deep-vein thrombi is greater than that of small coronary thrombi.

Heparin manufacturers in North America have traditionally measured heparin potency in USP units, with a unit defined as the concentration of heparin that prevents 1 mL of citrated sheep plasma from clotting for 1 h after calcium addition. In contrast, manufacturers in Europe measure heparin potency with anti-Xa assays using an international heparin standard for comparison. Because of problems with heparin contamination with oversulfated chondroitin sulfate, which the USP assay system does not detect, North American heparin manufacturers now use the anti-Xa assay to assess heparin potency. Although use of international units in place of USP units results in a 10% reduction in heparin doses, this change is unlikely to affect patient care because heparin has been dosed in international units in Europe for many years. Furthermore, heparin monitoring ensures a therapeutic anticoagulant response in high-risk situations, such as cardiopulmonary bypass surgery or percutaneous coronary intervention.

Limitations

Heparin has pharmacokinetic and biophysical limitations (Table 118-2). The pharmacokinetic limitations reflect heparin's propensity to bind in a pentasaccharide-independent fashion to cells and plasma proteins. Heparin binding to endothelial cells explains its dose-dependent clearance, whereas binding to plasma proteins results in a variable anticoagulant response and can lead to heparin resistance.

Table 118-2 Pharmacokinetic and Biophysical Limitations of Heparin

 
 
Limitations Mechanism 
Poor bioavailability at low doses Binds to endothelial cells and macrophages 
Dose-dependent clearance Binds to macrophages 
Variable anticoagulant response Binds to plasma proteins whose levels vary from patient to patient 
Reduced activity in the vicinity of platelet-rich thrombi Neutralized by platelet factor 4 released from activated platelets 
Limited activity against factor Xa incorporated in the prothrombinase complex and thrombin bound to fibrin Reduced capacity of heparin-antithrombin complex to inhibit factor Xa bound to activated platelets and thrombin bound to fibrin 
 

 

The biophysical limitations of heparin reflect the inability of the heparin-antithrombin complex to (1) inhibit factor Xa when it is incorporated into the prothrombinase complex, the complex that converts prothrombin to thrombin, and (2) to inhibit thrombin bound to fibrin. Consequently, factor Xa bound to activated platelets within platelet-rich thrombi has the potential to generate thrombin, even in the face of heparin. Once this thrombin binds to fibrin, it too is protected from inhibition by the heparin-antithrombin complex. Clot-associated thrombin can then trigger thrombus growth by locally activating platelets and amplifying its own generation through feedback activation of factors V, VIII, and XI. Further compounding the problem is the potential for heparin neutralization by the high concentrations of PF4 released from activated platelets within the platelet-rich thrombus.

Side Effects

The most common side effect of heparin is bleeding. Other complications include thrombocytopenia, osteoporosis, and elevated levels of transaminases.

Bleeding

The risk of heparin-induced bleeding increases with higher heparin doses. Concomitant administration of drugs that affect hemostasis, such as antiplatelet or fibrinolytic agents, increases the risk of bleeding, as does recent surgery or trauma. Heparin-treated patients with serious bleeding can be given protamine sulfate to neutralize the heparin. Protamine sulfate, a mixture of basic polypeptides isolated from salmon sperm, binds heparin with high affinity, and the resultant protamine-heparin complexes are then cleared. Typically, 1 mg of protamine sulfate neutralizes 100 units of heparin. Protamine sulfate is given IV. Anaphylactoid reactions to protamine sulfate can occur, and drug administration by slow IV infusion is recommended to reduce the risk.

Thrombocytopenia

Heparin can cause thrombocytopenia. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is an antibody-mediated process that is triggered by antibodies directed against neoantigens on PF4 that are exposed when heparin binds to this protein. These antibodies, which are usually of the IgG isotype, bind simultaneously to the heparin-PF4 complex and to platelet Fc receptors. Such binding activates the platelets and generates platelet microparticles. Circulating microparticles are prothrombotic because they express anionic phospholipids on their surface and can bind clotting factors and promote thrombin generation.

The clinical features of HIT are illustrated in Table 118-3. Typically, HIT occurs 5每14 days after initiation of heparin therapy, but it can manifest earlier if the patient has received heparin within the past 3 months. It is rare for the platelet count to fall below 100,000/L in patients with HIT, and even a 50% decrease in the platelet count from the pretreatment value should raise the suspicion of HIT in those receiving heparin. HIT is more common in surgical patients than in medical patients and, like many autoimmune disorders, occurs more frequently in females than in males.

Table 118-3 Features of Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia

 
 
Features Details 
Thrombocytopenia Platelet count of 100,000/L or a decrease in platelet count of 50% 
Timing Platelet count falls 5每10 days after starting heparin 
Type of heparin More common with unfractionated heparin than low-molecular-weight heparin 
Type of patient More common in surgical patients and patients with cancer than general medical patients. More common in women than in men 
Thrombosis Venous thrombosis more common than arterial thrombosis 
 

 

HIT can be associated with thrombosis, either arterial or venous. Venous thrombosis, which manifests as DVT and/or PE, is more common than arterial thrombosis. Arterial thrombosis can manifest as ischemic stroke or acute MI. Rarely, platelet-rich thrombi in the distal aorta or iliac arteries can cause critical limb ischemia.

The diagnosis of HIT is established using enzyme-linked assays to detect antibodies against heparin-PF4 complexes or with platelet activation assays. Enzyme-linked assays are sensitive but can be positive in the absence of any clinical evidence of HIT. The most specific diagnostic test is the serotonin release assay. This test is performed by quantifying serotonin release when washed platelets loaded with labeled serotonin are exposed to patient serum in the absence or presence of varying concentrations of heparin. If the patient serum contains the HIT antibody, heparin addition induces platelet activation and serotonin release.

Management of HIT is outlined in Table 118-4. Heparin should be stopped in patients with suspected or documented HIT, and an alternative anticoagulant should be administered to prevent or treat thrombosis. The agents most often used for this indication are parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors, such as lepirudin, argatroban, or bivalirudin, or factor Xa inhibitors, such as fondaparinux.

Table 118-4 Management of Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia

 
 
Stop all heparin 
Give an alternative anticoagulant, such as lepirudin, argatroban, bivalirudin, or fondaparinux 
Do not give platelet transfusions 
Do not give warfarin until the platelet count returns to its baseline level. If warfarin is administered, give vitamin K to restore the INR to normal 
Evaluate for thrombosis, particularly deep-vein thrombosis 
 


Abbreviation: INR, International normalized ratio.
 

Patients with HIT, particularly those with associated thrombosis, often have evidence of increased thrombin generation that can lead to consumption of protein C. If these patients are given warfarin without a concomitant parenteral anticoagulant to inhibit thrombin or thrombin generation, the further decrease in protein C levels induced by the vitamin K antagonist can trigger skin necrosis. To avoid this problem, patients with HIT should be treated with a direct thrombin inhibitor or fondaparinux until the platelet count returns to normal levels. At this point, low-dose warfarin therapy can be introduced, and the thrombin inhibitor can be discontinued when the anticoagulant response to warfarin has been therapeutic for at least 2 days.

Osteoporosis

Treatment with therapeutic doses of heparin for >1 month can cause a reduction in bone density. This complication has been reported in up to 30% of patients given long-term heparin therapy, and symptomatic vertebral fractures occur in 2每3% of these individuals.

Heparin causes bone loss both by decreasing bone formation and by enhancing bone resorption. Thus, heparin affects the activity of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts.

Elevated Levels of Transaminases

Therapeutic doses of heparin frequently cause modest elevation in the serum levels of hepatic transaminases, without a concomitant increase in the level of bilirubin. The levels of transaminases rapidly return to normal when the drug is stopped. The mechanism of this phenomenon is unknown.

Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin

Consisting of smaller fragments of heparin, LMWH is prepared from unfractionated heparin by controlled enzymatic or chemical depolymerization. The mean molecular weight of LMWH is 5000, one-third the mean molecular weight of unfractionated heparin. LMWH has advantages over heparin (Table 118-5) and has replaced heparin for most indications.

Table 118-5 Advantages of LMWH over Heparin

 
 
Advantage Consequence 
Better bioavailability and longer half-life after subcutaneous injection Can be given subcutaneously once or twice daily for both prophylaxis and treatment 
Dose-independent clearance Simplified dosing 
Predictable anticoagulant response Coagulation monitoring is unnecessary in most patients 
Lower risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia Safer than heparin for short- or long-term administration 
Lower risk of osteoporosis Safer than heparin for extended administration 
 


Abbreviation: LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin.
 

Mechanism of Action

Like heparin, LMWH exerts its anticoagulant activity by activating antithrombin. With a mean molecular weight of 5000, which corresponds to about 17 saccharide units, at least half of the pentasaccharide-containing chains of LMWH are too short to bridge thrombin to antithrombin (Fig. 118-5). However, these chains retain the capacity to accelerate factor Xa inhibition by antithrombin because this activity is largely the result of the conformational changes in antithrombin evoked by pentasaccharide binding. Consequently, LMWH catalyzes factor Xa inhibition by antithrombin more than thrombin inhibition. Depending on their unique molecular weight distributions, LMWH preparations have anti-factor Xa to anti-factor IIa ratios ranging from 2:1 to 4:1.

Pharmacology

Although usually given SC, LMWH also can be administered IV if a rapid anticoagulant response is needed. LMWH has pharmacokinetic advantages over heparin. These advantages reflect the fact that shorter heparin chains bind less avidly to endothelial cells, macrophages, and heparin-binding plasma proteins. Reduced binding to endothelial cells and macrophages eliminates the rapid, dose-dependent, and saturable mechanism of clearance that is a characteristic of unfractionated heparin. Instead, the clearance of LMWH is dose-independent and its plasma half-life is longer. Based on measurement of anti-factor Xa levels, LMWH has a plasma half-life of 4 h. LMWH is cleared almost exclusively by the kidneys, and the drug can accumulate in patients with renal insufficiency.

LMWH exhibits about 90% bioavailability after SC injection. Because LMWH binds less avidly to heparin-binding proteins in plasma than heparin, LMWH produces a more predictable dose response, and resistance to LMWH is rare. With a longer half-life and more predictable anticoagulant response, LMWH can be given SC once or twice daily without coagulation monitoring, even when the drug is given in treatment doses. These properties render LMWH more convenient than unfractionated heparin. Capitalizing on this feature, studies in patients with venous thromboembolism have shown that home treatment with LMWH is as effective and safe as in-hospital treatment with continuous IV infusions of heparin. Outpatient treatment with LMWH streamlines care, reduces health care costs, and increases patient satisfaction.

Monitoring

In the majority of patients, LMWH does not require coagulation monitoring. If monitoring is necessary, anti-factor Xa levels must be measured because most LMWH preparations have little effect on the aPTT. Therapeutic anti-factor Xa levels with LMWH range from 0.5 to 1.2 units/mL when measured 3每4 h after drug administration. When LMWH is given in prophylactic doses, peak anti-Factor Xa levels of 0.2每0.5 units/mL are desirable.

Indications for LMWH monitoring include renal insufficiency and obesity. LMWH monitoring in patients with a creatinine clearance of 50 mL/min is advisable to ensure that there is no drug accumulation. Although weight-adjusted LMWH dosing appears to produce therapeutic anti-factor Xa levels in patients who are overweight, this approach has not been extensively evaluated in those with morbid obesity. It may also be advisable to monitor the anticoagulant activity of LMWH during pregnancy because dose requirements can change, particularly in the third trimester. Monitoring should also be considered in high-risk settings, such as in patients with mechanical heart valves who are given LMWH for prevention of valve thrombosis, and when LMWH is used in treatment doses in infants or children.

Dosing

The doses of LMWH recommended for prophylaxis or treatment vary depending on the LMWH preparation. For prophylaxis, once-daily SC doses of 4000每5000 units are often used, whereas doses of 2500每3000 units are given when the drug is administered twice daily. For treatment of venous thromboembolism, a dose of 150每200 units/kg is given if the drug is administered once daily. If a twice-daily regimen is employed, a dose of 100 units/kg is given. In patients with unstable angina, LMWH is given SC on a twice-daily basis at a dose of 100每120 units/kg.

Side Effects

The major complication of LMWH is bleeding. Meta-analyses suggest that the risk of major bleeding is lower with LMWH than with unfractionated heparin. HIT and osteoporosis are less common with LMWH than with unfractionated heparin.

Bleeding

Like the situation with heparin, bleeding with LMWH is more common in patients receiving concomitant therapy with antiplatelet or fibrinolytic drugs. Recent surgery, trauma, or underlying hemostatic defects also increase the risk of bleeding with LMWH.

Although protamine sulfate can be used as an antidote for LMWH, protamine sulfate incompletely neutralizes the anticoagulant activity of LMWH because it only binds the longer chains of LMWH. Because longer chains are responsible for catalysis of thrombin inhibition by antithrombin, protamine sulfate completely reverses the anti-factor IIa activity of LMWH. In contrast, protamine sulfate only partially reverses the anti-factor Xa activity of LMWH because the shorter pentasaccharide-containing chains of LMWH do not bind to protamine sulfate. Consequently, patients at high risk for bleeding may be more safely treated with continuous IV unfractionated heparin than with SC LMWH.

Thrombocytopenia

The risk of HIT is about fivefold lower with LMWH than with heparin. LMWH binds less avidly to platelets and causes less PF4 release. Furthermore, with lower affinity for PF4 than heparin, LMWH is less likely to induce the conformational changes in PF4 that trigger the formation of HIT antibodies.

LMWH should not be used to treat HIT patients because most HIT antibodies exhibit cross-reactivity with LMWH. This in vitro cross-reactivity is not simply a laboratory phenomenon because there are case reports of thrombosis when HIT patients are treated with LMWH.

Osteoporosis

The risk of osteoporosis is lower with long-term LMWH than with heparin. For extended treatment, therefore, LMWH is a better choice than heparin because of the lower risk of osteoporosis and HIT.

Fondaparinux

A synthetic analogue of the antithrombin-binding pentasaccharide sequence, fondaparinux differs from LMWH in several ways (Table 118-6). Fondaparinux is licensed for thromboprophylaxis in general medical or surgical patients and in high-risk orthopedic patients and as an alternative to heparin or LMWH for initial treatment of patients with established venous thromboembolism. The drug is not yet licensed in the United States as an alternative for heparin or LMWH in patients with acute coronary syndromes.

Table 118-6 Comparison of LMWH and Fondaparinux

 
 
Features LMWH Fondaparinux 
Number of saccharide units 15每17 5 
Catalysis of factor Xa inhibition Yes Yes 
Catalysis of thrombin inhibition Yes No 
Bioavailability after subcutaneous administration (%) 90 100 
Plasma half-life (h) 4 17 
Renal excretion Yes Yes 
Induces release of tissue factor pathway inhibitor Yes No 
Neutralized by protamine sulfate Partially No 
 

 

Mechanism of Action

As a synthetic analogue of the antithrombin-binding pentasaccharide sequence found in heparin and LMWH, fondaparinux has a molecular weight of 1728. Fondaparinux binds only to antithrombin (Fig. 118-5) and is too short to bridge thrombin to antithrombin. Consequently, fondaparinux catalyzes factor Xa inhibition by antithrombin and does not enhance the rate of thrombin inhibition.

Pharmacology

Fondaparinux exhibits complete bioavailability after SC injection. With no binding to endothelial cells or plasma proteins, the clearance of fondaparinux is dose independent and its plasma half-life is 17 h. The drug is given SC once daily. Because fondaparinux is cleared unchanged via the kidneys, it is contraindicated in patients with a creatinine clearance <30 mL/min and should be used with caution in those with a creatinine clearance <50 mL/min.

Fondaparinux produces a predictable anticoagulant response after administration in fixed doses because it does not bind to plasma proteins. The drug is given at a dose of 2.5 mg once daily for prevention of venous thromboembolism. For initial treatment of established venous thromboembolism, fondaparinux is given at a dose of 7.5 mg once daily. The dose can be reduced to 5 mg once daily for those weighing <50 kg and increased to 10 mg for those >100 kg. When given in these doses, fondaparinux is as effective as heparin or LMWH for initial treatment of patients with DVT or PE and produces similar rates of bleeding.

Fondaparinux is used at a dose of 2.5 mg once daily in patients with acute coronary syndromes. When this prophylactic dose of fondaparinux was compared with treatment doses of enoxaparin in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes, there was no difference in the rate of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke at 9 days. However, the rate of major bleeding was 50% lower with fondaparinux than with enoxaparin, a difference that likely reflects the fact that the dose of fondaparinux was lower than that of enoxaparin. In acute coronary syndrome patients who require percutaneous coronary interventions, there is a risk of catheter thrombosis with fondaparinux, unless adjunctive heparin is given.

Side Effects

Fondaparinux does not cause HIT because it does not bind to PF4. In contrast to LMWH, there is no cross-reactivity of fondaparinux with HIT antibodies. Consequently, fondaparinux appears to be effective for treatment of HIT patients, although large clinical trials supporting its use are lacking.

The major side effect of fondaparinux is bleeding. There is no antidote for fondaparinux. Protamine sulfate has no effect on the anticoagulant activity of fondaparinux because it fails to bind to the drug. Recombinant activated factor VII reverses the anticoagulant effects of fondaparinux in volunteers, but it is unknown whether this agent will control fondaparinux-induced bleeding.

Parenteral Direct Thrombin Inhibitors

Heparin and LMWH are indirect inhibitors of thrombin because their activity is mediated by antithrombin. In contrast, direct thrombin inhibitors do not require a plasma cofactor; instead, these agents bind directly to thrombin and block its interaction with its substrates. Approved parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors include lepirudin, argatroban, and bivalirudin (Table 118-7). Lepirudin and argatroban are licensed for treatment of patients with HIT, whereas bivalirudin is approved as an alternative to heparin in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions, including those with HIT.

Table 118-7 Comparison of the Properties of Lepirudin, Bivalirudin, and Argatroban

 
 
  Lepirudin Bivalirudin Argatroban 
Molecular mass 7000 1980 527 
Site(s) of interaction with thrombin Active site and exosite 1 Active site and exosite 1 Active site 
Renal clearance Yes No No 
Hepatic metabolism No No Yes 
Plasma half-life (min) 60 25 45 
 

 

Lepirudin

A recombinant form of hirudin, lepirudin is a bivalent direct thrombin inhibitor that interacts with both the active site and exosite 1, the substrate-binding site, on thrombin. For rapid anticoagulation, lepirudin is given by continuous IV infusion, but the drug can be given SC for thromboprophylaxis. Lepirudin has a plasma half-life of 60 min after IV infusion and is cleared by the kidneys. Consequently, lepirudin accumulates in patients with renal insufficiency. A high proportion of lepirudin-treated patients develop antibodies against the drug. Although these antibodies rarely cause problems, in a small subset of patients, they can delay lepirudin clearance and enhance its anticoagulant activity. Serious bleeding has been reported in some of these patients.

Lepirudin is usually monitored using the aPTT, and the dose is adjusted to maintain an aPTT that is 1.5每2.5 times the control. The aPTT is not an ideal test for monitoring lepirudin therapy because the clotting time plateaus with higher drug concentrations. Although the ecarin clotting time provides a better index of lepirudin dose than the aPTT, the ecarin clotting time has yet to be standardized.

Argatroban

A univalent inhibitor that targets the active site of thrombin, argatroban is metabolized in the liver. Consequently, this drug must be used with caution in patients with hepatic insufficiency. Argatroban is not cleared via the kidneys, so this drug is safer than lepirudin for HIT patients with renal insufficiency.

Argatroban is administered by continuous IV infusion and has a plasma half-life of 45 min. The aPTT is used to monitor its anticoagulant effect, and the dose is adjusted to achieve an aPTT 1.5每3 times the baseline value, but not to exceed 100 s. Argatroban also prolongs the international normalized ratio (INR), a feature that can complicate the transitioning of patients to warfarin. This problem can be circumvented by using the levels of factor X to monitor warfarin in place of the INR. Alternatively, argatroban can be stopped for 2每3 h before INR determination.

Bivalirudin

A synthetic 20-amino-acid analogue of hirudin, bivalirudin is a divalent thrombin inhibitor. Thus, the N-terminal portion of bivalirudin interacts with the active site of thrombin, whereas its C-terminal tail binds to exosite 1, the substrate-binding domain on thrombin. Bivalirudin has a plasma half-life of 25 min, the shortest half-life of all the parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors. Bivalirudin is degraded by peptidases and is partially excreted via the kidneys. When given in high doses in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, the anticoagulant activity of bivalirudin is monitored using the activated clotting time. With lower doses, its activity can be assessed using the aPTT.

Studies comparing bivalirudin with heparin suggest that bivalirudin produces less bleeding. This feature plus its short half-life make bivalirudin an attractive alternative to heparin in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions. Bivalirudin also has been used successfully in HIT patients who require percutaneous coronary interventions.

Oral Anticoagulants

Current oral anticoagulant practice dates back almost 60 years to when the vitamin K antagonists were discovered as a result of investigations into the cause of hemorrhagic disease in cattle. Characterized by a decrease in prothrombin levels, this disorder is caused by ingestion of hay containing spoiled sweet clover. Hydroxycoumarin, which was isolated from bacterial contaminants in the hay, interferes with vitamin K metabolism, thereby causing a syndrome similar to vitamin K deficiency. Discovery of this compound provided the impetus for development of other vitamin K antagonists, including warfarin.

Warfarin

A water-soluble vitamin K antagonist initially developed as a rodenticide, warfarin is the coumarin derivative most often prescribed in North America. Like other vitamin K antagonists, warfarin interferes with the synthesis of the vitamin K每dependent clotting proteins, which include prothrombin (factor II) and factors VII, IX, and X. The synthesis of the vitamin K每dependent anticoagulant proteins, proteins C and S, is also reduced by vitamin K antagonists.

Mechanism of Action

All of the vitamin K每dependent clotting factors possess glutamic acid residues at their N termini. A posttranslational modification adds a carboxyl group to the -carbon of these residues to generate -carboxyglutamic acid. This modification is essential for expression of the activity of these clotting factors because it permits their calcium-dependent binding to negatively charged phospholipid surfaces. The -carboxylation process is catalyzed by a vitamin K每dependent carboxylase. Thus, vitamin K from the diet is reduced to vitamin K hydroquinone by vitamin K reductase (Fig. 118-6). Vitamin K hydroquinone serves as a cofactor for the carboxylase enzyme, which in the presence of carbon dioxide replaces the hydrogen on the -carbon of glutamic acid residues with a carboxyl group. During this process, vitamin K hydroquinone is oxidized to vitamin K epoxide, which is then reduced to vitamin K by vitamin K epoxide reductase.

Figure 118-6

 
 
 
Mechanism of action of warfarin. A racemic mixture of S- and R-enantiomers, S-warfarin is most active. By blocking vitamin K epoxide reductase, warfarin inhibits the conversion of oxidized vitamin K into its reduced form. This inhibits vitamin K每dependent -carboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X because reduced vitamin K serves as a cofactor for a -glutamyl carboxylase that catalyzes the -carboxylation process, thereby converting prozymogens to zymogens capable of binding calcium and interacting with anionic phospholipid surfaces. S-warfarin is metabolized by CYP2C9. Common genetic polymorphisms in this enzyme can influence warfarin metabolism. Polymorphisms in the C1 subunit of vitamin K reductase (VKORC1) also can affect the susceptibility of the enzyme to warfarin-induced inhibition, thereby influencing warfarin dosage requirements.
 
 

Warfarin inhibits vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR), thereby blocking the -carboxylation process. This results in the synthesis of vitamin K每dependent clotting proteins that are only partially -carboxylated. Warfarin acts as an anticoagulant because these partially -carboxylated proteins have reduced or absent biologic activity. The onset of action of warfarin is delayed until the newly synthesized clotting factors with reduced activity gradually replace their fully active counterparts.

The antithrombotic effect of warfarin depends on a reduction in the functional levels of factor X and prothrombin, clotting factors that have half-lives of 24 and 72 h, respectively. Because of the delay in achieving an antithrombotic effect, initial treatment with warfarin is supported by concomitant administration of a rapidly acting parenteral anticoagulant, such as heparin, LMWH, or fondaparinux, in patients with established thrombosis or at high risk for thrombosis.

Pharmacology

Warfarin is a racemic mixture of R and S isomers. Warfarin is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Levels of warfarin in the blood peak about 90 min after drug administration. Racemic warfarin has a plasma half-life of 36每42 h, and more than 97% of circulating warfarin is bound to albumin. Only the small fraction of unbound warfarin is biologically active.

Warfarin accumulates in the liver where the two isomers are metabolized via distinct pathways. CYP2C9 mediates oxidative metabolism of the more active S isomer (Fig. 118-6). Two relatively common variants, CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3, encode an enzyme with reduced activity. Patients with these variants require lower maintenance doses of warfarin. Approximately 25% of Caucasians have at least one variant allele of CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3, whereas those variant alleles are less common in African Americans and Asians (Table 118-8). Heterozygosity for CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 decreases the warfarin dose requirement by 20每30% relative to that required in subjects with the wild-type CYP2C9*1/*1 alleles, whereas homozygosity for the CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 alleles reduces the warfarin dose requirement by 50每70%.

Table 118-8 Frequencies of CYP2C9 Genotypes and VKORC1 Haplotypes in Different Populations and Their Effect on Warfarin Dose Requirements

 
 
  Frequency, %   
Genotype/haploptye Caucasians African Americans (A/A) Asians (A) Dose reduction compared with wild-type 
CYP2C9          
*1/*1 70 90 95 每 
*1/*2 17 2 0 22 
*1/*3 9 3 4 34 
*2/*2 2 0 0 43 
*2/*3 1 0 0 53 
*3/*3 0 0 1 76 
VKORC1          
Non-A/non-A 37 82 7 每 
Non-A/A 45 12 30 26 
A/A 18 6 63 50 
 

 

Consistent with their decreased warfarin dose requirement, subjects with at least one CYP2C9 variant allele are at increased risk for bleeding. Compared with individuals with no variant alleles, the relative risks for warfarin-associated bleeding in CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 carriers are 1.91 and 1.77, respectively.

Polymorphisms in VKORC1 also can influence the anticoagulant response to warfarin. Several genetic variations of VKORC1 are in strong linkage disequilibrium and have been designated as non-A haplotypes. VKORC1 variants are more prevalent than variants of CYP2C9. Asians have the highest prevalence of VKORC1 variants, followed by Caucasians and African Americans (Table 118-8). Polymorphisms in VKORC1 likely explain 30% of the variability in warfarin dose requirements. Compared with VKORC1 non-A/non-A homozygotes, the warfarin dose requirement decreases by 25 and 50% in A halotype heterozygotes and homozygotes, respectively. These findings prompted the Food and Drug Administration to amend the prescribing information for warfarin to indicate that lower initiation doses should be considered for patients with CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genetic variants. In addition to genotype data, other pertinent patient information has been incorporated into warfarin dosing algorithms. Although such algorithms help predict suitable warfarin doses, it remains unclear whether better dose identification improves patient outcome in terms of reducing hemorrhagic complications or recurrent thrombotic events.

In addition to genetic factors, the anticoagulant effect of warfarin is influenced by diet, drugs, and various disease states. Fluctuations in dietary vitamin K intake affect the activity of warfarin. A wide variety of drugs can alter absorption, clearance, or metabolism of warfarin. Because of the variability in the anticoagulant response to warfarin, coagulation monitoring is essential to ensure that a therapeutic response is obtained.

Monitoring

Warfarin therapy is most often monitored using the prothrombin time, a test that is sensitive to reductions in the levels of prothrombin, factor VII, and factor X. The test is performed by adding thromboplastin, a reagent that contains tissue factor, phospholipid, and calcium, to citrated plasma and determining the time to clot formation. Thromboplastins vary in their sensitivity to reductions in the levels of the vitamin K每dependent clotting factors. Thus, less sensitive thromboplastins will trigger the administration of higher doses of warfarin to achieve a target prothrombin time. This is problematic because higher doses of warfarin increase the risk of bleeding.

The INR was developed to circumvent many of the problems associated with the prothrombin time. To calculate the INR, the patient's prothrombin time is divided by the mean normal prothrombin time, and this ratio is then multiplied by the international sensitivity index (ISI), an index of the sensitivity of the thromboplastin used for prothrombin time determination to reductions in the levels of the vitamin K每dependent clotting factors. Highly sensitive thromboplastins have an ISI of 1.0. Most current thromboplastins have ISI values that range from 1.0 to 1.4.

Although the INR has helped to standardize anticoagulant practice, problems persist. The precision of INR determination varies depending on reagent-coagulometer combinations. This leads to variability in the INR results. Also complicating INR determination is unreliable reporting of the ISI by thromboplastin manufacturers. Furthermore, every laboratory must establish the mean normal prothrombin time with each new batch of thromboplastin reagent. To accomplish this, the prothrombin time must be measured in fresh plasma samples from at least 20 healthy volunteers using the same coagulometer that is used for patient samples.

For most indications, warfarin is administered in doses that produce a target INR of 2.0每3.0. An exception is patients with mechanical heart valves, where a target INR of 2.5每3.5 is recommended. Studies in atrial fibrillation demonstrate an increased risk of cardioembolic stroke when the INR falls to <1.7 and an increase in bleeding with INR values >4.5. These findings highlight the fact that vitamin K antagonists have a narrow therapeutic window. In support of this concept, a study in patients receiving long-term warfarin therapy for unprovoked venous thromboembolism demonstrated a higher rate of recurrent venous thromboembolism with a target INR of 1.5每1.9 compared with a target INR of 2.0每3.0.

Dosing

Warfarin is usually started at a dose of 5每10 mg. Lower doses are used for patients with CYP2C9 or VKORC1 polymorphisms, which affect the pharmacodynamics or pharmacokinetics of warfarin and render patients more sensitive to the drug. The dose is then titrated to achieve the desired target INR. Because of its delayed onset of action, patients with established thrombosis or those at high risk for thrombosis are given concomitant treatment with a rapidly acting parenteral anticoagulant, such as heparin, LMWH, or fondaparinux. Initial prolongation of the INR reflects reduction in the functional levels of factor VII. Consequently, concomitant treatment with the parenteral anticoagulant should be continued until the INR has been therapeutic for at least 2 consecutive days. A minimum 5-day course of parenteral anticoagulation is recommended to ensure that the levels of prothrombin have been reduced into the therapeutic range with warfarin.

Because warfarin has a narrow therapeutic window, frequent coagulation monitoring is essential to ensure that a therapeutic anticoagulant response is obtained. Even patients with stable warfarin dose requirements should have their INR determined every 2每3 weeks. More frequent monitoring is necessary when new medications are introduced because so many drugs enhance or reduce the anticoagulant effects of warfarin.

Side Effects

Like all anticoagulants, the major side effect of warfarin is bleeding. A rare complication is skin necrosis. Warfarin crosses the placenta and can cause fetal abnormalities. Consequently, warfarin should not be used during pregnancy.

Bleeding

At least half of the bleeding complications with warfarin occur when the INR exceeds the therapeutic range. Bleeding complications may be mild, such as epistaxis or hematuria, or more severe, such as retroperitoneal or gastrointestinal bleeding. Life-threatening intracranial bleeding can also occur.

To minimize the risk of bleeding, the INR should be maintained in the therapeutic range. In asymptomatic patients whose INR is between 3.5 and 4.5, warfarin should be withheld until the INR returns to the therapeutic range. If the INR is >4.5, a therapeutic INR can be achieved more rapidly by administration of low doses of sublingual vitamin K. A vitamin K dose of 1 mg is usually adequate for patients with an INR between 4.9 and 9, whereas 2每3 mg can be used for those with an INR >9. Higher doses of vitamin K can be administered if more rapid reversal of the INR is required or if the INR is excessively high. Although vitamin K administration results in a more rapid reduction in the INR compared with simply holding the warfarin, there is no evidence that vitamin K administration reduces the risk of hemorrhage.

Patients with serious bleeding need more aggressive treatment. These patients should be given 10 mg of vitamin K by slow IV infusion. Additional vitamin K should be given until the INR is in the normal range. Treatment with vitamin K should be supplemented with fresh-frozen plasma as a source of the vitamin K每dependent clotting proteins. For life-threatening bleeds, or if patients cannot tolerate the volume load, prothrombin complex concentrates can be used.

Warfarin-treated patients who experience bleeding when their INR is in the therapeutic range require investigation into the cause of the bleeding. Those with gastrointestinal bleeding often have underlying peptic ulcer disease or a tumor. Similarly, investigation of hematuria or uterine bleeding in patients with a therapeutic INR may unmask a tumor of the genitourinary tract.

Skin Necrosis

A rare complication of warfarin, skin necrosis usually is seen 2每5 days after initiation of therapy. Well-demarcated erythematous lesions form on the thighs, buttocks, breasts, or toes. Typically, the center of the lesion becomes progressively necrotic. Examination of skin biopsies taken from the border of these lesions reveals thrombi in the microvasculature.

Warfarin-induced skin necrosis is seen in patients with congenital or acquired deficiencies of protein C or protein S. Initiation of warfarin therapy in these patients produces a precipitous fall in plasma levels of proteins C or S, thereby eliminating this important anticoagulant pathway before warfarin exerts an antithrombotic effect through lowering of the functional levels of factor X and prothrombin. The resultant procoagulant state triggers thrombosis. Why the thrombosis is localized to the microvasculature of fatty tissues is unclear.

Treatment involves discontinuation of warfarin and reversal with vitamin K, if needed. An alternative anticoagulant, such as heparin or LMWH, should be given in patients with thrombosis. Protein C concentrates or recombinant activated protein C can be given to protein C每deficient patients to accelerate healing of the skin lesions; fresh-frozen plasma may be of value for those with protein S deficiency. Occasionally, skin grafting is necessary when there is extensive skin loss.

Because of the potential for skin necrosis, patients with known protein C or protein S deficiency require overlapping treatment with a parenteral anticoagulant when initiating warfarin therapy. Warfarin should be started in low doses in these patients, and the parenteral anticoagulant should be continued until the INR is therapeutic for at least 2每3 consecutive days.

Pregnancy

Warfarin crosses the placenta and can cause fetal abnormalities or bleeding. The fetal abnormalities include a characteristic embryopathy, which consists of nasal hypoplasia and stippled epiphyses. The risk of embryopathy is highest if warfarin is given in the first trimester of pregnancy. Central nervous system abnormalities can also occur with exposure to warfarin at any time during pregnancy. Finally, maternal administration of warfarin produces an anticoagulant effect in the fetus that can cause bleeding. This is of particular concern at delivery when trauma to the head during passage through the birth canal can lead to intracranial bleeding. Because of these potential problems, warfarin is contraindicated in pregnancy, particularly in the first and third trimesters. Instead, heparin, LMWH, or fondaparinux can be given during pregnancy for prevention or treatment of thrombosis.

Warfarin does not pass into the breast milk. Consequently, warfarin can safely be given to nursing mothers.

Special Problems

Patients with a lupus anticoagulant or those who need urgent or elective surgery present special challenges. Although observational studies suggested that patients with thrombosis complicating the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome required higher intensity warfarin regimens to prevent recurrent thromboembolic events, two randomized trials showed that targeting an INR of 2.0每3.0 is as effective as higher intensity treatment and produces less bleeding. Monitoring warfarin therapy can be problematic in patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome if the lupus anticoagulant prolongs the baseline INR.

If patients receiving long-term warfarin treatment require an elective invasive procedure, warfarin can be stopped 5 days before the procedure to allow the INR to return to normal levels. Those at high risk for recurrent thrombosis can be bridged with once- or twice-daily SC injections of LMWH when the INR falls to <2.0. The last dose of LMWH should be given 12每24 h before the procedure, depending on whether LMWH is administered twice or once daily. After the procedure, treatment with warfarin can be restarted.

New Oral Anticoagulants

New oral anticoagulants that target thrombin or factor Xa are under development. These drugs have a rapid onset of action and have half-lives that permit once- or twice-daily administration. Designed to produce a predictable level of anticoagulation, these new oral agents are given in fixed doses without routine coagulation monitoring. Therefore, these drugs are more convenient to administer than warfarin.

Dabigatran etexilate, an oral thrombin inhibitor, and rivaroxaban, an oral factor Xa inhibitor, are licensed in Europe and Canada for short-term thromboprophylaxis after elective hip or knee replacement surgery. Phase III trials with apixaban, another oral factor Xa inhibitor, also have been completed in patients undergoing major orthopedic surgery (Table 118-9).

Table 118-9 Comparison of the Features of New Oral Anticoagulants in Advanced Stages of Development

 
 
Features Rivaroxaban Apixaban Dabigatran Etexilate 
Target Xa Xa IIa 
Molecular weight 436 460 628 
Prodrug No No Yes 
Bioavailability (%) 80 50 6 
Time to peak (h) 3 3 2 
Half-life (h) 9 9每14 12每17 
Renal excretion (%) 65 25 80 
Antidote None None None 
 

 

The RE-LY trial shows the promise of these new agents for long-term indications. This trial compared two different dose regimens of dabigatran etexilate (110 mg or 150 mg twice daily) with warfarin (dose-adjusted to achieve an INR between 2 and 3) for stroke prevention in 18,113 patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. The annual rates of the primary efficacy outcome, stroke or systemic embolism, were 1.7% with warfarin, 1.5% with the lower dose dabigatran regimen, and 1.1% with the higher dose regimen. Thus, the lower dose dabigatran regimen was noninferior to warfarin, while the higher dose regimen was superior. Annual rates of major bleeding were 3.4% with warfarin compared with 2.7% and 3.1% with the lower and higher dose dabigatran regimens, respectively. Thus, the lower dose dabigatran regimen was associated with significantly less major bleeding than warfarin, while the rate of major bleeding with the higher dose regimen was not significantly different from that with warfarin. Rates of intracerebral bleeding were significantly lower with both doses of dabigatran than with warfarin, as were rates of life-threatening bleeding. There was no evidence of hepatotoxicity with dabigatran.

Based on the results of the RE-LY trial, dabigatran etexilate has been licensed in the United States and Canada for stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation. The 150 mg twice daily dose of dabigatran is recommended for most patients. In the United States, a 75 mg twice daily dose is recommended for patients with a creatinine clearance of 30 to 50 mL/min, while in Canada, the 110 mg twice daily dose is recommended for those over the age of 80 years or for patients at high risk of bleeding. The drug is contraindicated in patients with a creatinine clearance less than 15 mL/min.

Dabigatran etexilate also was compared with warfarin in 2539 patients with acute venous thromboembolism. Patients were initially treated with heparin or LMWH and then randomized to a 6-month course of dabigatran (150 mg twice daily) or warfarin, which was dose-adjusted to achieve an INR of 2每3. The primary endpoint, a composite of recurrent venous thromboembolism or fatal pulmonary embolism, occurred in 2.4% of patients given dabigatran and in 2.1% of those treated with warfarin. Major bleeding occurred in 1.6 and 1.9% of patients given dabigatran and warfarin, respectively. Based on the results of this trial, unmonitored fixed-dose dabigatran appears to be noninferior to warfarin for treatment of patients with venous thromboembolism. Taken together with the results of the RE-LY trial, these findings suggest that the new oral anticoagulants will gradually replace warfarin.
 
Fibrinolytic Drugs

Role of Fibrinolytic Therapy

Fibrinolytic drugs can be used to degrade thrombi and are administered systemically or can be delivered via catheters directly into the substance of the thrombus. Systemic delivery is used for treatment of acute MI, acute ischemic stroke, and most cases of massive PE. The goal of therapy is to produce rapid thrombus dissolution, thereby restoring antegrade blood flow. In the coronary circulation, restoration of blood flow reduces morbidity and mortality rates by limiting myocardial damage, whereas in the cerebral circulation, rapid thrombus dissolution decreases the neuronal death and brain infarction that produce irreversible brain injury. For patients with massive PE, the goal of thrombolytic therapy is to restore pulmonary artery perfusion.

Peripheral arterial thrombi and thrombi in the proximal deep veins of the leg are most often treated using catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy. Catheters with multiple side holes can be utilized to enhance drug delivery. In some cases, intravascular devices that fragment and extract the thrombus are used to hasten treatment. These devices can be used alone or in conjunction with fibrinolytic drugs.

Mechanism of Action

Currently approved fibrinolytic agents include streptokinase; acylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex (anistreplase); urokinase; recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rtPA), which is also known as alteplase or activase; and two recombinant derivatives of rtPA, tenecteplase and reteplase. All of these agents act by converting the proenzyme, plasminogen, to plasmin, the active enzyme (Fig. 118-7). Plasmin then degrades the fibrin matrix of thrombi and produces soluble fibrin degradation products.

Figure 118-7

 
 
 
The fibrinolytic system and its regulation. Plasminogen activators convert plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin then degrades fibrin into soluble fibrin degradation products. The system is regulated at two levels. Type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) regulates the plasminogen activators, whereas 2-antiplasmin serves as the major inhibitor of plasmin.
 
 

Endogenous fibrinolysis is regulated at two levels. Plasminogen activator inhibitors, particularly the type 1 form (PAI-1), prevent excessive plasminogen activation by regulating the activity of tPA and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA). Once plasmin is generated, it is regulated by plasmin inhibitors, the most important of which is 2-antiplasmin. The plasma concentration of plasminogen is twofold higher than that of 2-antiplasmin. Consequently, with pharmacologic doses of plasminogen activators, the concentration of plasmin that is generated can exceed that of 2-antiplasmin. In addition to degrading fibrin, unregulated plasmin can also degrade fibrinogen and other clotting factors. This process, which is known as the systemic lytic state, reduces the hemostatic potential of the blood and increases the risk of bleeding.

The endogenous fibrinolytic system is geared to localize plasmin generation to the fibrin surface. Both plasminogen and tPA bind to fibrin to form a ternary complex that promotes efficient plasminogen activation. In contrast to free plasmin, plasmin generated on the fibrin surface is relatively protected from inactivation by 2-antiplasmin, a feature that promotes fibrin dissolution. Furthermore, C-terminal lysine residues, exposed as plasmin degrades fibrin, serve as binding sites for additional plasminogen and tPA molecules. This creates a positive feedback that enhances plasmin generation. When used pharmacologically, the various plasminogen activators capitalize on these mechanisms to a lesser or greater extent.

Plasminogen activators that preferentially activate fibrin-bound plasminogen are considered fibrin-specific. In contrast, nonspecific plasminogen activators do not discriminate between fibrin-bound and circulating plasminogen. Activation of circulating plasminogen results in the generation of unopposed plasmin that can trigger the systemic lytic state. Alteplase and its derivatives are fibrin-specific plasminogen activators, whereas streptokinase, anistreplase, and urokinase are nonspecific agents.

Streptokinase

Unlike other plasminogen activators, streptokinase is not an enzyme and does not directly convert plasminogen to plasmin. Instead, streptokinase forms a 1:1 stoichiometric complex with plasminogen. Formation of this complex induces a conformational change in plasminogen that exposes its active site (Fig. 118-8). This conformationally altered plasminogen then converts additional plasminogen molecules to plasmin.

Figure 118-8

 
 
 
Mechanism of action of streptokinase. Streptokinase binds to plasminogen and induces a conformational change in plasminogen that exposes its active site. The streptokinase/plasmin(ogen) complex then serves as the activator of additional plasminogen molecules.
 
 

Streptokinase has no affinity for fibrin, and the streptokinase-plasminogen complex activates both free and fibrin-bound plasminogen. Activation of circulating plasminogen generates sufficient amounts of plasmin to overwhelm 2-antiplasmin. Unopposed plasmin not only degrades fibrin in the occlusive thrombus but also induces a systemic lytic state.

When given systemically to patients with acute MI, streptokinase reduces mortality. For this indication, the drug is usually given as an IV infusion of 1.5 million units over 30每60 min. Patients who receive streptokinase can develop antibodies against the drug, as can patients with prior streptococcal injection. These antibodies can reduce the effectiveness of streptokinase.

Allergic reactions occur in 5% of patients treated with streptokinase. These may manifest as a rash, fever, chills, and rigors. Although anaphylactic reactions can occur, these are rare. Transient hypotension is common with streptokinase and has been attributed to plasmin-mediated release of bradykinin from kininogen. The hypotension usually responds to leg elevation and administration of IV fluids and low doses of vasopressors, such as dopamine or norepinephrine.

Anistreplase

To generate this drug, streptokinase is combined with equimolar amounts of Lys-plasminogen, a plasmin-cleaved form of plasminogen with a Lys residue at its N terminus. The active site of Lys-plasminogen that is exposed upon combination with streptokinase is then masked with an anisoyl group. After IV infusion, the anisoyl group is slowly removed by deacylation, giving the complex a half-life of 100 min. This allows drug administration via a single bolus infusion.

Although it is more convenient to administer, anistreplase offers few mechanistic advantages over streptokinase. Like streptokinase, anistreplase does not distinguish between fibrin-bound and circulating plasminogen. Consequently, it too produces a systemic lytic state. Likewise, allergic reactions and hypotension are just as frequent with anistreplase as they are with streptokinase.

When anistreplase was compared with alteplase in patients with acute MI, reperfusion was obtained more rapidly with alteplase than with anistreplase. Improved reperfusion was associated with a trend toward better clinical outcomes and reduced mortality rate with alteplase. These results and the high cost of anistreplase have dampened the enthusiasm for its use.

Urokinase

Urokinase is a two-chain serine protease derived from cultured fetal kidney cells with a molecular weight of 34,000. Urokinase converts plasminogen to plasmin directly by cleaving the Arg560-Val561 bond. Unlike streptokinase, urokinase is not immunogenic and allergic reactions are rare. Urokinase produces a systemic lytic state because it does not discriminate between fibrin-bound and circulating plasminogen.

Despite many years of use, urokinase has never been systemically evaluated for coronary thrombolysis. Instead, urokinase is often employed for catheter-directed lysis of thrombi in the deep veins or the peripheral arteries. Because of production problems, the availability of urokinase is limited.

Alteplase

A recombinant form of single-chain tPA, alteplase has a molecular weight of 68,000. Alteplase is rapidly converted into its two-chain form by plasmin. Although single- and two-chain forms of tPA have equivalent activity in the presence of fibrin, in its absence, single-chain tPA has tenfold lower activity.

Alteplase consists of five discrete domains (Fig. 118-9); the N-terminal A chain of two-chain alteplase contains four of these domains. Residues 4 through 50 make up the finger domain, a region that resembles the finger domain of fibronectin; residues 50 through 87 are homologous with epidermal growth factor, whereas residues 92 through 173 and 180 through 261, which have homology to the kringle domains of plasminogen, are designated as the first and second kringle, respectively. The fifth alteplase domain is the protease domain; it is located on the C-terminal B chain of two-chain alteplase.

Figure 118-9

 
 
 
Domain structures of alteplase (tPA), tenecteplase (TNK-tPA), desmoteplase (b-PA), and reteplase (r-PA). The finger (F), epidermal growth factor (EGF), first and second kringles (K1 and K2, respectively), and protease (P) domains are illustrated. The glycosylation site (Y) on K1 has been repositioned in tenecteplase to endow it with a longer half-life. In addition, a tetra-alanine substitution in the protease domain renders tenecteplase resistant to PAI-1 inhibition. Desmoteplase differs from alteplase and tenecteplase in that it lacks a K2 domain. Reteplase is a truncated variant that lacks the F, EGF, and K1 domains.
 
 

The interaction of alteplase with fibrin is mediated by the finger domain and, to a lesser extent, by the second kringle domain. The affinity of alteplase for fibrin is considerably higher than that for fibrinogen. Consequently, the catalytic efficiency of plasminogen activation by alteplase is two to three orders of magnitude higher in the presence of fibrin than in the presence of fibrinogen. This phenomenon helps to localize plasmin generation to the fibrin surface.

Although alteplase preferentially activates plasminogen in the presence of fibrin, alteplase is not as fibrin-selective as was first predicted. Its fibrin specificity is limited because like fibrin, (DD)E, the major soluble degradation product of cross-linked fibrin, binds alteplase and plasminogen with high affinity. Consequently, (DD)E is as potent as fibrin as a stimulator of plasminogen activation by alteplase. Whereas plasmin generated on the fibrin surface results in thrombolysis, plasmin generated on the surface of circulating (DD)E degrades fibrinogen. Fibrinogenolysis results in the accumulation of fragment X, a high-molecular-weight clottable fibrinogen degradation product. Incorporation of fragment X into hemostatic plugs formed at sites of vascular injury renders them susceptible to lysis. This phenomenon may contribute to alteplase-induced bleeding.

A trial comparing alteplase with streptokinase for treatment of patients with acute MI demonstrated significantly lower mortality with alteplase than with streptokinase, although the absolute difference was small. The greatest benefit was seen in patients age <75 years with anterior MI who presented <6 h after symptom onset.

For treatment of acute MI or acute ischemic stroke, alteplase is given as an IV infusion over 60每90 min. The total dose of alteplase usually ranges from 90 to 100 mg. Allergic reactions and hypotension are rare, and alteplase is not immunogenic.

Tenecteplase

Tenecteplase is a genetically engineered variant of tPA and was designed to have a longer half-life than tPA and to be resistant to inactivation by PAI-1. To prolong its half-life, a new glycosylation site was added to the first kringle domain (Fig. 118-9). Because addition of this extra carbohydrate side chain reduced fibrin affinity, the existing glycosylation site on the first kringle domain was removed. To render the molecule resistant to inhibition by PAI-1, a tetra-alanine substitution was introduced at residues 296每299 in the protease domain, the region responsible for the interaction of tPA with PAI-1.

Tenecteplase is more fibrin-specific than tPA. Although both agents bind to fibrin with similar affinity, the affinity of tenecteplase for (DD)E is significantly lower than that of tPA. Consequently, (DD)E does not stimulate systemic plasminogen activation by tenecteplase to the same extent as tPA. As a result, tenecteplase produces less fibrinogenolysis than tPA.

For coronary thrombolysis, tenecteplase is given as a single IV bolus. In a large phase III trial that enrolled >16,000 patients, the 30-day mortality rate with single-bolus tenecteplase was similar to that with accelerated-dose tPA. Although rates of intracranial hemorrhage were also similar with both treatments, patients given tenecteplase had fewer noncerebral bleeds and a reduced need for blood transfusions than those treated with tPA. The improved safety profile of tenecteplase likely reflects its enhanced fibrinspecificity.

Reteplase

Reteplase is a recombinant tPA derivative and is a single-chain variant that lacks the finger, epidermal growth factor, and first kringle domains (Fig. 118-9). This truncated derivative has a molecular weight of 39,000. Reteplase binds fibrin more weakly than tPA because it lacks the finger domain. Because it is produced in Escherichia coli, reteplase is not glycosylated. This endows it with a plasma half-life longer than that of tPA. Consequently, reteplase is given as two IV boluses, which are separated by 30 min. Clinical trials have demonstrated that reteplase is at least as effective as streptokinase for treatment of acute MI, but the agent is not superior to tPA.

New Fibrinolytic Agents

Several new drugs are under investigation. These include desmoteplase (Fig. 118-9), a recombinant form of the full-length plasminogen activator isolated from the saliva of the vampire bat, and alfimeprase, a truncated form of fibrolase, an enzyme isolated from the venom of the southern copperhead snake. Clinical studies with these agents have been disappointing. Desmoteplase, which is more fibrin-specific than tPA, was investigated for treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Patients presenting 3每9 h after symptom onset were randomized to one of two doses of desmoteplase or to placebo. Overall response rates were low and no different with desmoteplase from with placebo. Mortality rate was higher in the desmoteplase arms.

Alfimeprase is a metalloproteinase that degrades fibrin and fibrinogen in a plasmin-independent fashion. In the circulation, alfimeprase is inhibited by 2-macroglobulin. Consequently, the drug must be delivered via a catheter directly into the thrombus. Studies of alfimeprase for treatment of peripheral arterial occlusion or for restoration of flow in blocked central venous catheters were stopped due to lack of efficacy. The disappointing results with desmoteplase and alfimeprase highlight the challenges of introducing new fibrinolytic drugs.
 
Conclusions and Future Directions

Arterial and venous thromboses reflect a complex interplay among the vessel wall, platelets, the coagulation system, and the fibrinolytic pathways. Activation of coagulation also triggers inflammatory pathways that may contribute to thrombogenesis. A better understanding of the biochemistry of blood coagulation and advances in structure-based drug design have identified new targets and resulted in the development of novel antithrombotic drugs. Well-designed clinical trials have provided detailed information on which drugs to use and when to use them. Despite these advances, however, thromboembolic disorders remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality rates. Therefore, the search for better targets and more potent antiplatelet, anticoagulant, and fibrinolytic drugs continues.
 
Further Readings

Connolly SJ et al: Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 361:1139, 2009[PMID: 19717844] 

 
Eikelboom JW, Weitz JI: New anticoagulants. Circulation 121:1523, 2010[PMID: 20368532] 

 
Greinacher A: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. J Thromb Haemost 7:9, 2009[PMID: 19630757] 

 
International Warfarin Pharmacogenetics Consortium: Estimation of the warfarin dose with clinical and pharmacogenetic data. N Engl J Med 360:753, 2009 

 
Mackman N: Triggers, targets and treatments of thrombosis. Nature 451:914, 2008[PMID: 18288180] 

 
Mega JL et al: Cytochrome p-450 polymorphisms and response to clopidogrel. N Engl J Med 360:354, 2009[PMID: 19106084] 

 
Rijken DC et al: New insights into the molecular mechanisms of the fibrinolytic system. J Thromb Haemost 7:4, 2009[PMID: 19017261] 

 
Varenhorst C et al: Genetic variation of CYP2C19 affects both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodymamic responses to clopidogrel but not prasugrel in aspirin-treated patients with coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J 30:1744, 2009[PMID: 19429918] 

 
Wallentin L et al: Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 361:1045, 2009[PMID: 19717846] 

 
〞〞〞: Effect of CYP2C19 and ABCB1 single nucleotide polymorphisms on outcomes of treatment with ticagrelor versus clopidogrel for acute coronary syndromes: A genetic substudy of the PLATO trial. Lancet 376:1320, 2010 

 
Watson SP: Platelet activation by extracellular matrix proteins in haemostasis and thrombosis. Curr Pharm Des 15:1358, 2009[PMID: 19355974] 

 
Wiviott SD et al for the TRITON每TIMI 38 Investigators: Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 357:2001, 2007[PMID: 17982182] 
^^
