
Pain: Pathophysiology and Management: Introduction

The task of medicine is to preserve and restore health and to relieve suffering. Understanding pain is essential to both of these goals. Because pain is universally understood as a signal of disease, it is the most common symptom that brings a patient to a physician's attention. The function of the pain sensory system is to protect the body and maintain homeostasis. It does this by detecting, localizing, and identifying potential or actual tissue-damaging processes. Because different diseases produce characteristic patterns of tissue damage, the quality, time course, and location of a patient's pain complaint provide important diagnostic clues. It is the physician's responsibility to provide rapid and effective pain relief.
 
The Pain Sensory System

Pain is an unpleasant sensation localized to a part of the body. It is often described in terms of a penetrating or tissue-destructive process (e.g., stabbing, burning, twisting, tearing, squeezing) and/or of a bodily or emotional reaction (e.g., terrifying, nauseating, sickening). Furthermore, any pain of moderate or higher intensity is accompanied by anxiety and the urge to escape or terminate the feeling. These properties illustrate the duality of pain: it is both sensation and emotion. When it is acute, pain is characteristically associated with behavioral arousal and a stress response consisting of increased blood pressure, heart rate, pupil diameter, and plasma cortisol levels. In addition, local muscle contraction (e.g., limb flexion, abdominal wall rigidity) is often present.

Peripheral Mechanisms

The Primary Afferent Nociceptor

A peripheral nerve consists of the axons of three different types of neurons: primary sensory afferents, motor neurons, and sympathetic postganglionic neurons (Fig. 11-1). The cell bodies of primary sensory afferents are located in the dorsal root ganglia in the vertebral foramina. The primary afferent axon has two branches: one projects centrally into the spinal cord and the other projects peripherally to innervate tissues. Primary afferents are classified by their diameter, degree of myelination, and conduction velocity. The largest-diameter afferent fibers, A-beta (A), respond maximally to light touch and/or moving stimuli; they are present primarily in nerves that innervate the skin. In normal individuals, the activity of these fibers does not produce pain. There are two other classes of primary afferents: the small-diameter myelinated A-delta (A) and the unmyelinated (C fiber) axons (Fig. 11-1). These fibers are present in nerves to the skin and to deep somatic and visceral structures. Some tissues, such as the cornea, are innervated only by A and C fiber afferents. Most A and C fiber afferents respond maximally only to intense (painful) stimuli and produce the subjective experience of pain when they are electrically stimulated; this defines them as primary afferent nociceptors (pain receptors). The ability to detect painful stimuli is completely abolished when conduction in A and C fiber axons is blocked.

Figure 11-1

 
 
 
Components of a typical cutaneous nerve. There are two distinct functional categories of axons: primary afferents with cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion, and sympathetic postganglionic fibers with cell bodies in the sympathetic ganglion. Primary afferents include those with large-diameter myelinated (A), small-diameter myelinated (A), and unmyelinated (C) axons. All sympathetic postganglionic fibers are unmyelinated.
 
 

Individual primary afferent nociceptors can respond to several different types of noxious stimuli. For example, most nociceptors respond to heat; intense cold; intense mechanical stimuli, such as a pinch; changes in pH, particularly an acidic environment; and application of chemical irritants including adenosine triphosphate (ATP), serotonin, bradykinin, and histamine.

Sensitization

When intense, repeated, or prolonged stimuli are applied to damaged or inflamed tissues, the threshold for activating primary afferent nociceptors is lowered, and the frequency of firing is higher for all stimulus intensities. Inflammatory mediators such as bradykinin, nerve-growth factor, some prostaglandins, and leukotrienes contribute to this process, which is called sensitization. Sensitization occurs at the level of the peripheral nerve terminal (peripheral sensitization) as well as at the level of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (central sensitization). Peripheral sensitization occurs in damaged or inflamed tissues, when inflammatory mediators activate intracellular signal transduction in nociceptors, prompting an increase in the production, transport, and membrane insertion of chemically gated and voltage-gated ion channels. These changes increase the excitability of nociceptor terminals and lower their threshold for activation by mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli. Central sensitization occurs when activity, generated by nociceptors during inflammation, enhances the excitability of nerve cells in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Following injury and resultant sensitization, normally innocuous stimuli can produce pain. Sensitization is a clinically important process that contributes to tenderness, soreness, and hyperalgesia (increased pain intensity in response to the same noxious stimulus; e.g. moderate pressure causes severe pain). A striking example of sensitization is sunburned skin, in which severe pain can be produced by a gentle slap on the back or a warm shower.

Sensitization is of particular importance for pain and tenderness in deep tissues. Viscera are normally relatively insensitive to noxious mechanical and thermal stimuli, although hollow viscera do generate significant discomfort when distended. In contrast, when affected by a disease process with an inflammatory component, deep structures such as joints or hollow viscera characteristically become exquisitely sensitive to mechanical stimulation.

A large proportion of A and C fiber afferents innervating viscera are completely insensitive in normal noninjured, noninflamed tissue. That is, they cannot be activated by known mechanical or thermal stimuli and are not spontaneously active. However, in the presence of inflammatory mediators, these afferents become sensitive to mechanical stimuli. Such afferents have been termed silent nociceptors, and their characteristic properties may explain how, under pathologic conditions, the relatively insensitive deep structures can become the source of severe and debilitating pain and tenderness. Low pH, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and other inflammatory mediators such as bradykinin play a significant role in sensitization.

Nociceptor-Induced Inflammation

Primary afferent nociceptors also have a neuroeffector function. Most nociceptors contain polypeptide mediators that are released from their peripheral terminals when they are activated (Fig. 11-2). An example is substance P, an 11-amino-acid peptide. Substance P is released from primary afferent nociceptors and has multiple biologic activities. It is a potent vasodilator, degranulates mast cells, is a chemoattractant for leukocytes, and increases the production and release of inflammatory mediators. Interestingly, depletion of substance P from joints reduces the severity of experimental arthritis. Primary afferent nociceptors are not simply passive messengers of threats to tissue injury but also play an active role in tissue protection through these neuroeffector functions.

Figure 11-2

 
 
 
 
Events leading to activation, sensitization, and spread of sensitization of primary afferent nociceptor terminals. A. Direct activation by intense pressure and consequent cell damage. Cell damage induces lower pH (H+) and leads to release of potassium (K+) and to synthesis of prostaglandins (PG) and bradykinin (BK). Prostaglandins increase the sensitivity of the terminal to bradykinin and other pain-producing substances. B. Secondary activation. Impulses generated in the stimulated terminal propagate not only to the spinal cord but also into other terminal branches where they induce the release of peptides, including substance P (SP). Substance P causes vasodilation and neurogenic edema with further accumulation of bradykinin (BK). Substance P also causes the release of histamine (H) from mast cells and serotonin (5HT) from platelets.
 
 

Central Mechanisms

The Spinal Cord and Referred Pain

The axons of primary afferent nociceptors enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root. They terminate in the dorsal horn of the spinal gray matter (Fig. 11-3). The terminals of primary afferent axons contact spinal neurons that transmit the pain signal to brain sites involved in pain perception. When primary afferents are activated by noxious stimuli, they release neurotransmitters from their terminals that excite the spinal cord neurons. The major neurotransmitter released is glutamate, which rapidly excites dorsal horn neurons. Primary afferent nociceptor terminals also release peptides, including substance P and calcitoningene-related peptide, which produce a slower and longer-lasting excitation of the dorsal horn neurons. The axon of each primary afferent contacts many spinal neurons, and each spinal neuron receives convergent inputs from many primary afferents.

Figure 11-3

 
 
 
The convergence-projection hypothesis of referred pain. According to this hypothesis, visceral afferent nociceptors converge on the same pain-projection neurons as the afferents from the somatic structures in which the pain is perceived. The brain has no way of knowing the actual source of input and mistakenly "projects" the sensation to the somatic structure.
 
 

The convergence of sensory inputs to a single spinal pain-transmission neuron is of great importance because it underlies the phenomenon of referred pain. All spinal neurons that receive input from the viscera and deep musculoskeletal structures also receive input from the skin. The convergence patterns are determined by the spinal segment of the dorsal root ganglion that supplies the afferent innervation of a structure. For example, the afferents that supply the central diaphragm are derived from the third and fourth cervical dorsal root ganglia. Primary afferents with cell bodies in these same ganglia supply the skin of the shoulder and lower neck. Thus, sensory inputs from both the shoulder skin and the central diaphragm converge on pain-transmission neurons in the third and fourth cervical spinal segments. Because of this convergence and the fact that the spinal neurons are most often activated by inputs from the skin, activity evoked in spinal neurons by input from deep structures is mislocalized by the patient to a place that roughly corresponds with the region of skin innervated by the same spinal segment. Thus, inflammation near the central diaphragm is usually reported as shoulder discomfort. This spatial displacement of pain sensation from the site of the injury that produces it is known as referred pain.

Ascending Pathways for Pain

A majority of spinal neurons contacted by primary afferent nociceptors send their axons to the contralateral thalamus. These axons form the contralateral spinothalamic tract, which lies in the anterolateral white matter of the spinal cord, the lateral edge of the medulla, and the lateral pons and midbrain. The spinothalamic pathway is crucial for pain sensation in humans. Interruption of this pathway produces permanent deficits in pain and temperature discrimination.

Spinothalamic tract axons ascend to several regions of the thalamus. There is tremendous divergence of the pain signal from these thalamic sites to broad areas of the cerebral cortex that subserve different aspects of the pain experience (Fig. 11-4). One of the thalamic projections is to the somatosensory cortex. This projection mediates the purely sensory aspects of pain, i.e., its location, intensity, and quality. Other thalamic neurons project to cortical regions that are linked to emotional responses, such as the cingulate gyrus and other areas of the frontal lobes, including the insular cortex. These pathways to the frontal cortex subserve the affective or unpleasant emotional dimension of pain. This affective dimension of pain produces suffering and exerts potent control of behavior. Because of this dimension, fear is a constant companion of pain. As a consequence, injury or surgical lesions to areas of the frontal cortex activated by painful stimuli diminish the emotional impact of pain while largely preserving the individual's ability to recognize noxious stimuli as painful.

Figure 11-4

 
 
 
 
Pain transmission and modulatory pathways. A. Transmission system for nociceptive messages. Noxious stimuli activate the sensitive peripheral ending of the primary afferent nociceptor by the process of transduction. The message is then transmitted over the peripheral nerve to the spinal cord, where it synapses with cells of origin of the major ascending pain pathway, the spinothalamic tract. The message is relayed in the thalamus to the anterior cingulate (C), frontal insular (F), and somatosensory cortex (SS). B. Pain-modulation network. Inputs from frontal cortex and hypothalamus activate cells in the midbrain that control spinal pain-transmission cells via cells in the medulla.
 
 

Pain Modulation

The pain produced by injuries of similar magnitude is remarkably variable in different situations and in different individuals. For example, athletes have been known to sustain serious fractures with only minor pain, and Beecher's classic World War II survey revealed that many soldiers in battle were unbothered by injuries that would have produced agonizing pain in civilian patients. Furthermore, even the suggestion that a treatment will relieve pain can have a significant analgesic effect (the placebo effect). On the other hand, many patients find even minor injuries (such as venipuncture) frightening and unbearable, and the expectation of pain can induce pain even without a noxious stimulus. The suggestion that pain will worsen following administration of an inert substance can increase its perceived intensity (the nocebo effect).

The powerful effect of expectation and other psychological variables on the perceived intensity of pain is explained by brain circuits that modulate the activity of the pain-transmission pathways. One of these circuits has links to the hypothalamus, midbrain, and medulla, and it selectively controls spinal pain-transmission neurons through a descending pathway (Fig. 11-4).

Human brain每imaging studies have implicated this pain-modulating circuit in the pain-relieving effect of attention, suggestion, and opioid analgesic medications (Fig. 11-5). Furthermore, each of the component structures of the pathway contains opioid receptors and is sensitive to the direct application of opioid drugs. In animals, lesions of this descending modulatory system reduce the analgesic effect of systemically administered opioids such as morphine. Along with the opioid receptor, the component nuclei of this pain-modulating circuit contain endogenous opioid peptides such as the enkephalins and -endorphin.

Figure 11-5

 
 
 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) demonstrates placebo-enhanced brain activity in anatomic regions correlating with the opioidergic descending pain control system. Top panel, Frontal fMRI image shows placebo-enhanced brain activity in the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Bottom panel, Sagittal fMRI images show placebo-enhanced responses in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC), the rostral ventral medullae (RVM), the periaqueductal gray (PAG) area, and the hypothalamus. The placebo-enhanced activity in all areas was reduced by naloxone, demonstrating the link between the descending opioidergic system and the placebo analgesic response. (Adapted with permission from Eippert et al.)
 
 

The most reliable way to activate this endogenous opioid-mediated modulating system is by suggestion of pain relief or by intense emotion directed away from the pain-causing injury (e.g., during severe threat or an athletic competition). In fact, pain-relieving endogenous opioids are released following surgical procedures and in patients given a placebo for pain relief.

Pain-modulating circuits can enhance as well as suppress pain. Both pain-inhibiting and pain-facilitating neurons in the medulla project to and control spinal pain-transmission neurons. Because pain-transmission neurons can be activated by modulatory neurons, it is theoretically possible to generate a pain signal with no peripheral noxious stimulus. In fact, human functional imaging studies have demonstrated increased activity in this circuit during migraine headaches. A central circuit that facilitates pain could account for the finding that pain can be induced by suggestion or enhanced by expectation and provides a framework for understanding how psychological factors can contribute to chronic pain.

Neuropathic Pain

Lesions of the peripheral or central nociceptive pathways typically result in a loss or impairment of pain sensation. Paradoxically, damage to or dysfunction of these pathways can also produce pain. For example, damage to peripheral nerves, as occurs in diabetic neuropathy, or to primary afferents, as in herpes zoster, can result in pain that is referred to the body region innervated by the damaged nerves. Pain may also be produced by damage to the central nervous system (CNS), for example, in some patients following trauma or cerebrovascular injury to spinal cord, brainstem, or thalamic areas that contain central nociceptive pathways. Such neuropathic pains are often severe and are typically resistant to standard treatments for pain.

Neuropathic pain typically has an unusual burning, tingling, or electric shock每like quality and may be triggered by very light touch. These features are rare in other types of pain. On examination, a sensory deficit is characteristically present in the area of the patient's pain. Hyperpathia, a greatly exaggerated pain sensation to innocuous or mild nociceptive stimuli, is also characteristic of neuropathic pain; patients often complain that the very lightest moving stimulus evokes exquisite pain (allodynia). In this regard, it is of clinical interest that a topical preparation of 5% lidocaine in patch form is effective for patients with postherpetic neuralgia who have prominent allodynia.

A variety of mechanisms contribute to neuropathic pain. As with sensitized primary afferent nociceptors, damaged primary afferents, including nociceptors, become highly sensitive to mechanical stimulation and may generate impulses in the absence of stimulation. Increased sensitivity and spontaneous activity are due, in part, to an increased concentration of sodium channels. Damaged primary afferents may also develop sensitivity to norepinephrine. Interestingly, spinal cord pain-transmission neurons cut off from their normal input may also become spontaneously active. Thus, both CNS and peripheral nervous system hyperactivity contribute to neuropathic pain.

Sympathetically Maintained Pain

Patients with peripheral nerve injury occasionally develop spontaneous pain in the region innervated by the nerve. This pain is often described as having a burning quality. The pain typically begins after a delay of hours to days or even weeks and is accompanied by swelling of the extremity, periarticular bone loss, and arthritic changes in the distal joints. The pain may be relieved by a local anesthetic block of the sympathetic innervation to the affected extremity. Damaged primary afferent nociceptors acquire adrenergic sensitivity and can be activated by stimulation of the sympathetic outflow. This constellation of spontaneous pain and signs of sympathetic dysfunction following injury has been termed complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). When this occurs after an identifiable nerve injury, it is termed CRPS type II (also known as posttraumatic neuralgia or, if severe, causalgia). When a similar clinical picture appears without obvious nerve injury, it is termed CRPS type I (also known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy). CRPS can be produced by a variety of injuries, including fractures of bone, soft tissue trauma, myocardial infarction, and stroke (Chap. 375). CRPS type I typically resolves with symptomatic treatment; however, when it persists, detailed examination often reveals evidence of peripheral nerve injury. Although the pathophysiology of CRPS is poorly understood, the pain and the signs of inflammation, when acute, can be rapidly relieved by blocking the sympathetic nervous system. This implies that sympathetic activity can activate undamaged nociceptors when inflammation is present. Signs of sympathetic hyperactivity should be sought in patients with posttraumatic pain and inflammation and no other obvious explanation.

Treatment: Acute Pain

The ideal treatment for any pain is to remove the cause; thus, while treatment can be initiated immediately, efforts to establish the underlying etiology should always proceed as treatment begins. Sometimes, treating the underlying condition does not immediately relieve pain. Furthermore, some conditions are so painful that rapid and effective analgesia is essential (e.g., the postoperative state, burns, trauma, cancer, or sickle cell crisis). Analgesic medications are a first line of treatment in these cases, and all practitioners should be familiar with their use.

Aspirin, Acetaminophen, and Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (NSAIDs)

These drugs are considered together because they are used for similar problems and may have a similar mechanism of action (Table 11-1). All these compounds inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX), and, except for acetaminophen, all have anti-inflammatory actions, especially at higher dosages. They are particularly effective for mild to moderate headache and for pain of musculoskeletal origin.

Table 11-1 Drugs for Relief of Pain

 
 
Generic Name Dose, mg Interval Comments 
Nonnarcotic analgesics: usual doses and intervals 
Acetylsalicylic acid 650 PO q 4 h Enteric-coated preparations available 
Acetaminophen 650 PO q 4 h Side effects uncommon 
Ibuprofen 400 PO q 4每6 h Available without prescription 
Naproxen 250每500 PO q 12 h Delayed effects may be due to long half-life 
Fenoprofen 200 PO q 4每6 h Contraindicated in renal disease 
Indomethacin 25每50 PO q 8 h Gastrointestinal side effects common 
Ketorolac 15每60 IM/IV q 4每6 h Available for parenteral use 
Celecoxib 100每200 PO q 12每24 h Useful for arthritis 
Valdecoxib 10每20 PO q12每24 h Removed from U.S. market in 2005 
 

 
Generic Name Parenteral Dose, mg PO Dose, mg Comments 
Narcotic analgesics: usual doses and intervals 
Codeine 30每60 q 4 h 30每60 q 4 h Nausea common 
Oxycodone 〞 5每10 q 4每6 h Usually available with acetaminophen or aspirin 
Morphine 5 q 4 h 30 q 4 h   
Morphine sustained release 〞 15每60 bid to tid Oral slow-release preparation 
Hydromorphone 1每2 q 4 h 2每4 q 4 h Shorter acting than morphine sulfate 
Levorphanol 2 q 6每8 h 4 q 6每8 h Longer acting than morphine sulfate; absorbed well PO 
Methadone 5-10 q 6每8 h 5-20 q 6每8 h Delayed sedation due to long half-life; therapy should not be initiated with greater than 40 mg/day and dose escalation should be made no more frequently than every 3 days 
Meperidine 50每100 q 3每4 h 300 q 4 h Poorly absorbed PO; normeperidine a toxic metabolite; routine use of this agent is not recommended 
Butorphanol 〞 1每2 q 4 h Intranasal spray 
Fentanyl 25每100 g/h 〞 72-h transdermal patch 
Tramadol 〞 50每100 q 4每6 h Mixed opioid/adrenergic action 
 

 
Generic Name  Uptake Blockade Sedative Potency  Anticholinergic Potency  Orthostatic Hypotension  Cardiac Arrhythmia  Ave. Dose, mg/d  Range, mg/d  
5-HT  NE  
Antidepressantsa
  
Doxepin ++ + High Moderate Moderate Less 200 75每400 
Amitriptyline ++++ ++ High Highest Moderate Yes 150 25每300 
Imipramine ++++ ++ Moderate Moderate High Yes 200 75每400 
Nortriptyline +++ ++ Moderate Moderate Low Yes 100 40每150 
Desipramine +++ ++++ Low Low Low Yes 150 50每300 
Venlafaxine +++ ++ Low None None No 150 75每400 
Duloxetine +++ +++ Low None None No 40 30每60 
 

 
Generic Name  PO Dose, mg  Interval  Generic Name  PO Dose, mg  Interval  
Anticonvulsants and antiarrhythmicsa
  
Phenytoin 300 daily/qhs Clonazepam 1 q 6 h 
Carbamazepine 200每300 q 6 h Gabapentinb
  600每1200 q 8 h 
Oxcarbazepine 300 bid Pregabalin 150每600 bid 
 


aAntidepressants, anticonvulsants, and antiarrhythmics have not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of pain.

bGabapentin in doses up to 1800 mg/d is FDA approved for postherpetic neuralgia.

Note:5-HT, serotonin; NE, norepinephrine.
 

Because they are effective for these common types of pain and are available without prescription, COX inhibitors are by far the most commonly used analgesics. They are absorbed well from the gastrointestinal tract and, with occasional use, have only minimal side effects. With chronic use, gastric irritation is a common side effect of aspirin and NSAIDs and is the problem that most frequently limits the dose that can be given. Gastric irritation is most severe with aspirin, which may cause erosion and ulceration of the gastric mucosa leading to bleeding or perforation. Because aspirin irreversibly acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase and thereby interferes with coagulation of the blood, gastrointestinal bleeding is a particular risk. Older age and history of gastrointestinal disease increase the risks of aspirin and NSAIDs. In addition to the well-known gastrointestinal toxicity of NSAIDs, nephrotoxicity is a significant problem for patients using these drugs on a chronic basis. Patients at risk for renal insufficiency, particularly those with significant contraction of their intravascular volume as occurs with chronic diuretic use or acute hypovolemia, should be monitored closely. NSAIDs can also increase blood pressure in some individuals. Long-term treatment with NSAIDs requires regular blood pressure monitoring and treatment if necessary. Although toxic to the liver when taken in high doses, acetaminophen rarely produces gastric irritation and does not interfere with platelet function.

The introduction of a parenteral form of NSAID, ketorolac, extends the usefulness of this class of compounds in the management of acute severe pain. Ketorolac is sufficiently potent and rapid in onset to supplant opioids for many patients with acute severe headache and musculoskeletal pain.

There are two major classes of COX: COX-1 is constitutively expressed, and COX-2 is induced in the inflammatory state. COX-2每selective drugs have similar analgesic potency and produce less gastric irritation than the nonselective COX inhibitors. The use of COX-2每selective drugs does not appear to lower the risk of nephrotoxicity compared to nonselective NSAIDs. On the other hand, COX-2每selective drugs offer a significant benefit in the management of acute postoperative pain because they do not affect blood coagulation. Nonselective COX inhibitors are usually contraindicated postoperatively because they impair platelet-mediated blood clotting and are thus associated with increased bleeding at the operative site. COX-2 inhibitors, including celecoxib (Celebrex) are associated with increased cardiovascular risk. It is possible that this is a class effect of NSAIDs, excluding aspirin. These drugs are contraindicated in patients in the immediate period after coronary artery bypass surgery and should be used with caution in patients with a history of or significant risk factors for cardiovascular disease.

Opioid Analgesics

Opioids are the most potent pain-relieving drugs currently available. Of all analgesics, they have the broadest range of efficacy and provide the most reliable and effective method for rapid pain relief. Although side effects are common, most are reversible: nausea, vomiting, pruritus, and constipation are the most frequent and bothersome side effects. Respiratory depression is uncommon at standard analgesic doses, but can be life-threatening. Opioid-related side effects can be reversed rapidly with the narcotic antagonist naloxone. The physician should not hesitate to use opioid analgesics in patients with acute severe pain. Table 11-1 lists the most commonly used opioid analgesics.

Opioids produce analgesia by actions in the CNS. They activate pain-inhibitory neurons and directly inhibit pain-transmission neurons. Most of the commercially available opioid analgesics act at the same opioid receptor (-receptor), differing mainly in potency, speed of onset, duration of action, and optimal route of administration. Some side effects are due to accumulation of nonopioid metabolites that are unique to individual drugs. One striking example of this is normeperidine, a metabolite of meperidine. Normeperidine produces hyperexcitability and seizures that are not reversible with naloxone. Normeperidine accumulation is increased in patients with renal failure.

The most rapid relief with opioids is obtained by intravenous administration; relief with oral administration is significantly slower. Common side effects include nausea, vomiting, constipation, and sedation. The most serious side effect is respiratory depression. Patients with any form of respiratory compromise must be kept under close observation following opioid administration; an oxygen-saturation monitor may be useful. Opioid-induced respiratory depression is typically accompanied by significant sedation and a reduction in respiratory rate. A fall in oxygen saturation represents a critical level of respiratory depression and the need for immediate intervention to prevent life-threatening hypoxemia. Ventilatory assistance should be maintained until the opioid-induced respiratory depression has resolved. The opioid antagonist naloxone should be readily available whenever opioids are used at high doses or in patients with compromised pulmonary function. Opioid effects are dose-related, and there is great variability among patients in the doses that relieve pain and produce side effects. Because of this, initiation of therapy requires titration to optimal dose and interval. The most important principle is to provide adequate pain relief. This requires determining whether the drug has adequately relieved the pain and frequent reassessment to determine the optimal interval for dosing. The most common error made by physicians in managing severe pain with opioids is to prescribe an inadequate dose. Because many patients are reluctant to complain, this practice leads to needless suffering. In the absence of sedation at the expected time of peak effect, a physician should not hesitate to repeat the initial dose to achieve satisfactory pain relief.

An innovative approach to the problem of achieving adequate pain relief is the use of patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). PCA uses a microprocessor-controlled infusion device that can deliver a baseline continuous dose of an opioid drug as well as preprogrammed additional doses whenever the patient pushes a button. The patient can then titrate the dose to the optimal level. This approach is used most extensively for the management of postoperative pain, but there is no reason why it should not be used for any hospitalized patient with persistent severe pain. PCA is also used for short-term home care of patients with intractable pain, such as that caused by metastatic cancer.

It is important to understand that the PCA device delivers small, repeated doses to maintain pain relief; in patients with severe pain, the pain must first be brought under control with a loading dose before transitioning to the PCA device. The bolus dose of the drug (typically 1 mg morphine, 0.2 mg of hydromorphone, or 10 g fentanyl) can then be delivered repeatedly as needed. To prevent overdosing, PCA devices are programmed with a lockout period after each demand dose is delivered (5每10 min) and a limit on the total dose delivered per hour. While some have advocated the use of a simultaneous continuous or basal infusion of the PCA drug, this increases the risk of respiratory depression and has not been shown to increase the overall efficacy of the technique.

Many physicians, nurses, and patients have a certain trepidation about using opioids that is based on an exaggerated fear of addiction. In fact, there is a vanishingly small chance of patients becoming addicted to narcotics as a result of their appropriate medical use.

The availability of new routes of administration has extended the usefulness of opioid analgesics. Most important is the availability of spinal administration. Opioids can be infused through a spinal catheter placed either intrathecally or epidurally. By applying opioids directly to the spinal or epidural space adjacent to the spinal cord, regional analgesia can be obtained using relatively low total doses. Indeed, the dose required to produce effective localized analgesia when using morphine intrathecally (0.1每0.3 mg) is a fraction of that required to produce similar analgesia when administered intravenously (5每10 mg). In this way, side effects such as sedation, nausea, and respiratory depression can be minimized. This approach has been used extensively in obstetric procedures and for postoperative pain relief following surgical procedures on the lower extremities. Continuous intrathecal delivery via implanted spinal drug-delivery systems is now commonly used, particularly for the treatment of cancer-related pain that would require sedating doses for adequate pain control if given systemically. Opioids can also be given intranasally (butorphanol), rectally, and transdermally (fentanyl), thus avoiding the discomfort of frequent injections in patients who cannot be given oral medication. The fentanyl transdermal patch has the advantage of providing fairly steady plasma levels, which maximizes patient comfort.

Recent additions to the armamentarium for treating opioid-induced side effects are the peripherally acting opioid antagonists alvimopan (Entereg) and methylnaltrexone (Rellistor). Alvimopan is available as an orally administered agent that is restricted to the intestinal lumen by limited absorption; methylnaltrexone is available in a subcutaneously administered form that has virtually no penetration into the CNS. Both agents act by binding to peripheral -receptors, thereby inhibiting or reversing the effects of opioids at these peripheral sites. The action of both agents is restricted to receptor sites outside of the CNS; thus, these drugs can reverse the adverse effects of opioid analgesics that are mediated through their peripheral receptors without reversing their analgesic effects. Both agents are effective for persistent ileus following abdominal surgery to the extent that opioid analgesics used for postoperative pain control contribute to this serious problem. Likewise, both agents have been tested for their effectiveness in treating opioid-induced bowel dysfunction (constipation) in patients taking opioid analgesics on a chronic basis. Although contradictory, the weight of evidence indicates that alvimopan can reduce the incidence and duration of ileus following major abdominal surgery and methylnaltrexone can produce rapid reversal of constipation in many patients receiving opioids on a chronic basis.

Opioid and COX Inhibitor Combinations

When used in combination, opioids and COX inhibitors have additive effects. Because a lower dose of each can be used to achieve the same degree of pain relief and their side effects are nonadditive, such combinations are used to lower the severity of dose-related side effects. However, fixed-ratio combinations of an opioid with acetaminophen carry a special risk. Dose escalation as a result of increased severity of pain or decreased opioid effect as a result of tolerance may lead to levels of acetaminophen that are toxic to the liver. Although acetaminophen-related hepatotoxicity is uncommon, it remains a leading cause for liver failure. Thus, many practitioners have moved away from the use of opioid-acetaminophen combination analgesics to avoid the risk of excessive acetaminophen exposure as the dose of the analgesic is escalated.
 
Chronic Pain

Managing patients with chronic pain is intellectually and emotionally challenging. The patient's problem is often difficult or impossible to diagnose with certainty; such patients are demanding of the physician's time and often appear emotionally distraught. The traditional medical approach of seeking an obscure organic pathology is usually unhelpful. On the other hand, psychological evaluation and behaviorally based treatment paradigms are frequently helpful, particularly in the setting of a multidisciplinary pain-management center. Unfortunately, this approach, while effective, remains largely underused in current medical practice.

There are several factors that can cause, perpetuate, or exacerbate chronic pain. First, of course, the patient may simply have a disease that is characteristically painful for which there is presently no cure. Arthritis, cancer, chronic daily headaches, fibromyalgia, and diabetic neuropathy are examples of this. Second, there may be secondary perpetuating factors that are initiated by disease and persist after that disease has resolved. Examples include damaged sensory nerves, sympathetic efferent activity, and painful reflex muscle contraction. Finally, a variety of psychological conditions can exacerbate or even cause pain.

There are certain areas to which special attention should be paid in a patient's medical history. Because depression is the most common emotional disturbance in patients with chronic pain, patients should be questioned about their mood, appetite, sleep patterns, and daily activity. A simple standardized questionnaire, such as the Beck Depression Inventory, can be a useful screening device. It is important to remember that major depression is a common, treatable, and potentially fatal illness.

Other clues that a significant emotional disturbance is contributing to a patient's chronic pain complaint include pain that occurs in multiple, unrelated sites; a pattern of recurrent, but separate, pain problems beginning in childhood or adolescence; pain beginning at a time of emotional trauma, such as the loss of a parent or spouse; a history of physical or sexual abuse; and past or present substance abuse.

On examination, special attention should be paid to whether the patient guards the painful area and whether certain movements or postures are avoided because of pain. Discovering a mechanical component to the pain can be useful both diagnostically and therapeutically. Painful areas should be examined for deep tenderness, noting whether this is localized to muscle, ligamentous structures, or joints. Chronic myofascial pain is very common, and, in these patients, deep palpation may reveal highly localized trigger points that are firm bands or knots in muscle. Relief of the pain following injection of local anesthetic into these trigger points supports the diagnosis. A neuropathic component to the pain is indicated by evidence of nerve damage, such as sensory impairment, exquisitely sensitive skin, weakness, and muscle atrophy, or loss of deep tendon reflexes. Evidence suggesting sympathetic nervous system involvement includes the presence of diffuse swelling, changes in skin color and temperature, and hypersensitive skin and joint tenderness compared with the normal side. Relief of the pain with a sympathetic block is diagnostic.

A guiding principle in evaluating patients with chronic pain is to assess both emotional and organic factors before initiating therapy. Addressing these issues together, rather than waiting to address emotional issues after organic causes of pain have been ruled out, improves compliance in part because it assures patients that a psychological evaluation does not mean that the physician is questioning the validity of their complaint. Even when an organic cause for a patient's pain can be found, it is still wise to look for other factors. For example, a cancer patient with painful bony metastases may have additional pain due to nerve damage and may also be depressed. Optimal therapy requires that each of these factors be looked for and treated.

Treatment: Chronic Pain

Once the evaluation process has been completed and the likely causative and exacerbating factors identified, an explicit treatment plan should be developed. An important part of this process is to identify specific and realistic functional goals for therapy, such as getting a good night's sleep, being able to go shopping, or returning to work. A multidisciplinary approach that uses medications, counseling, physical therapy, nerve blocks, and even surgery may be required to improve the patient's quality of life. There are also some newer, relatively invasive procedures that can be helpful for some patients with intractable pain. These include image-guided interventions such as epidural injection of glucocorticoids for acute radicular pain, radiofrequency treatment of the facet joints for chronic facet-related pain, percutaneous intradiscal treatments for both axial and radicular pain, and placement of implanted intraspinal electrodes and implantation of intrathecal drug-delivery systems for severe and persistent pain that is unresponsive to more conservative treatments. There are no set criteria for predicting which patients will respond to these procedures. They are generally reserved for patients who have not responded to conventional pharmacologic approaches. Referral to a multidisciplinary pain clinic for a full evaluation should precede any invasive procedures. Such referrals are clearly not necessary for all chronic pain patients. For some, pharmacologic management alone can provide adequate relief.

Antidepressant Medications

The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), particularly nortriptyline and desipramine (Table 11-1) are useful for the management of chronic pain. Although developed for the treatment of depression, the TCAs have a spectrum of dose-related biologic activities that include analgesia in a variety of chronic clinical conditions. Although the mechanism is unknown, the analgesic effect of TCAs has a more rapid onset and occurs at a lower dose than is typically required for the treatment of depression. Furthermore, patients with chronic pain who are not depressed obtain pain relief with antidepressants. There is evidence that TCAs potentiate opioid analgesia, so they may be useful adjuncts for the treatment of severe persistent pain such as occurs with malignant tumors. Table 11-2 lists some of the painful conditions that respond to TCAs. TCAs are of particular value in the management of neuropathic pain such as occurs in diabetic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia, for which there are few other therapeutic options.

Table 11-2 Painful Conditions that Respond to Tricyclic Antidepressants

 
 
Postherpetic neuralgiaa
  
Diabetic neuropathya
  
Tension headachea
  
Migraine headachea
  
Rheumatoid arthritisa,b
  
Chronic low back painb
  
Cancer Central post-stroke pain 
 


aControlled trials demonstrate analgesia.

bControlled studies indicate benefit but not analgesia.
 

The TCAs that have been shown to relieve pain have significant side effects (Table 11-1; Chap. 390). Some of these side effects, such as orthostatic hypotension, drowsiness, cardiac-conduction delay, memory impairment, constipation, and urinary retention, are particularly problematic in elderly patients, and several are additive to the side effects of opioid analgesics. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as fluoxetine (Prozac) have fewer and less serious side effects than TCAs, but they are much less effective for relieving pain. It is of interest that venlafaxine (Effexor) and duloxetine (Cymbalta), which are nontricyclic antidepressants that block both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake, appear to retain most of the pain-relieving effect of TCAs with a side-effect profile more like that of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. These drugs may be particularly useful in patients who cannot tolerate the side effects of TCAs.

Anticonvulsants and Antiarrhythmics

These drugs are useful primarily for patients with neuropathic pain. Phenytoin (Dilantin) and carbamazepine (Tegretol) were first shown to relieve the pain of trigeminal neuralgia. This pain has a characteristic brief, shooting, electric shock每like quality. In fact, anticonvulsants seem to be particularly helpful for pains that have such a lancinating quality. Newer anticonvulsants, gabapentin (Neurontin) and pregabalin (Lyrica), are effective for a broad range of neuropathic pains. Furthermore, because of their favorable side-effect profile, these newer anticonvulsants are often used as first-line agents.

Chronic Opioid Medication

The long-term use of opioids is accepted for patients with pain due to malignant disease. Although opioid use for chronic pain of nonmalignant origin is controversial, it is clear that for many such patients, opioid analgesics are the best available option. This is understandable because opioids are the most potent and have the broadest range of efficacy of any analgesic medications. Although addiction is rare in patients who first use opioids for pain relief, some degree of tolerance and physical dependence is likely with long-term use. Therefore, before embarking on opioid therapy, other options should be explored, and the limitations and risks of opioids should be explained to the patient. It is also important to point out that some opioid analgesic medications have mixed agonist-antagonist properties (e.g., pentazocine and butorphanol). From a practical standpoint, this means that they may worsen pain by inducing an abstinence syndrome in patients who are physically dependent on other opioid analgesics.

With long-term outpatient use of orally administered opioids, it is desirable to use long-acting compounds such as levorphanol, methadone, or sustained-release morphine (Table 11-1). Transdermal fentanyl is another excellent option. The pharmacokinetic profile of these drug preparations enables prolonged pain relief, minimizes side effects such as sedation that are associated with high peak plasma levels, and reduces the likelihood of rebound pain associated with a rapid fall in plasma opioid concentration. While long-acting opioid preparations may provide superior pain relief in patients with a continuous pattern of ongoing pain, others suffer from intermittent severe episodic pain and experience superior pain control and fewer side effects with the periodic use of short-acting opioid analgesics. Constipation is a virtually universal side effect of opioid use and should be treated expectantly. A recent advance for patients with chronic debilitating conditions is the development of methylnaltrexone, a peripherally acting mu opioid antagonist that blocks the constipation and itching associated with chronic opioid use without interfering with analgesia; the usual dose is 0.15 mg/kg of body weight given subcutaneously no more often than once daily.

Treatment of Neuropathic Pain

It is important to individualize treatment for patients with neuropathic pain. Several general principles should guide therapy: the first is to move quickly to provide relief, and the second is to minimize drug side effects. For example, in patients with postherpetic neuralgia and significant cutaneous hypersensitivity, topical lidocaine (Lidoderm patches) can provide immediate relief without side effects. Anticonvulsants (gabapentin or pregabalin, see above) or antidepressants (nortriptyline, desipramine, duloxetine, or venlafaxine) can be used as first-line drugs for patients with neuropathic pain. Systemically administered antiarrhythmic drugs such as lidocaine and mexiletene are less likely to be effective; although intravenous infusion of lidocaine predictably provides analgesia in those with many forms of neuropathic pain, the relief is usually transient, typically lasting just hours after the cessation of the infusion. The oral lidocaine congener mexiletene is poorly tolerated, producing frequent gastrointestinal adverse effects. There is no consensus on which class of drug should be used as a first-line treatment for any chronically painful condition. However, because relatively high doses of anticonvulsants are required for pain relief, sedation is very common. Sedation is also a problem with TCAs but is much less of a problem with serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs, e.g., venlafaxine and duloxetine). Thus, in the elderly or in those patients whose daily activities require high-level mental activity, these drugs should be considered the first line. In contrast, opioid medications should be used as a second- or third-line drug class. While highly effective for many painful conditions, opioids are sedating, and their effect tends to lessen over time, leading to dose escalation and, occasionally, a worsening of pain due to physical dependence. Drugs of different classes can be used in combination to optimize pain control.

It is worth emphasizing that many patients, especially those with chronic pain, seek medical attention primarily because they are suffering and because only physicians can provide the medications required for pain relief. A primary responsibility of all physicians is to minimize the physical and emotional discomfort of their patients. Familiarity with pain mechanisms and analgesic medications is an important step toward accomplishing this aim.
 
Further Readings

Costigan M: Neuropathic pain: A maladaptive response of the nervous system to damage. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:1, 2009 [PMID: 19400724] 

 
Craig AD: How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:655, 2002 

 
Dworkin RH: Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain: Evidence-based recommendations. Pain 123:237, 2007 

 
Eippert F et al: Activation of the opioidergic descending pain control system underlies placebo analgesia. Neuron 63:533, 2009 [PMID: 19709634] 

 
Fields HL: Should we be reluctant to prescribe opioids for chronic nonmalignant pain? Pain 129:233, 2007 [PMID: 17449177] 

 
Macintyre PE: Safety and efficacy of patient-controlled analgesia. Br J Anaesth 87:36, 2001 [PMID: 11460812] 

 
Oaklander AL: Is reflex sympathetic dystrophy/complex regional pain syndrome type I a small-fiber neuropathy? Ann Neurol 64:629, 2009 
 
 

^^
Chest Discomfort: Introduction

Chest discomfort is a common challenge for clinicians in the office or emergency department. The differential diagnosis includes conditions affecting organs throughout the thorax and abdomen, with prognostic implications that vary from benign to life-threatening (Table 12-1). Failure to recognize potentially serious conditions such as acute ischemic heart disease, aortic dissection, tension pneumothorax, or pulmonary embolism can lead to serious complications, including death. Conversely, overly conservative management of low-risk patients leads to unnecessary hospital admissions, tests, procedures, and anxiety.

Table 12-1 Diagnoses among Chest Pain Patients Without Myocardial Infarction

 
 
Diagnosis
 Percent
 
Gastroesophageal diseasea
 42
 
  Gastroesophageal reflux
   
  Esophageal motility disorders
   
  Peptic ulcer
   
  Gallstones
   
Ischemic heart disease
 31
 
Chest wall syndromes
 28
 
Pericarditis
 4
 
Pleuritis/pneumonia
 2
 
Pulmonary embolism
 2
 
Lung cancer
 1.5
 
Aortic aneurysm
 1
 
Aortic stenosis
 1
 
Herpes zoster
 1
 
 


aIn order of frequency.

Source: P Fruergaard et al: Eur Heart J 17:1028, 1996.
 

Causes of Chest Discomfort

Myocardial Ischemia and Injury

Myocardial ischemia occurs when the oxygen supply to the heart is insufficient to meet metabolic needs. This mismatch can result from a decrease in oxygen supply, a rise in demand, or both. The most common underlying cause of myocardial ischemia is obstruction of coronary arteries by atherosclerosis; in the presence of such obstruction, transient ischemic episodes are usually precipitated by an increase in oxygen demand as a result of physical exertion. However, ischemia can also result from psychological stress, fever, or large meals or from compromised oxygen delivery due to anemia, hypoxia, or hypotension. Ventricular hypertrophy due to valvular heart disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or hypertension can predispose the myocardium to ischemia because of impaired penetration of blood flow from epicardial coronary arteries to the endocardium.

Angina Pectoris

(See also Chap. 243) The chest discomfort of myocardial ischemia is a visceral discomfort that is usually described as a heaviness, pressure, or squeezing (Table 12-2). Other common adjectives for anginal pain are burning and aching. Some patients deny any "pain" but may admit to dyspnea or a vague sense of anxiety. The word "sharp" is sometimes used by patients to describe intensity rather than quality.

Table 12-2 Typical Clinical Features of Major Causes of Acute Chest Discomfort

 
 
Condition Duration Quality Location Associated Features 
Angina More than 2 and less than 10 min Pressure, tightness, squeezing, heaviness, burning Retrosternal, often with radiation to or isolated discomfort in neck, jaw, shoulders, or arms〞frequently on left Precipitated by exertion, exposure to cold, psychologic stress

S4 gallop or mitral regurgitationmurmur during pain
 
Unstable angina 10每20 min Similar to angina but often more severe Similar to angina Similar to angina, but occurs with low levels of exertion or even at rest 
Acute myocardial infarction Variable; often more than 30 min Similar to angina but often more severe Similar to angina Unrelieved by nitroglycerin

May be associated with evidence of heart failure or arrhythmia
 
Aortic stenosis Recurrent episodes as described for angina As described for angina As described for angina Late-peaking systolic murmurradiating to carotid arteries 
Pericarditis Hours to days; may be episodic Sharp Retrosternal or toward cardiac apex; may radiate to left shoulder May be relieved by sitting up andleaning forward

Pericardial friction rub
 
Aortic dissection Abrupt onset of unrelenting pain Tearing or rippingsensation; knifelike Anterior chest, often radiating to back, between shoulder blades Associated with hypertension and/or underlying connective tissue disorder, e.g., Marfan syndrome

Murmur of aortic insufficiency, pericardial rub, pericardial tamponade, or loss of peripheral pulses
 
Pulmonary embolism Abrupt onset; several minutes to a few hours Pleuritic Often lateral, on the side of the embolism Dyspnea, tachypnea, tachycardia, and hypotension 
Pulmonary hypertension Variable Pressure Substernal Dyspnea, signs of increased venous pressure including edema and jugular venous distention 
Pneumonia or pleuritis Variable Pleuritic Unilateral, often localized Dyspnea, cough, fever, rales, occasional rub 
Spontaneous pneumothorax Sudden onset; several hours Pleuritic Lateral to side of pneumothorax Dyspnea, decreased breath sounds on side of pneumothorax 
Esophageal reflux 10每60 min Burning Substernal, epigastric Worsened by postprandial recumbency

Relieved by antacids
 
Esophageal spasm 2每30 min Pressure, tightness, burning Retrosternal Can closely mimic angina 
Peptic ulcer Prolonged Burning Epigastric, substernal Relieved with food or antacids 
Gallbladder disease Prolonged Burning, pressure Epigastric, right upper quadrant, substernal May follow meal 
Musculoskeletal disease Variable Aching Variable Aggravated by movement

May be reproduced by localized pressure on examination
 
Herpes zoster Variable Sharp or burning Dermatomal distribution Vesicular rash in area of discomfort 
Emotional and psychiatricconditions Variable; may be fleeting Variable Variable; may be retrosternal Situational factors may precipitate symptoms

Anxiety or depression often detectable with careful history
 
 

 

The location of angina pectoris is usually retrosternal; most patients do not localize the pain to any small area. The discomfort may radiate to the neck, jaw, teeth, arms, or shoulders, reflecting the common origin in the posterior horn of the spinal cord of sensory neurons supplying the heart and these areas. Some patients present with aching in sites of radiated pain as their only symptoms of ischemia. Occasional patients report epigastric distress with ischemic episodes. Less common is radiation to below the umbilicus or to the back.

Stable angina pectoris usually develops gradually with exertion, emotional excitement, or after heavy meals. Rest or treatment with sublingual nitroglycerin typically leads to relief within several minutes. In contrast, pain that is fleeting (lasting only a few seconds) is rarely ischemic in origin. Similarly, pain that lasts for several hours is unlikely to represent angina, particularly if the patient's electrocardiogram (ECG) does not show evidence of ischemia.

Anginal episodes can be precipitated by any physiologic or psychological stress that induces tachycardia. Most myocardial perfusion occurs during diastole, when there is minimal pressure opposing coronary artery flow from within the left ventricle. Since tachycardia decreases the percentage of the time in which the heart is in diastole, it decreases myocardial perfusion.

Unstable Angina and Myocardial Infarction

(See also Chaps. 244 and 245) Patients with these acute ischemic syndromes usually complain of symptoms similar in quality to angina pectoris, but more prolonged and severe. The onset of these syndromes may occur with the patient at rest, or awakened from sleep, and sublingual nitroglycerin may lead to transient or no relief. Accompanying symptoms may include diaphoresis, dyspnea, nausea, and light-headedness.

The physical examination may be completely normal in patients with chest discomfort due to ischemic heart disease. Careful auscultation during ischemic episodes may reveal a third or fourth heart sound, reflecting myocardial systolic or diastolic dysfunction. A transient murmur of mitral regurgitation suggests ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction. Severe episodes of ischemia can lead to pulmonary congestion and even pulmonary edema.

Other Cardiac Causes

Myocardial ischemia caused by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or aortic stenosis leads to angina pectoris similar to that caused by coronary atherosclerosis. In such cases, a loud systolic murmur or other findings usually suggest that abnormalities other than coronary atherosclerosis may be contributing to the patient's symptoms. Some patients with chest pain and normal coronary angiograms have functional abnormalities of the coronary circulation, ranging from coronary spasm visible on coronary angiography to abnormal vasodilator responses and heightened vasoconstrictor responses. The term "cardiac syndrome X" is used to describe patients with angina-like chest pain and ischemic-appearing ST-segment depression during stress despite normal coronary arteriograms. Some data indicate that many such patients have limited changes in coronary flow in response to pacing stress or coronary vasodilators.

Pericarditis

(See also Chap. 239) The pain in pericarditis is believed to be due to inflammation of the adjacent parietal pleura, since most of the pericardium is believed to be insensitive to pain. Thus, infectious pericarditis, which usually involves adjoining pleural surfaces, tends to be associated with pain, while conditions that cause only local inflammation (e.g., myocardial infarction or uremia) and cardiac tamponade tend to result in mild or no chest pain.

The adjacent parietal pleura receives its sensory supply from several sources, so the pain of pericarditis can be experienced in areas ranging from the shoulder and neck to the abdomen and back. Most typically, the pain is retrosternal and is aggravated by coughing, deep breaths, or changes in position〞all of which lead to movements of pleural surfaces. The pain is often worse in the supine position and relieved by sitting upright and leaning forward. Less common is a steady aching discomfort that mimics acute myocardial infarction.

Diseases of the Aorta

(See also Chap. 248) Aortic dissection is a potentially catastrophic condition that is due to spread of a subintimal hematoma within the wall of the aorta. The hematoma may begin with a tear in the intima of the aorta or with rupture of the vasa vasorum within the aortic media. This syndrome can occur with trauma to the aorta, including motor vehicle accidents or medical procedures in which catheters or intraaortic balloon pumps damage the intima of the aorta. Nontraumatic aortic dissections are rare in the absence of hypertension and/or conditions associated with deterioration of the elastic or muscular components of the media within the aorta's wall. Cystic medial degeneration is a feature of several inherited connective tissue diseases, including Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. About half of all aortic dissections in women under 40 years of age occur during pregnancy.

Almost all patients with acute dissections present with severe chest pain, although some patients with chronic dissections are identified without associated symptoms. Unlike the pain of ischemic heart disease, symptoms of aortic dissection tend to reach peak severity immediately, often causing the patient to collapse from its intensity. The classic teaching is that the adjectives used to describe the pain reflect the process occurring within the wall of the aorta〞"ripping" and "tearing"〞but more recent data suggest that the most common presenting complaint is sudden onset of severe, sharp pain. The location often correlates with the site and extent of the dissection. Thus, dissections that begin in the ascending aorta and extend to the descending aorta tend to cause pain in the front of the chest that extends into the back, between the shoulder blades.

Physical findings may also reflect extension of the aortic dissection that compromises flow into arteries branching off the aorta. Thus, loss of a pulse in one or both arms, cerebrovascular accident, or paraplegia can all be catastrophic consequences of aortic dissection. Hematomas that extend proximally and undermine the coronary arteries or aortic valve apparatus may lead to acute myocardial infarction or acute aortic insufficiency. Rupture of the hematoma into the pericardial space leads to pericardial tamponade.

Another abnormality of the aorta that can cause chest pain is a thoracic aortic aneurysm. Aortic aneurysms are frequently asymptomatic but can cause chest pain and other symptoms by compressing adjacent structures. This pain tends to be steady, deep, and sometimes severe.

Pulmonary Embolism

(See also Chap. 262) Chest pain due to pulmonary embolism is believed to be due to distention of the pulmonary artery or infarction of a segment of the lung adjacent to the pleura. Massive pulmonary emboli may lead to substernal pain that is suggestive of acute myocardial infarction. More commonly, smaller emboli lead to focal pulmonary infarctions that cause pain that is lateral and pleuritic. Associated symptoms include dyspnea and, occasionally, hemoptysis. Tachycardia is usually present. Although not always present, certain characteristic ECG changes can support the diagnosis.

Pneumothorax

(See also Chap. 263) Sudden onset of pleuritic chest pain and respiratory distress should lead to consideration of spontaneous pneumothorax, as well as pulmonary embolism. Such events may occur without a precipitating event in persons without lung disease, or as a consequence of underlying lung disorders.

Pneumonia or Pleuritis

(See also Chaps. 257 and 263) Lung diseases that damage and cause inflammation of the pleura of the lung usually cause a sharp, knifelike pain that is aggravated by inspiration or coughing.

Gastrointestinal Conditions

(See also Chap. 292) Esophageal pain from acid reflux from the stomach, spasm, obstruction, or injury can be difficult to differentiate from myocardial syndromes. Acid reflux typically causes a deep burning discomfort that may be exacerbated by alcohol, aspirin, or some foods; this discomfort is often relieved by antacid or other acid-reducing therapies. Acid reflux tends to be exacerbated by lying down and may be worse in early morning when the stomach is empty of food that might otherwise absorb gastric acid.

Esophageal spasm may occur in the presence or absence of acid reflux and leads to a squeezing pain indistinguishable from angina. Prompt relief of esophageal spasm is often provided by antianginal therapies such as sublingual nifedipine, further promoting confusion between these syndromes. Chest pain can also result from injury to the esophagus, such as a Mallory-Weiss tear caused by severe vomiting.

Chest pain can result from diseases of the gastrointestinal tract below the diaphragm, including peptic ulcer disease, biliary disease, and pancreatitis. These conditions usually cause abdominal pain as well as chest discomfort; symptoms are not likely to be associated with exertion. The pain of ulcer disease typically occurs 60 to 90 min after meals, when postprandial acid production is no longer neutralized by food in the stomach. Cholecystitis usually causes a pain that is described as aching, occurring an hour or more after meals.

Neuromusculoskeletal Conditions

Cervical disk disease can cause chest pain by compression of nerve roots. Pain in a dermatomal distribution can also be caused by intercostal muscle cramps or by herpes zoster. Chest pain symptoms due to herpes zoster may occur before skin lesions are apparent.

Costochondral and chondrosternal syndromes are the most common causes of anterior chest musculoskeletal pain. Only occasionally are physical signs of costochondritis such as swelling, redness, and warmth (Tietze's syndrome) present. The pain of such syndromes is usually fleeting and sharp, but some patients experience a dull ache that lasts for hours. Direct pressure on the chondrosternal and costochondral junctions may reproduce the pain from these and other musculoskeletal syndromes. Arthritis of the shoulder and spine and bursitis may also cause chest pain. Some patients who have these conditions and myocardial ischemia blur and confuse symptoms of these syndromes.

Emotional and Psychiatric Conditions

As many as 10% of patients who present to emergency departments with acute chest discomfort have panic disorder or other emotional conditions. The symptoms in these populations are highly variable, but frequently the discomfort is described as visceral tightness or aching that lasts more than 30 min. Some patients offer other atypical descriptions, such as pain that is fleeting, sharp, and/or localized to a small region. The ECG in patients with emotional conditions may be difficult to interpret if hyperventilation causes ST-T-wave abnormalities. A careful history may elicit clues of depression, prior panic attacks, somatization, agoraphobia, or other phobias.

Approach to the Patient: Chest Discomfort

The evaluation of the patient with chest discomfort must accommodate two goals〞determining the diagnosis and assessing the safety of the immediate management plan. The latter issue is often dominant when the patient has acute chest discomfort, such as patients seen in the emergency department. In such settings, the clinician must focus first on identifying patients who require aggressive interventions to diagnose or manage potentially life-threatening conditions, including acute ischemic heart disease, acute aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, and tension pneumothorax. If such conditions are unlikely, the clinician must address questions such as the safety of discharge to home, admission to a non-coronary care unit facility, or immediate exercise testing. Table 12-3 displays a sequence of questions that can be used in the evaluation of the patient with chest discomfort, with the diagnostic entities that are most important for consideration at each stage of the evaluation.

Table 12-3 Considerations in the Assessmentof the Patient with Chest Discomfort

 
 
1. Could the chest discomfort be due to an acute, potentially life-threatening condition that warrants immediate hospitalization and aggressive evaluation? 
Acute ischemic heart disease Pulmonary embolism 
Aortic dissection Spontaneous pneumothorax 
2. If not, could the discomfort be due to a chronic condition likely to lead to serious complications? 
Stable angina   
Aortic stenosis   
Pulmonary hypertension   
3. If not, could the discomfort be due to an acute condition that warrants specific treatment? 
Pericarditis

Pneumonia/pleuritis

Herpes zoster
 
4. If not, could the discomfort be due to another treatable chronic condition? 
Esophageal reflux Cervical disk disease 
Esophageal spasm Arthritis of the shoulderor spine 
Peptic ulcer disease Costochondritis 
Gallbladder disease Other musculoskeletal disorders 
Other gastrointestinal conditions Anxiety state 
 

 

Acute Chest Discomfort

In patients with acute chest discomfort, the clinician must first assess the patient's respiratory and hemodynamic status. If either is compromised, initial management should focus on stabilizing the patient before the diagnostic evaluation is pursued. If, however, the patient does not require emergent interventions, then a focused history, physical examination, and laboratory evaluation should be performed to assess the patient's risk of life-threatening conditions.

Clinicians who are seeing patients in the office setting should not assume that they do not have acute ischemic heart disease, even if the prevalence may be lower. Malpractice litigation related to myocardial infarctions that were missed during office evaluations is becoming increasingly common, and ECGs were not performed in many such cases. The prevalence of high-risk patients seen in office settings may be increasing due to congestion in emergency departments.

In either setting, the history should include questions about the quality and location of the chest discomfort (Table 12-2). The patient should also be asked about the nature of onset of the pain and its duration. Myocardial ischemia is usually associated with a gradual intensification of symptoms over a period of minutes. Pain that is fleeting or that lasts hours without being associated with electrocardiographic changes is not likely to be ischemic in origin. Although the presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease may heighten concern for this diagnosis, the absence of such risk factors does not lower the risk for myocardial ischemia enough to be used to justify a decision to discharge a patient.

Wide radiation of chest pain increases probability that pain is due to myocardial infarction. Radiation of chest pain to the left arm is common with acute ischemic heart disease, but radiation to the right arm is also highly consistent with this diagnosis. Figure 12-1 shows estimates derived from several studies of the impact of various clinical features from the history on the probability that a patient has an acute myocardial infarction.

Figure 12-1

 
 
 
Impact of chest pain characteristics on odds of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). (Figure prepared from data in Swap and Nagurney.)
 
 

Right shoulder pain is also common with acute cholecystitis, but this syndrome is usually accompanied by pain that is located in the abdomen rather than chest. Chest pain that radiates between the scapulae raises the question of aortic dissection.

The physical examination should include evaluation of blood pressure in both arms and of pulses in both legs. Poor perfusion of a limb may be due to an aortic dissection that has compromised flow to an artery branching from the aorta. Chest auscultation may reveal diminished breath sounds; a pleural rub; or evidence of pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, or pleurisy. Tension pneumothorax may lead to a shift in the trachea from the midline, away from the side of the pneumothorax. The cardiac examination should seek pericardial rubs, systolic and diastolic murmurs, and third or fourth heart sounds. Pressure on the chest wall may reproduce symptoms in patients with musculoskeletal causes of chest pain; it is important that the clinician ask the patient if the chest pain syndrome is being completely reproduced before drawing too much reassurance that more serious underlying conditions are not present.

An ECG is an essential test for adults with chest discomfort that is not due to an obvious traumatic cause. In such patients, the presence of electrocardiographic changes consistent with ischemia or infarction (Chap. 228) is associated with high risks of acute myocardial infarction or unstable angina (Table 12-4); such patients should be admitted to a unit with electrocardiographic monitoring and the capacity to respond to a cardiac arrest. The absence of such changes does not exclude acute ischemic heart disease, but the risk of life-threatening complications is low for patients with normal electrocardiograms or only nonspecific ST-T-wave changes. If these patients are not considered appropriate for immediate discharge, they are often candidates for early or immediate exercise testing.

Table 12-4 Prevalence of Acute Ischemic Heart Disease Syndromes among Subsets of Emergency Department Patients with Chest Pain

 
 
Finding PrevalenceMyocardial Infarction, % Unstable Angina, % 
ST elevation (1 mm) or Q waves on ECG not known to be old 79 12 
Ischemia or strain on ECG not known to be old (ST depression 1 mm or ischemic T waves) 20 41 
None of the preceding ECG changes but a prior history of angina or myocardial infarction (history of heart attack or nitroglycerin use) 4 51 
None of the preceding ECG changes and no prior history of angina or myocardial infarction (history of heart attack or nitroglycerin use) 2 14 
 


Abbreviation: ECG, electrocardiogram. 

Unpublished data from Brigham and Women's Hospital Chest Pain Study, 1997每1999.
 

Markers of myocardial injury are often obtained in the emergency department evaluation of acute chest discomfort. In recent years, the cardiac troponins (I and T) have superceded creatine kinase (CK) and CK-MB as the markers of choice for detecting myocardial injury. Some data support the use of other markers, such as myeloperoxidase and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), but their roles in routine care have not been established. Single values of any of these markers do not have high sensitivity for acute myocardial infarction or for prediction of complications. Hence, decisions to discharge patients home should not be made on the basis of single negative values of these tests, including the cardiac troponins.

Provocative tests for coronary artery disease are not appropriate for patients with ongoing chest pain. In such patients, rest myocardial perfusion scans can be considered; a normal scan reduces the likelihood of coronary artery disease and can help avoid admission of low-risk patients to the hospital. Computerized tomographic angiography (CTA) is emerging as an alternative diagnostic strategy for patients in whom the likelihood of coronary disease is not clear.

Clinicians frequently employ therapeutic trials with sublingual nitroglycerin or antacids or, in the stable patient seen in the office setting, a proton pump inhibitor. A common error is to assume that a response to any of these interventions clarifies the diagnosis. While such information is often helpful, the patient's response may be due to the placebo effect. Hence, myocardial ischemia should never be considered excluded solely because of a response to antacid therapy. Similarly, failure of nitroglycerin to relieve pain does not exclude the diagnosis of coronary disease.

If the patient's history or examination is consistent with aortic dissection, imaging studies to evaluate the aorta must be pursued promptly because of the high risk of catastrophic complications with this condition. Appropriate tests include a chest CT scan with contrast, MRI, or transesophageal echocardiography. Current data indicate that elevated d-dimer levels should raise clinicians' suspicion of aortic dissection.

Acute pulmonary embolism should be considered in patients with respiratory symptoms, pleuritic chest pain, hemoptysis, or a history of venous thromboembolism or coagulation abnormalities. Initial tests usually include CT angiography or a lung scan, which are sometimes combined with lower extremity venous ultrasound or D-dimer testing.

If patients with acute chest discomfort show no evidence of life-threatening conditions, the clinician should then focus on serious chronic conditions with the potential to cause major complications, the most common of which is stable angina. Early use of exercise electrocardiography, stress echocardiography, or stress perfusion imaging for such patients, whether in the office or the emergency department, is now an accepted management strategy for low-risk patients. Exercise testing is not appropriate, however, for patients who (1) report pain that is believed to be ischemic occurring at rest or (2) have electrocardiographic changes not known to be old that are consistent with ischemia.

Patients with sustained chest discomfort who do not have evidence for life-threatening conditions should be evaluated for evidence of conditions likely to benefit from acute treatment (Table 12-3). Pericarditis may be suggested by the history, physical examination, and ECG (Table 12-2). Clinicians should carefully assess blood pressure patterns and consider echocardiography in such patients to detect evidence of impending pericardial tamponade. Chest x-rays can be used to evaluate the possibility of pulmonary disease.

Guidelines and Critical Pathwaysfor Acute Chest Discomfort

Guidelines for the initial evaluation for patients with acute chest pain have been developed by the American College of Cardiology, American Heart Association, and other organizations. These guidelines recommend performance of an ECG for virtually all patients with chest pain who do not have an obvious noncardiac cause of their pain, and performance of a chest x-ray for patients with signs or symptoms consistent with congestive heart failure, valvular heart disease, pericardial disease, or aortic dissection or aneurysm.

The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines on exercise testing support its use in low-risk patients presenting to the emergency department, as well as in selected intermediate-risk patients. However, these guidelines emphasize that exercise tests should be performed only after patients have been screened for high-risk features or other indicators for hospital admission.

Many medical centers have adopted critical pathways and other forms of guidelines to increase efficiency and to expedite the treatment of patients with high-risk acute ischemic heart disease syndromes. These guidelines emphasize the following strategies:

Rapid identification and treatment of patients for whom emergent reperfusion therapy, either via percutaneous coronary interventions or thrombolytic agents, is likely to lead to improved outcomes.
Triage to non-coronary care unit monitored facilities such as intermediate-care units or chest pain units of patients with a low risk for complications, such as patients without new ischemic changes on their ECGs and without ongoing chest pain. Such patients can usually be safely observed in non-coronary care unit settings, undergo early exercise testing, or be discharged home. Risk stratification can be assisted through use of prospectively validated multivariate algorithms that have been published for acute ischemic heart disease and its complications.
Shortening lengths of stay in the coronary care unit and hospital. Recommendations regarding the minimum length of stay in a monitored bed for a patient who has no further symptoms have decreased in recent years to 12 h or less if exercise testing or other risk stratification technologies are available.
Nonacute Chest Discomfort

The management of patients who do not require admission to the hospital or who no longer require inpatient observation should seek to identify the cause of the symptoms and the likelihood of major complications. Noninvasive tests for coronary disease serve both to diagnose this condition and to identify patients with high-risk forms of coronary disease who may benefit from revascularization. Gastrointestinal causes of chest pain can be evaluated via endoscopy or radiology studies, or with trials of medical therapy. Emotional and psychiatric conditions warrant appropriate evaluation and treatment; randomized trial data indicate that cognitive therapy and group interventions lead to decreases in symptoms for such patients.
 
Further Readings

Gibbons RJ et al: ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for exercise testing. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on Exercise Testing). Available at www.acc.org/ qualityandscience/clinical/guidelines/exercise/dirindex.htm. Accessed on May 8, 2010 

 
Leber AW et al: Quantification of obstructive and nonobstructive coronary lesions of 64-slice computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol 46:147, 2005 [PMID: 15992649] 

 
Miller JM et al: Diagnostic performance of coronary angiography by 64-row CT. N Engl J Med 359:2324, 2008 [PMID: 19038879] 

 
Reichlin T et al: Early diagnosis of myocardial infarction with sensitive cardiac troponin assays. N Engl J Med 361:858, 2009 [PMID: 19710484] 

 
Sequist T, Lee TH: Prediction of missed myocardial infarction among symptomatic outpatients without coronary heart disease. Am Heart J 149:74, 2005 [PMID: 15660037] 

 
Sequist TD et al: Missed opportunities in the primary care management of early acute ischemic heart disease. Arch Intern Med 166: 2237, 2006 [PMID: 17101942] 

 
Suzuki T et al: Diagnosis of acute aortic dissection by d-dimer. Circulation 119:2702, 2009 [PMID: 19433758] 

 
Swap CJ, Nagurney JT: Value and limitations of chest pain history in the evaluation of patients with suspected acute coronary syndromes. JAMA 294:2623, 2005 [PMID: 16304077] 

 
Tong KL et al: Myocardial contrast echocardiography versus Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction score in patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain and a nondiagnostic electrocardiogram. J Am Coll Cardiol 46:928, 2005 

 
Tsai TT et al: Acute aortic syndromes. Circulation 205:3802, 2005 
 
 

^^
Abdominal Pain: Introduction

The correct interpretation of acute abdominal pain is challenging. Few other clinical situations demand greater judgment, because the most catastrophic of events may be forecast by the subtlest of symptoms and signs. A meticulously executed, detailed history and physical examination are of the greatest importance. The etiologic classification in Table 13-1, although not complete, forms a useful basis for the evaluation of patients with abdominal pain.

Table 13-1 Some Important Causes of Abdominal Pain

 
 
Pain Originating in the Abdomen  
Parietal peritoneal inflammation

   Bacterial contamination

      Perforated appendix or other perforated viscus

      Pelvic inflammatory disease

   Chemical irritation

      Perforated ulcer

      Pancreatitis

      Mittelschmerz

Mechanical obstruction of hollow viscera

   Obstruction of the small or large intestine

   Obstruction of the biliary tree

   Obstruction of the ureter

Vascular disturbances

   Embolism or thrombosis

   Vascular rupture

   Pressure or torsional occlusion

   Sickle cell anemia

Abdominal wall

   Distortion or traction of mesentery

   Trauma or infection of muscles

Distention of visceral surfaces, e.g., by hemorrhage

   Hepatic or renal capsules

Inflammation of a viscus

   Appendicitis

   Typhoid fever

   Typhlitis
 
Pain Referred from Extraabdominal Source  
Cardiothoracic

   Acute myocardial infarction

   Myocarditis, endocarditis, pericarditis

   Congestive heart failure

   Pneumonia

   Pulmonary embolus

   Pleurodynia

   Pneumothorax

   Empyema

   Esophageal disease, spasm, rupture, inflammation

Genitalia

   Torsion of the testis
 
Metabolic Causes  
Diabetes

Uremia

Hyperlipidemia

Hyperparathyroidism

Acute adrenal insufficiency

Familial Mediterranean fever

Porphyria

C'1 esterase inhibitor deficiency (angioneurotic edema)
 
Neurologic/Psychiatric Causes  
Herpes zoster

Tabes dorsalis

Causalgia

Radiculitis from infection or arthritis

Spinal cord or nerve root compression

Functional disorders

Psychiatric disorders
 
Toxic Causes  
Lead poisoning

Insect or animal envenomations

   Black widow spiders

   Snake bites
 
Uncertain Mechanisms  
Narcotic withdrawal

Heat stroke
 
 

 

The diagnosis of "acute or surgical abdomen" is not an acceptable one because of its often misleading and erroneous connotation. The most obvious of "acute abdomens" may not require operative intervention, and the mildest of abdominal pains may herald an urgently correctable lesion. Any patient with abdominal pain of recent onset requires early and thorough evaluation and accurate diagnosis.

Some Mechanisms of Pain Originating in the Abdomen

Inflammation of the Parietal Peritoneum

The pain of parietal peritoneal inflammation is steady and aching in character and is located directly over the inflamed area, its exact reference being possible because it is transmitted by somatic nerves supplying the parietal peritoneum. The intensity of the pain is dependent on the type and amount of material to which the peritoneal surfaces are exposed in a given time period. For example, the sudden release into the peritoneal cavity of a small quantity of sterile acid gastric juice causes much more pain than the same amount of grossly contaminated neutral feces. Enzymatically active pancreatic juice incites more pain and inflammation than does the same amount of sterile bile containing no potent enzymes. Blood and urine are often so bland as to go undetected if their contact with the peritoneum has not been sudden and massive. In the case of bacterial contamination, such as in pelvic inflammatory disease, the pain is frequently of low intensity early in the illness until bacterial multiplication has caused the elaboration of irritating substances.

The rate at which the irritating material is applied to the peritoneum is important. Perforated peptic ulcer may be associated with entirely different clinical pictures dependent only on the rapidity with which the gastric juice enters the peritoneal cavity.

The pain of peritoneal inflammation is invariably accentuated by pressure or changes in tension of the peritoneum, whether produced by palpation or by movement, as in coughing or sneezing. The patient with peritonitis lies quietly in bed, preferring to avoid motion, in contrast to the patient with colic, who may writhe incessantly.

Another characteristic feature of peritoneal irritation is tonic reflex spasm of the abdominal musculature, localized to the involved body segment. The intensity of the tonic muscle spasm accompanying peritoneal inflammation is dependent on the location of the inflammatory process, the rate at which it develops, and the integrity of the nervous system. Spasm over a perforated retrocecal appendix or perforated ulcer into the lesser peritoneal sac may be minimal or absent because of the protective effect of overlying viscera. A slowly developing process often greatly attenuates the degree of muscle spasm. Catastrophic abdominal emergencies such as a perforated ulcer may be associated with minimal or no detectable pain or muscle spasm in obtunded, seriously ill, debilitated elderly patients or in psychotic patients.

Obstruction of Hollow Viscera

The pain of obstruction of hollow abdominal viscera is classically described as intermittent, or colicky. Yet the lack of a truly cramping character should not be misleading, because distention of a hollow viscus may produce steady pain with only very occasional exacerbations. It is not nearly as well localized as the pain of parietal peritoneal inflammation.

The colicky pain of obstruction of the small intestine is usually periumbilical or supraumbilical and is poorly localized. As the intestine becomes progressively dilated with loss of muscular tone, the colicky nature of the pain may diminish. With superimposed strangulating obstruction, pain may spread to the lower lumbar region if there is traction on the root of the mesentery. The colicky pain of colonic obstruction is of lesser intensity than that of the small intestine and is often located in the infraumbilical area. Lumbar radiation of pain is common in colonic obstruction.

Sudden distention of the biliary tree produces a steady rather than colicky type of pain; hence, the term biliary colic is misleading. Acute distention of the gallbladder usually causes pain in the right upper quadrant with radiation to the right posterior region of the thorax or to the tip of the right scapula, but is not uncommonly midline. Distention of the common bile duct is often associated with pain in the epigastrium radiating to the upper part of the lumbar region. Considerable variation is common, however, so that differentiation between these may be impossible. The typical subscapular pain or lumbar radiation is frequently absent. Gradual dilatation of the biliary tree, as in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas, may cause no pain or only a mild aching sensation in the epigastrium or right upper quadrant. The pain of distention of the pancreatic ducts is similar to that described for distention of the common bile duct but, in addition, is very frequently accentuated by recumbency and relieved by the upright position.

Obstruction of the urinary bladder results in dull suprapubic pain, usually low in intensity. Restlessness without specific complaint of pain may be the only sign of a distended bladder in an obtunded patient. In contrast, acute obstruction of the intravesicular portion of the ureter is characterized by severe suprapubic and flank pain that radiates to the penis, scrotum, or inner aspect of the upper thigh. Obstruction of the ureteropelvic junction is felt as pain in the costovertebral angle, whereas obstruction of the remainder of the ureter is associated with flank pain that often extends into the same side of the abdomen.

Vascular Disturbances

A frequent misconception, despite abundant experience to the contrary, is that pain associated with intraabdominal vascular disturbances is sudden and catastrophic in nature. The pain of embolism or thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery or that of impending rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm certainly may be severe and diffuse. Yet, just as frequently, the patient with occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery has only mild continuous or cramping diffuse pain for two or three days before vascular collapse or findings of peritoneal inflammation appear. The early, seemingly insignificant discomfort is caused by hyperperistalsis rather than peritoneal inflammation. Indeed, absence of tenderness and rigidity in the presence of continuous, diffuse pain in a patient likely to have vascular disease is quite characteristic of occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery. Abdominal pain with radiation to the sacral region, flank, or genitalia should always signal the possible presence of a rupturing abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain may persist over a period of several days before rupture and collapse occur.

Abdominal Wall

Pain arising from the abdominal wall is usually constant and aching. Movement, prolonged standing, and pressure accentuate the discomfort and muscle spasm. In the case of hematoma of the rectus sheath, now most frequently encountered in association with anticoagulant therapy, a mass may be present in the lower quadrants of the abdomen. Simultaneous involvement of muscles in other parts of the body usually serves to differentiate myositis of the abdominal wall from an intraabdominal process that might cause pain in the same region.

Referred Pain in Abdominal Diseases

Pain referred to the abdomen from the thorax, spine, or genitalia may prove a vexing diagnostic problem, because diseases of the upper part of the abdominal cavity such as acute cholecystitis or perforated ulcer are frequently associated with intrathoracic complications. A most important, yet often forgotten, dictum is that the possibility of intrathoracic disease must be considered in every patient with abdominal pain, especially if the pain is in the upper part of the abdomen. Systematic questioning and examination directed toward detecting myocardial or pulmonary infarction, pneumonia, pericarditis, or esophageal disease (the intrathoracic diseases that most often masquerade as abdominal emergencies) will often provide sufficient clues to establish the proper diagnosis. Diaphragmatic pleuritis resulting from pneumonia or pulmonary infarction may cause pain in the right upper quadrant and pain in the supraclavicular area, the latter radiation to be distinguished from the referred subscapular pain caused by acute distention of the extrahepatic biliary tree. The ultimate decision as to the origin of abdominal pain may require deliberate and planned observation over a period of several hours, during which repeated questioning and examination will provide the diagnosis or suggest the appropriate studies.

Referred pain of thoracic origin is often accompanied by splinting of the involved hemithorax with respiratory lag and decrease in excursion more marked than that seen in the presence of intraabdominal disease. In addition, apparent abdominal muscle spasm caused by referred pain will diminish during the inspiratory phase of respiration, whereas it is persistent throughout both respiratory phases if it is of abdominal origin. Palpation over the area of referred pain in the abdomen also does not usually accentuate the pain and in many instances actually seems to relieve it. Thoracic disease and abdominal disease frequently coexist and may be difficult or impossible to differentiate. For example, the patient with known biliary tract disease often has epigastric pain during myocardial infarction, or biliary colic may be referred to the precordium or left shoulder in a patient who has suffered previously from angina pectoris. For an explanation of the radiation of pain to a previously diseased area, see Chap. 11.

Referred pain from the spine, which usually involves compression or irritation of nerve roots, is characteristically intensified by certain motions such as cough, sneeze, or strain and is associated with hyperesthesia over the involved dermatomes. Pain referred to the abdomen from the testes or seminal vesicles is generally accentuated by the slightest pressure on either of these organs. The abdominal discomfort is of dull, aching character and is poorly localized.

Metabolic Abdominal Crises

Pain of metabolic origin may simulate almost any other type of intraabdominal disease. Several mechanisms may be at work. In certain instances, such as hyperlipidemia, the metabolic disease itself may be accompanied by an intraabdominal process such as pancreatitis, which can lead to unnecessary laparotomy unless recognized. C'1 esterase deficiency associated with angioneurotic edema is often associated with episodes of severe abdominal pain. Whenever the cause of abdominal pain is obscure, a metabolic origin always must be considered. Abdominal pain is also the hallmark of familial Mediterranean fever (Chap. 330).

The problem of differential diagnosis is often not readily resolved. The pain of porphyria and of lead colic is usually difficult to distinguish from that of intestinal obstruction, because severe hyperperistalsis is a prominent feature of both. The pain of uremia or diabetes is nonspecific, and the pain and tenderness frequently shift in location and intensity. Diabetic acidosis may be precipitated by acute appendicitis or intestinal obstruction, so if prompt resolution of the abdominal pain does not result from correction of the metabolic abnormalities, an underlying organic problem should be suspected. Black widow spider bites produce intense pain and rigidity of the abdominal muscles and back, an area infrequently involved in intraabdominal disease.

Neurogenic Causes

Causalgic pain may occur in diseases that injure sensory nerves. It has a burning character and is usually limited to the distribution of a given peripheral nerve. Normal stimuli such as touch or change in temperature may be transformed into this type of pain, which is frequently present in a patient at rest. The demonstration of irregularly spaced cutaneous pain spots may be the only indication of an old nerve lesion underlying causalgic pain. Even though the pain may be precipitated by gentle palpation, rigidity of the abdominal muscles is absent, and the respirations are not disturbed. Distention of the abdomen is uncommon, and the pain has no relationship to the intake of food.

Pain arising from spinal nerves or roots comes and goes suddenly and is of a lancinating type (Chap. 15). It may be caused by herpes zoster, impingement by arthritis, tumors, herniated nucleus pulposus, diabetes, or syphilis. It is not associated with food intake, abdominal distention, or changes in respiration. Severe muscle spasm, as in the gastric crises of tabes dorsalis, is common but is either relieved or is not accentuated by abdominal palpation. The pain is made worse by movement of the spine and is usually confined to a few dermatomes. Hyperesthesia is very common.

Pain due to functional causes conforms to none of the aforementioned patterns. Mechanism is hard to define. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder characterized by abdominal pain and altered bowel habits. The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical criteria (Chap. 296) and after exclusion of demonstrable structural abnormalities. The episodes of abdominal pain are often brought on by stress, and the pain varies considerably in type and location. Nausea and vomiting are rare. Localized tenderness and muscle spasm are inconsistent or absent. The causes of IBS or related functional disorders are not known.

Approach to the Patient: Abdominal Pain

Few abdominal conditions require such urgent operative intervention that an orderly approach need be abandoned, no matter how ill the patient. Only those patients with exsanguinating intraabdominal hemorrhage (e.g., ruptured aneurysm) must be rushed to the operating room immediately, but in such instances only a few minutes are required to assess the critical nature of the problem. Under these circumstances, all obstacles must be swept aside, adequate venous access for fluid replacement obtained, and the operation begun. Many patients of this type have died in the radiology department or the emergency room while awaiting such unnecessary examinations as electrocardiograms or CT scans. There are no contraindications to operation when massive intraabdominal hemorrhage is present. Fortunately, this situation is relatively rare. These comments do not pertain to gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which can often be managed by other means (Chap. 41).

Nothing will supplant an orderly, painstakingly detailed history, which is far more valuable than any laboratory or radiographic examination. This kind of history is laborious and time-consuming, making it not especially popular, even though a reasonably accurate diagnosis can be made on the basis of the history alone in the majority of cases. Computer-aided diagnosis of abdominal pain provides no advantage over clinical assessment alone. In cases of acute abdominal pain, a diagnosis is readily established in most instances, whereas success is not so frequent in patients with chronic pain. IBS is one of the most common causes of abdominal pain and must always be kept in mind (Chap. 296). The location of the pain can assist in narrowing the differential diagnosis (Table 13-2); however, the chronological sequence of events in the patient's history is often more important than emphasis on the location of pain. If the examiner is sufficiently open-minded and unhurried, asks the proper questions, and listens, the patient will usually provide the diagnosis. Careful attention should be paid to the extra-abdominal regions that may be responsible for abdominal pain. An accurate menstrual history in a female patient is essential. Narcotics or analgesics should not be withheld until a definitive diagnosis or a definitive plan has been formulated; obfuscation of the diagnosis by adequate analgesia is unlikely.

Table 13-2 Differential Diagnoses of Abdominal Pain by Location

 
 
Right Upper Quadrant Epigastric Left Upper Quadrant 
Cholecystitis

Cholangitis

Pancreatitis

Pneumonia/empyema

Pleurisy/pleurodynia

Subdiaphragmatic abscess

Hepatitis

Budd-Chiari syndrome
 Peptic ulcer disease

Gastritis

GERD

Pancreatitis

Myocardial infarction

Pericarditis

Ruptured aortic aneurysm

Esophagitis
 Splenic infarct

Splenic rupture

Splenic abscess

Gastritis

Gastric ulcer

Pancreatitis

Subdiaphragmatic abscess
 
Right Lower Quadrant  Periumbilical  Left Lower Quadrant  
Appendicitis

Salpingitis

Inguinal hernia

Ectopic pregnancy

Nephrolithiasis

Inflammatory bowel disease

Mesenteric lymphadenitis

Typhlitis
 Early appendicitis

Gastroenteritis

Bowel obstruction

Ruptured aortic aneurysm
 Diverticulitis

Salpingitis

Inguinal hernia

Ectopic pregnancy

Nephrolithiasis

Irritable bowel syndrome

Inflammatory bowel disease
 
Diffuse Nonlocalized Pain  
Gastroenteritis

Mesenteric ischemia

Bowel obstruction

Irritable bowel syndrome

Peritonitis

Diabetes

Malaria

Familial Mediterranean fever

Metabolic diseases

Psychiatric disease
 
 


Abbreviation: GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 

In the examination, simple critical inspection of the patient, e.g., of facies, position in bed, and respiratory activity, provides valuable clues. The amount of information to be gleaned is directly proportional to the gentleness and thoroughness of the examiner. Once a patient with peritoneal inflammation has been examined brusquely, accurate assessment by the next examiner becomes almost impossible. Eliciting rebound tenderness by sudden release of a deeply palpating hand in a patient with suspected peritonitis is cruel and unnecessary. The same information can be obtained by gentle percussion of the abdomen (rebound tenderness on a miniature scale), a maneuver that can be far more precise and localizing. Asking the patient to cough will elicit true rebound tenderness without the need for placing a hand on the abdomen. Furthermore, the forceful demonstration of rebound tenderness will startle and induce protective spasm in a nervous or worried patient in whom true rebound tenderness is not present. A palpable gallbladder will be missed if palpation is so brusque that voluntary muscle spasm becomes superimposed on involuntary muscular rigidity.

As with history taking, sufficient time should be spent in the examination. Abdominal signs may be minimal but nevertheless, if accompanied by consistent symptoms, may be exceptionally meaningful. Abdominal signs may be virtually or totally absent in cases of pelvic peritonitis, so careful pelvic and rectal examinations are mandatory in every patient with abdominal pain. Tenderness on pelvic or rectal examination in the absence of other abdominal signs can be caused by operative indications such as perforated appendicitis, diverticulitis, twisted ovarian cyst, and many others.

Much attention has been paid to the presence or absence of peristaltic sounds, their quality, and their frequency. Auscultation of the abdomen is one of the least revealing aspects of the physical examination of a patient with abdominal pain. Catastrophes such as strangulating small intestinal obstruction or perforated appendicitis may occur in the presence of normal peristaltic sounds. Conversely, when the proximal part of the intestine above an obstruction becomes markedly distended and edematous, peristaltic sounds may lose the characteristics of borborygmi and become weak or absent, even when peritonitis is not present. It is usually the severe chemical peritonitis of sudden onset that is associated with the truly silent abdomen. Assessment of the patient's state of hydration is important.

Laboratory examinations may be valuable in assessing the patient with abdominal pain, yet, with few exceptions, they rarely establish a diagnosis. Leukocytosis should never be the single deciding factor as to whether or not operation is indicated. A white blood cell count >20,000/L may be observed with perforation of a viscus, but pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and intestinal infarction may be associated with marked leukocytosis. A normal white blood cell count is not rare in cases of perforation of abdominal viscera. The diagnosis of anemia may be more helpful than the white blood cell count, especially when combined with the history.

The urinalysis may reveal the state of hydration or rule out severe renal disease, diabetes, or urinary infection. Blood urea nitrogen, glucose, and serum bilirubin levels may be helpful. Serum amylase levels may be increased by many diseases other than pancreatitis, e.g., perforated ulcer, strangulating intestinal obstruction, and acute cholecystitis; thus, elevations of serum amylase do not rule out the need for an operation. The determination of the serum lipase may have greater accuracy than that of the serum amylase.

Plain and upright or lateral decubitus radiographs of the abdomen may be of value in cases of intestinal obstruction, perforated ulcer, and a variety of other conditions. They are usually unnecessary in patients with acute appendicitis or strangulated external hernias. In rare instances, barium or water-soluble contrast study of the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract may demonstrate partial intestinal obstruction that may elude diagnosis by other means. If there is any question of obstruction of the colon, oral administration of barium sulfate should be avoided. On the other hand, in cases of suspected colonic obstruction (without perforation), contrast enema may be diagnostic.

In the absence of trauma, peritoneal lavage has been replaced as a diagnostic tool by ultrasound, CT, and laparoscopy. Ultrasonography has proved to be useful in detecting an enlarged gallbladder or pancreas, the presence of gallstones, an enlarged ovary, or a tubal pregnancy. Laparoscopy is especially helpful in diagnosing pelvic conditions, such as ovarian cysts, tubal pregnancies, salpingitis, and acute appendicitis. Radioisotopic hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scans (HIDAs) may help differentiate acute cholecystitis from acute pancreatitis. A CT scan may demonstrate an enlarged pancreas, ruptured spleen, or thickened colonic or appendiceal wall and streaking of the mesocolon or mesoappendix characteristic of diverticulitis or appendicitis.

Sometimes, even under the best circumstances with all available aids and with the greatest of clinical skill, a definitive diagnosis cannot be established at the time of the initial examination. Nevertheless, despite lack of a clear anatomic diagnosis, it may be abundantly clear to an experienced and thoughtful physician and surgeon that on clinical grounds alone operation is indicated. Should that decision be questionable, watchful waiting with repeated questioning and examination will often elucidate the true nature of the illness and indicate the proper course of action.
 
Further Readings

Jones PF: Suspected acute appendicitis: Trends in management over 30 years. Br J Surg 88:1570, 2001 [PMID: 11736966] 

 
Lyon C, Clark DC: Diagnosis of acute abdominal pain in older patients. Am Fam Physician 74:1537, 2006 [PMID: 17111893] 

 
Merlin MA et al: Evidence-based appendicitis: The initial work-up. Postgrad Med 122:189, 2010 [PMID: 20463429] 

 
Silen W: Cope's Early Diagnosis of the Acute Abdomen, 21st ed, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005 

 
Thomas SH, Silen W: Effect on diagnostic efficiency of analgesia for undifferentiated abdominal pain. Br J Surg 90:5, 2003 [PMID: 12520567] 

 
 

^^
Headache: Introduction

Headache is among the most common reasons patients seek medical attention. Diagnosis and management is based on a careful clinical approach augmented by an understanding of the anatomy, physiology, and pharmacology of the nervous system pathways that mediate the various headache syndromes.
 
General Principles

A classification system developed by the International Headache Society characterizes headache as primary or secondary (Table 14每1). Primary headaches are those in which headache and its associated features are the disorder in itself, whereas secondary headaches are those caused by exogenous disorders. Primary headache often results in considerable disability and a decrease in the patient's quality of life. Mild secondary headache, such as that seen in association with upper respiratory tract infections, is common but rarely worrisome. Life-threatening headache is relatively uncommon, but vigilance is required in order to recognize and appropriately treat such patients.

Table 14-1 Common Causes of Headache

 
 
Primary Headache
 Secondary Headache
 
Type
 %
 Type
 %
 
Tension-type
 69
 Systemic infection
 63
 
Migraine
 16
 Head injury
 4
 
Idiopathic stabbing
 2
 Vascular disorders
 1
 
Exertional
 1
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage
 <1
 
Cluster
 0.1
 Brain tumor
 0.1
 
 


Source: After J Olesen et al: The Headaches. Philadelphia, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
 

Anatomy and Physiology of Headache

Pain usually occurs when peripheral nociceptors are stimulated in response to tissue injury, visceral distension, or other factors (Chap. 11). In such situations, pain perception is a normal physiologic response mediated by a healthy nervous system. Pain can also result when pain-producing pathways of the peripheral or central nervous system (CNS) are damaged or activated inappropriately. Headache may originate from either or both mechanisms. Relatively few cranial structures are pain-producing; these include the scalp, middle meningeal artery, dural sinuses, falx cerebri, and proximal segments of the large pial arteries. The ventricular ependyma, choroid plexus, pial veins, and much of the brain parenchyma are not pain-producing.

The key structures involved in primary headache appear to be

the large intracranial vessels and dura mater and the peripheral terminals of the trigeminal nerve that innervate these structures
the caudal portion of the trigeminal nucleus, which extends into the dorsal horns of the upper cervical spinal cord and receives input from the first and second cervical nerve roots (the trigeminocervical complex)
rostral pain-processing regions, such as the ventroposteromedial thalamus and the cortex
the pain-modulatory systems in the brain that modulate input from trigeminal nociceptors at all levels of the pain-processing pathways
The innervation of the large intracranial vessels and dura mater by the trigeminal nerve is known as the trigeminovascular system. Cranial autonomic symptoms, such as lacrimation and nasal congestion, are prominent in the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias, including cluster headache and paroxysmal hemicrania, and may also be seen in migraine. These autonomic symptoms reflect activation of cranial parasympathetic pathways, and functional imaging studies indicate that vascular changes in migraine and cluster headache, when present, are similarly driven by these cranial autonomic systems. Migraine and other primary headache types are not "vascular headaches"; these disorders do not reliably manifest vascular changes, and treatment outcomes cannot be predicted by vascular effects. Migraine is a brain disorder, and best understood and managed as such.

Clinical Evaluation of Acute, New-Onset Headache

The patient who presents with a new, severe headache has a differential diagnosis that is quite different from the patient with recurrent headaches over many years. In new-onset and severe headache, the probability of finding a potentially serious cause is considerably greater than in recurrent headache. Patients with recent onset of pain require prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment. Serious causes to be considered include meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, epidural or subdural hematoma, glaucoma, tumor, and purulent sinusitis. When worrisome symptoms and signs are present (Table 14每2), rapid diagnosis and management is critical.

Table 14-2 Headache Symptoms that Suggest a Serious Underlying Disorder

 
 
"Worst" headache ever
 
First severe headache
 
Subacute worsening over days or weeks
 
Abnormal neurologic examination
 
Fever or unexplained systemic signs
 
Vomiting that precedes headache
 
Pain induced by bending, lifting, cough
 
Pain that disturbs sleep or presents immediately upon awakening
 
Known systemic illness
 
Onset after age 55
 
Pain associated with local tenderness, e.g., region of temporal artery
 
 

 

A complete neurologic examination is an essential first step in the evaluation. In most cases, patients with an abnormal examination or a history of recent-onset headache should be evaluated by a CT or MRI study. As an initial screening procedure for intracranial pathology in this setting, CT and MRI methods appear to be equally sensitive. In some circumstances, a lumbar puncture (LP) is also required, unless a benign etiology can be otherwise established. A general evaluation of acute headache might include the investigation of cardiovascular and renal status by blood pressure monitoring and urine examination; eyes by funduscopy, intraocular pressure measurement, and refraction; cranial arteries by palpation; and cervical spine by the effect of passive movement of the head and by imaging.

The psychological state of the patient should also be evaluated since a relationship exists between head pain and depression. Many patients in chronic daily pain cycles become depressed, although depression itself is rarely a cause of headache. Drugs with antidepressant actions are also effective in the prophylactic treatment of both tension-type headache and migraine.

Underlying recurrent headache disorders may be activated by pain that follows otologic or endodontic surgical procedures. Thus, pain about the head as the result of diseased tissue or trauma may reawaken an otherwise quiescent migrainous syndrome. Treatment of the headache is largely ineffective until the cause of the primary problem is addressed.

Serious underlying conditions that are associated with headache are described below. Brain tumor is a rare cause of headache and even less commonly a cause of severe pain. The vast majority of patients presenting with severe headache have a benign cause.
 
Secondary Headache

The management of secondary headache focuses on diagnosis and treatment of the underlying condition.

Meningitis

Acute, severe headache with stiff neck and fever suggests meningitis. Lumbar puncture is mandatory. Often there is striking accentuation of pain with eye movement. Meningitis can be easily mistaken for migraine in that the cardinal symptoms of pounding headache, photophobia, nausea, and vomiting are frequently present, perhaps reflecting the underlying biology of some of the patients.

Meningitis is discussed in Chaps. 381 and 382.

Intracranial Hemorrhage

Acute, severe headache with stiff neck but without fever suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage. A ruptured aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or intraparenchymal hemorrhage may also present with headache alone. Rarely, if the hemorrhage is small or below the foramen magnum, the head CT scan can be normal. Therefore, lumbar puncture may be required to diagnose definitively subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Intracranial hemorrhage is discussed in Chap. 275.

Brain Tumor

Approximately 30% of patients with brain tumors consider headache to be their chief complaint. The head pain is usually nondescript〞an intermittent deep, dull aching of moderate intensity, which may worsen with exertion or change in position and may be associated with nausea and vomiting. This pattern of symptoms results from migraine far more often than from brain tumor. The headache of brain tumor disturbs sleep in about 10% of patients. Vomiting that precedes the appearance of headache by weeks is highly characteristic of posterior fossa brain tumors. A history of amenorrhea or galactorrhea should lead one to question whether a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma (or the polycystic ovary syndrome) is the source of headache. Headache arising de novo in a patient with known malignancy suggests either cerebral metastases or carcinomatous meningitis, or both. Head pain appearing abruptly after bending, lifting, or coughing can be due to a posterior fossa mass, a Chiari malformation, or low CSF volume.

Brain tumors are discussed in Chap. 379.

Temporal Arteritis

(See also Chaps. 28 and 326) Temporal (giant cell) arteritis is an inflammatory disorder of arteries that frequently involves the extracranial carotid circulation. It is a common disorder of the elderly; its annual incidence is 77 per 100,000 individuals age 50 and older. The average age of onset is 70 years, and women account for 65% of cases. About half of patients with untreated temporal arteritis develop blindness due to involvement of the ophthalmic artery and its branches; indeed, the ischemic optic neuropathy induced by giant cell arteritis is the major cause of rapidly developing bilateral blindness in patients >60 years. Because treatment with glucocorticoids is effective in preventing this complication, prompt recognition of the disorder is important.

Typical presenting symptoms include headache, polymyalgia rheumatica (Chap. 326), jaw claudication, fever, and weight loss. Headache is the dominant symptom and often appears in association with malaise and muscle aches. Head pain may be unilateral or bilateral and is located temporally in 50% of patients but may involve any and all aspects of the cranium. Pain usually appears gradually over a few hours before peak intensity is reached; occasionally, it is explosive in onset. The quality of pain is only seldom throbbing; it is almost invariably described as dull and boring, with superimposed episodic stabbing pains similar to the sharp pains that appear in migraine. Most patients can recognize that the origin of their head pain is superficial, external to the skull, rather than originating deep within the cranium (the pain site for migraineurs). Scalp tenderness is present, often to a marked degree; brushing the hair or resting the head on a pillow may be impossible because of pain. Headache is usually worse at night and often aggravated by exposure to cold. Additional findings may include reddened, tender nodules or red streaking of the skin overlying the temporal arteries, and tenderness of the temporal or, less commonly, the occipital arteries.

The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often, though not always, elevated; a normal ESR does not exclude giant cell arteritis. A temporal artery biopsy followed by immediate treatment with prednisone 80 mg daily for the first 4每6 weeks should be initiated when clinical suspicion is high. The prevalence of migraine among the elderly is substantial, considerably higher than that of giant cell arteritis. Migraineurs often report amelioration of their headaches with prednisone; thus, caution must be used when interpreting the therapeutic response.

Glaucoma

Glaucoma may present with a prostrating headache associated with nausea and vomiting. The headache often starts with severe eye pain. On physical examination, the eye is often red with a fixed, moderately dilated pupil.

Glaucoma is discussed in Chap. 28.
 
Primary Headache Syndromes

Primary headaches are disorders in which headache and associated features occur in the absence of any exogenous cause (Table 14每1). The most common are migraine, tension-type headache, and cluster headache.

Migraine

Migraine, the second most common cause of headache, afflicts approximately 15% of women and 6% of men over a one year period. It is usually an episodic headache associated with certain features such as sensitivity to light, sound, or movement; nausea and vomiting often accompany the headache. A useful description of migraine is a benign and recurring syndrome of headache associated with other symptoms of neurologic dysfunction in varying admixtures (Table 14每3). Migraine can often be recognized by its activators, referred to as triggers.

Table 14-3 Symptoms Accompanying Severe Migraine Attacks in 500 Patients

 
 
Symptom
 Patients Affected, %
 
Nausea
 87
 
Photophobia
 82
 
Lightheadedness
 72
 
Scalp tenderness
 65
 
Vomiting
 56
 
Visual disturbances
 36
 
Paresthesias
 33
 
Vertigo
 33
 
Photopsia
 26
 
Alteration of consciousness
 18
 
Diarrhea
 16
 
Fortification spectra
 10
 
Syncope
 10
 
Seizure
 4
 
Confusional state
 4
 
 


Source: From NH Raskin, Headache, 2nd ed. New York, Churchill Livingston, 1988; with permission.
 

The brain of the migraineur is particularly sensitive to environmental and sensory stimuli; migraine-prone patients do not habituate easily to sensory stimuli. This sensitivity is amplified in females during the menstrual cycle. Headache can be initiated or amplified by various triggers, including glare, bright lights, sounds, or other afferent stimulation; hunger; excess stress; physical exertion; stormy weather or barometric pressure changes; hormonal fluctuations during menses; lack of or excess sleep; and alcohol or other chemical stimulation. Knowledge of a patient's susceptibility to specific triggers can be useful in management strategies involving lifestyle adjustments.

Pathogenesis

The sensory sensitivity that is characteristic of migraine is probably due to dysfunction of monoaminergic sensory control systems located in the brainstem and thalamus (Fig. 14-1).

Figure 14-1

 
 
 
Brainstem pathways that modulate sensory input. The key pathway for pain in migraine is the trigeminovascular input from the meningeal vessels, which passes through the trigeminal ganglion and synapses on second-order neurons in the trigeminocervical complex (TCC). These neurons in turn project in the quintothalamic tract and, after decussating in the brainstem, synapse on neurons in the thalamus. Important modulation of the trigeminovascular nociceptive input comes from the dorsal raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, and nucleus raphe magnus.
 
 


Activation of cells in the trigeminal nucleus results in the release of vasoactive neuropeptides, particularly calcitonin gene每related peptide (CGRP), at vascular terminations of the trigeminal nerve and within the trigeminal nucleus. CGRP receptor antagonists have now been shown to be effective in the acute treatment of migraine. Centrally, the second-order trigeminal neurons cross the midline and project to ventrobasal and posterior nuclei of the thalamus for further processing. Additionally, there are projections to the periaqueductal gray and hypothalamus, from which reciprocal descending systems have established antinociceptive effects. Other brainstem regions likely to be involved in descending modulation of trigeminal pain include the nucleus locus coeruleus in the pons and the rostroventromedial medulla.

Pharmacologic and other data point to the involvement of the neurotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; also known as serotonin) in migraine. Approximately 60 years ago, methysergide was found to antagonize certain peripheral actions of 5-HT and was introduced as the first drug capable of preventing migraine attacks. The triptans are designed to selectively stimulate subpopulations of 5-HT receptors; at least 14 different 5-HT receptors exist in humans. The triptans are potent agonists of 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, and 5-HT1F receptors and are less potent at the 5-HT1A receptor. A growing body of data indicates that the antimigraine efficacy of the triptans relates to their ability to stimulate 5-HT1B/1D receptors, which are located on both blood vessels and nerve terminals. Separately, it has now been shown that selective 5-HT1F receptor activation, which has a purely neural effect, can terminate acute migraine.

Data also support a role for dopamine in the pathophysiology of migraine. Most migraine symptoms can be induced by dopaminergic stimulation. Moreover, there is dopamine receptor hypersensitivity in migraineurs, as demonstrated by the induction of yawning, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, and other symptoms of a migraine attack by dopaminergic agonists at doses that do not affect nonmigraineurs. Dopamine receptor antagonists are effective therapeutic agents in migraine, especially when given parenterally or concurrently with other antimigraine agents.

Migraine genes identified by studying families with familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) reveal involvement of ion channels, suggesting that alterations in membrane excitability can predispose to migraine. Mutations involving the Cav2.1 (P/Q)每type voltage-gated calcium channel CACNA1A gene are now known to cause FHM 1; this mutation is responsible for about 50% of FHM. Mutations in the Na+-K+ATPase ATP1A2 gene, designated FHM 2, are responsible for about 20% of FHM. Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel SCN1A cause FHM 3. Functional neuroimaging has suggested that brainstem regions in migraine (Fig. 14-2) and the posterior hypothalamic gray matter region close to the human circadian pacemaker cells of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in cluster headache (Fig. 14-3) are good candidates for specific involvement in primary headache.

Figure 14-2

 
 
 
 
Positron emission tomography (PET) activation in migraine. In spontaneous attacks of episodic migraine there is activation of the region of the dorsolateral pons; an identical pattern is found in chronic migraine (not shown). This area, which includes the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, is fundamental to the expression of migraine. Moreover, lateralization of changes in this region of the brainstem correlates with lateralization of the head pain in hemicranial migraine; the scans shown in panels A and B are of patients with acute migraine headache on the right and left side, respectively. (From S Afridi et al: Brain 128:932, 2005.)
 
 

Figure 14-3

 
 
 
 
Posterior hypothalamic gray matter activation on positron emission tomography (PET) in a patient with acute cluster headache (A). (From A May et al: Lancet 352:275, 1998.) High-resolution T1 weighted MRI obtained using voxel-based morphometry demonstrates increased gray matter activity, lateralized to the side of pain in a patient with cluster headache (B). (From A May et al: Nat Med 5:836, 1999.)
 
 

Diagnosis and Clinical Features

Diagnostic criteria for migraine headache are listed in Table 14每4. A high index of suspicion is required to diagnose migraine: the migraine aura, consisting of visual disturbances with flashing lights or zigzag lines moving across the visual field or of other neurologic symptoms, is reported in only 20每25% of patients. A headache diary can often be helpful in making the diagnosis; this is also helpful in assessing disability and the frequency of treatment for acute attacks. Patients with episodes of migraine that occur daily or near-daily are considered to have chronic migraine (see "Chronic Daily Headache," below). Migraine must be differentiated from tension-type headache (discussed below), the most common primary headache syndrome seen in clinical practice. Migraine at its most basic level is headache with associated features, and tension-type headache is headache that is featureless. Most patients with disabling headache probably have migraine.

Table 14-4 Simplified Diagnostic Criteria for Migraine

 
 
Repeated attacks of headache lasting 4每72 h in patients with a normal physical examination, no other reasonable cause for the headache, and:
 
At Least 2 of the Following Features:
 Plus at Least 1 of the Following Features:
 
Unilateral pain
 Nausea/vomiting
 
Throbbing pain
 Photophobia and phonophobia
 
Aggravation by movement
   
Moderate or severe intensity
   
 


Source: Adapted from the International Headache Society Classification (Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society, 2004).
 

Patients with acephalgic migraine experience recurrent neurologic symptoms, often with nausea or vomiting, but with little or no headache. Vertigo can be prominent; it has been estimated that one-third of patients referred for vertigo or dizziness have a primary diagnosis of migraine.

Treatment: Migraine Headaches

Once a diagnosis of migraine has been established, it is important to assess the extent of a patient's disease and disability. The Migraine Disability Assessment Score (MIDAS) is a well-validated, easy-to-use tool (Fig. 14-4).

Figure 14-4

 
 
 
MIDAS Questionnaire.
 
 

Patient education is an important aspect of migraine management. Information for patients is available at www.achenet.org, the website of the American Council for Headache Education (ACHE). It is helpful for patients to understand that migraine is an inherited tendency to headache; that migraine can be modified and controlled by lifestyle adjustments and medications, but it cannot be eradicated; and that, except in some occasions in women on oral estrogens or contraceptives, migraine is not associated with serious or life-threatening illnesses.

Nonpharmacologic Management

Migraine can often be managed to some degree by a variety of nonpharmacologic approaches. Most patients benefit by the identification and avoidance of specific headache triggers. A regulated lifestyle is helpful, including a healthful diet, regular exercise, regular sleep patterns, avoidance of excess caffeine and alcohol, and avoidance of acute changes in stress levels.

The measures that benefit a given individual should be used routinely since they provide a simple, cost-effective approach to migraine management. Patients with migraine do not encounter more stress than headache-free individuals; overresponsiveness to stress appears to be the issue. Since the stresses of everyday living cannot be eliminated, lessening one's response to stress by various techniques is helpful for many patients. These may include yoga, transcendental meditation, hypnosis, and conditioning techniques such as biofeedback. For most patients, this approach is, at best, an adjunct to pharmacotherapy. Nonpharmacologic measures are unlikely to prevent all migraine attacks. If these measures fail to prevent an attack, pharmacologic approaches are then needed to abort an attack.

Acute Attack Therapies for Migraine

The mainstay of pharmacologic therapy is the judicious use of one or more of the many drugs that are effective in migraine (Table 14每5). The selection of the optimal regimen for a given patient depends on a number of factors, the most important of which is the severity of the attack. Mild migraine attacks can usually be managed by oral agents; the average efficacy rate is 50每70%. Severe migraine attacks may require parenteral therapy. Most drugs effective in the treatment of migraine are members of one of three major pharmacologic classes: anti-inflammatory agents, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists, and dopamine receptor antagonists.

Table 14-5 Treatment of Acute Migraine

 
 
Drug Trade Name Dosage 
Simple Analgesics  
Acetaminophen, aspirin, caffeine Excedrin

Migraine
 Two tablets or caplets q6h (max 8 per day) 
NSAIDs  
Naproxen Aleve, Anaprox, generic 220每550 mg PO bid 
Ibuprofen Advil, Motrin, Nuprin, generic 400 mg PO q3每4h 
Tolfenamic acid Clotam Rapid 200 mg PO. May repeat x1 after 1每2 h 
5-HT1 Agonists  
Oral      
Ergotamine Ergomar One 2 mg sublingual tablet at onset and q1/2h (max 3 per day, 5 per week)
  
Ergotamine 1 mg, caffeine 100 mg Ercaf, Wigraine One or two tablets at onset, then one tablet q1/2h (max 6 per day, 10 per week)
  
Naratriptan Amerge 2.5 mg tablet at onset; may repeat once after 4 h 
Rizatriptan Maxalt 5每10 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 30 mg/d) 
  Maxalt-MLT   
Sumatriptan Imitrex 50每100 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 200 mg/d) 
Frovatriptan Frova 2.5 mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 5 mg/d) 
Almotriptan Axert 12.5 mg tablet at onset, may repeat after 2 h (max 25 mg/d) 
Eletriptan Relpax 40 or 80 mg 
Zolmitriptan Zomig

Zomig Rapimelt
 2.5 mg tablet at onset; may repeat after 2 h (max 10 mg/d) 
Nasal      
Dihydroergotamine Migranal Nasal Spray Prior to nasal spray, the pump must be primed 4 times; 1 spray (0.5 mg) is administered, followed in 15 min by a second spray 
Sumatriptan Imitrex Nasal Spray 5每20 mg intranasal spray as 4 sprays of 5 mg or a single 20 mg spray (may repeat once after 2 h, not to exceed a dose of 40 mg/d) 
Zolmitriptan Zomig 5 mg intranasal spray as one spray (may repeat once after 2 h, not to exceed a dose of 10 mg/d) 
Parenteral      
Dihydroergotamine DHE-45 1 mg IV, IM, or SC at onset and q1h (max 3 mg/d, 6 mg per week) 
Sumatriptan Imitrex Injection 6 mg SC at onset (may repeat once after 1 h for max of 2 doses in 24 h) 
Dopamine Antagonists  
Oral      
Metoclopramide Reglan,a generica  5每10 mg/d 
Prochlorperazine Compazine,a generica  1每25 mg/d 
Parenteral      
Chlorpromazine Generica  0.1 mg/kg IV at 2 mg/min; max 35 mg/d 
Metoclopramide Reglan,a generic  10 mg IV 
Prochlorperazine Compazine,a generica  10 mg IV 
Other  
Oral      
Acetaminophen, 325 mg, plus dichloralphenazone, 100 mg, plus isometheptene, 65 mg  Midrin, Duradrin, generic Two capsules at onset followed by 1 capsule q1h (max 5 capsules) 
Nasal      
Butorphanol Stadola  1 mg (1 spray in 1 nostril), may repeat if necessary in 1每2 h 
Parenteral      
Narcotics Generica  Multiple preparations and dosages; see Table 11-1 
 


aNot all drugs are specifically indicated by the FDA for migraine. Local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.

Note: Antiemetics (e.g., domperidone 10 mg or ondansetron 4 or 8 mg) or prokinetics (e.g., metoclopramide 10 mg) are sometimes useful adjuncts.

Abbreviations: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine.
 

In general, an adequate dose of whichever agent is chosen should be used as soon as possible after the onset of an attack. If additional medication is required within 60 min because symptoms return or have not abated, the initial dose should be increased for subsequent attacks. Migraine therapy must be individualized; a standard approach for all patients is not possible. A therapeutic regimen may need to be constantly refined until one is identified that provides the patient with rapid, complete, and consistent relief with minimal side effects (Table 14每6).

Table 14-6 Clinical Stratification of Acute Specific Migraine Treatments

 
 
Clinical Situation
 Treatment Options
 
Failed NSAIDS/analgesics
 First tier
 
  Sumatriptan 50 mg or 100 mg PO  
  Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO  
  Rizatriptan 10 mg PO  
  Eletriptan 40 mg PO  
  Zolmitriptan 2.5 mg PO  
  Slower effect/better tolerability  
  Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO  
  Frovatriptan 2.5 mg PO  
  Infrequent headache  
  Ergotamine 1每2 mg PO  
  Dihydroergotamine nasal spray 2 mg 
Early nausea or difficulties taking tablets
 Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
 
  Sumatriptan 20 mg nasal spray
 
  Rizatriptan 10 mg MLT wafer
 
Headache recurrence
 Ergotamine 2 mg (most effective PR/usually with caffeine)
 
  Naratriptan 2.5 mg PO
 
  Almotriptan 12.5 mg PO
 
  Eletriptan 40 mg
 
Tolerating acute treatments poorly
 Naratriptan 2.5 mg
 
  Almotriptan 12.5 mg
 
Early vomiting
 Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
 
  Sumatriptan 25 mg PR
 
  Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
 
Menses-related headache
 Prevention
 
  Ergotamine PO at night  
  Estrogen patches 
  Treatment
 
  Triptans  
  Dihydroergotamine nasal spray 
Very rapidly developing symptoms
 Zolmitriptan 5 mg nasal spray
 
  Sumatriptan 6 mg SC
 
  Dihydroergotamine 1 mg IM
 
 

 

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)

Both the severity and duration of a migraine attack can be reduced significantly by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (Table 14每5). Indeed, many undiagnosed migraineurs are self-treated with nonprescription NSAIDs. A general consensus is that NSAIDs are most effective when taken early in the migraine attack. However, the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory agents in migraine is usually less than optimal in moderate or severe migraine attacks. The combination of acetaminophen, aspirin, and caffeine has been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of mild to moderate migraine. The combination of aspirin and metoclopramide has been shown to be comparable to a single dose of sumatriptan. Important side effects of NSAIDs include dyspepsia and gastrointestinal irritation.

5-HT1 Receptor Agonists

Oral

Stimulation of 5-HT1B/1D receptors can stop an acute migraine attack. Ergotamine and dihydroergotamine are nonselective receptor agonists, while the triptans are selective 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists. A variety of triptans, 5-HT1B/1D receptor agonists〞naratriptan, rizatriptan, eletriptan, sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, almotriptan, and frovatriptan〞are now available for the treatment of migraine.

Each drug in the triptan class has similar pharmacologic properties but varies slightly in terms of clinical efficacy. Rizatriptan and eletriptan are the most efficacious of the triptans currently available in the United States. Sumatriptan and zolmitriptan have similar rates of efficacy as well as time to onset, with an advantage of having multiple formulations, whereas almotriptan, frovatriptan, and naratriptan are somewhat slower in onset and are better tolerated. Clinical efficacy appears to be related more to the tmax (time to peak plasma level) than to the potency, half-life, or bioavailability. This observation is consistent with a large body of data indicating that faster-acting analgesics are more effective than slower-acting agents.

Unfortunately, monotherapy with a selective oral 5-HT1B/1D agonist does not result in rapid, consistent, and complete relief of migraine in all patients. Triptans are not effective in migraine with aura unless given after the aura is completed and the headache initiated. Side effects are common though often mild and transient. Moreover, 5-HT1B/1D agonists are contraindicated in individuals with a history of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. Recurrence of headache is another important limitation of triptan use and occurs at least occasionally in most patients. Evidence from randomized controlled trials show that coadministration of a longer-acting NSAID, naproxen 500 mg, with sumatriptan will augment the initial effect of sumatriptan and, importantly, reduce rates of headache recurrence.

Ergotamine preparations offer a nonselective means of stimulating 5-HT1 receptors. A nonnauseating dose of ergotamine should be sought since a dose that provokes nausea is too high and may intensify head pain. Except for a sublingual formulation of ergotamine, oral formulations of ergotamine also contain 100 mg caffeine (theoretically to enhance ergotamine absorption and possibly to add additional analgesic activity). The average oral ergotamine dose for a migraine attack is 2 mg. Since the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of ergotamine in migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies used with the triptans, it is difficult to assess the clinical efficacy of ergotamine versus the triptans. In general, ergotamine appears to have a much higher incidence of nausea than triptans, but less headache recurrence.

Nasal

The fastest-acting nonparenteral antimigraine therapies that can be self-administered include nasal formulations of dihydroergotamine (Migranal), zolmitriptan (Zomig nasal), or sumatriptan. The nasal sprays result in substantial blood levels within 30每60 min. Although in theory nasal sprays might provide faster and more effective relief of a migraine attack than oral formulations, their reported efficacy is only approximately 50每60%. Studies with an inhalational formulation of dihydroergotamine indicate that its absorption problems can be overcome to produce rapid onset of action with good tolerability.

Parenteral

Parenteral administration of drugs such as dihydroergotamine and sumatriptan is approved by the FDA for the rapid relief of a migraine attack. Peak plasma levels of dihydroergotamine are achieved 3 min after IV dosing, 30 min after IM dosing, and 45 min after SC dosing. If an attack has not already peaked, SC or IM administration of 1 mg dihydroergotamine suffices for about 80每90% of patients. Sumatriptan, 6 mg SC, is effective in ~70每80% of patients.

Dopamine Antagonists

Oral

Oral dopamine antagonists should be considered as adjunctive therapy in migraine. Drug absorption is impaired during migraine because of reduced gastrointestinal motility. Delayed absorption occurs even in the absence of nausea and is related to the severity of the attack and not its duration. Therefore, when oral NSAIDs and/or triptan agents fail, the addition of a dopamine antagonist such as metoclopramide 10 mg should be considered to enhance gastric absorption. In addition, dopamine antagonists decrease nausea/vomiting and restore normal gastric motility.

Parenteral

Parenteral dopamine antagonists (e.g., chlorpromazine, prochlorperazine, metoclopramide) can also provide significant acute relief of migraine; they can be used in combination with parenteral 5-HT1B/1D agonists. A common IV protocol used for the treatment of severe migraine is the administration over 2 min of a mixture of 5 mg of prochlorperazine and 0.5 mg of dihydroergotamine.

Other Medications for Acute Migraine

Oral

The combination of acetaminophen, dichloralphenazone, and isometheptene, one to two capsules, has been classified by the FDA as "possibly" effective in the treatment of migraine. Since the clinical studies demonstrating the efficacy of this combination analgesic in migraine predated the clinical trial methodologies used with the triptans, it is difficult to compare the efficacy of this sympathomimetic compound to other agents.

Nasal

A nasal preparation of butorphanol is available for the treatment of acute pain. As with all narcotics, the use of nasal butorphanol should be limited to a select group of migraineurs, as described below.

Parenteral

Narcotics are effective in the acute treatment of migraine. For example, IV meperidine (50每100 mg) is given frequently in the emergency room. This regimen "works" in the sense that the pain of migraine is eliminated. However, this regimen is clearly suboptimal for patients with recurrent headache. Narcotics do not treat the underlying headache mechanism; rather, they act to alter the pain sensation. Moreover, in patients taking oral narcotics such as oxycodone or hydrocodone, narcotic addiction can greatly confuse the treatment of migraine. Narcotic craving and/or withdrawal can aggravate and accentuate migraine. Therefore, it is recommended that narcotic use in migraine be limited to patients with severe, but infrequent, headaches that are unresponsive to other pharmacologic approaches.

Medication-Overuse Headache

Acute attack medications, particularly codeine or barbiturate-containing compound analgesics, have a propensity to aggravate headache frequency and induce a state of refractory daily or near-daily headache called medication-overuse headache. This condition is likely not a separate headache entity but a reaction of the migraine patient to a particular medicine. Migraine patients who have two or more headache days a week should be cautioned about frequent analgesic use (see "Chronic Daily Headache," below).

Preventive Treatments for Migraine

Patients with an increasing frequency of migraine attacks, or with attacks that are either unresponsive or poorly responsive to abortive treatments, are good candidates for preventive agents. In general, a preventive medication should be considered in the subset of patients with five or more attacks a month. Significant side effects are associated with the use of many of these agents; furthermore, determination of dose can be difficult since the recommended doses have been derived for conditions other than migraine. The mechanism of action of these drugs is unclear; it seems likely that the brain sensitivity that underlies migraine is modified. Patients are usually started on a low dose of a chosen treatment; the dose is then gradually increased, up to a reasonable maximum to achieve clinical benefit.

Drugs that have the capacity to stabilize migraine are listed in Table 14每7. Drugs must be taken daily, and there is usually a lag of at least 2每12 weeks before an effect is seen. The drugs that have been approved by the FDA for the prophylactic treatment of migraine include propranolol, timolol, sodium valproate, topiramate, and methysergide (not available in the United States). In addition, a number of other drugs appear to display prophylactic efficacy. This group includes amitriptyline, nortriptyline, flunarizine, phenelzine, gabapentin, and cyproheptadine. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum toxin type A in episodic migraine were negative, while, overall, placebo-controlled trials in chronic migraine were positive. Phenelzine and methysergide are usually reserved for recalcitrant cases because of their serious potential side effects. Phenelzine is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI); therefore, tyramine-containing foods, decongestants, and meperidine are contraindicated. Methysergide may cause retroperitoneal or cardiac valvular fibrosis when it is used for >6 months, and thus monitoring is required for patients using this drug; the risk of fibrosis is about 1:1500 and is likely to reverse after the drug is stopped.

Table 14-7 Preventive Treatments in Migrainea 

 
 
Drug
 Dose
 Selected Side Effects
 
Pizotifenb
 0.5每2 mg qd
 Weight gain
 
    Drowsiness
 
Beta blocker
     
  Propranolol
 40每120 mg bid
 Reduced energy
 
    Tiredness
 
    Postural symptoms
 
    Contraindicated in asthma
 
Tricyclics
     
  Amitriptyline
 10每75 mg at night
 Drowsiness
 
  Dothiepin
 25每75 mg at night
   
  Nortriptyline
 25每75 mg at night
 Note: Some patients may only need a total dose of 10 mg, although generally 1每1.5 mg/kg body weight is required
 
Anticonvulsants
     
  Topiramate
 25每200 mg/d
 Paresthesias
 
    Cognitive symptoms
 
    Weight loss
 
    Glaucoma
 
    Caution with nephrolithiasis
 
  Valproate
 400每600 mg bid
 Drowsiness
 
    Weight gain
 
    Tremor
 
    Hair loss
 
    Fetal abnormalities
 
    Hematologic or liver abnormalities
 
  Gabapentin
 900每3600 mg qd
 Dizziness
 
    Sedation
 
Serotonergic drugs
     
  Methysergide
 1每4 mg qd
 Drowsiness
 
    Leg cramps
 
    Hair loss
 
    Retroperitoneal fibrosis (1-month drug holiday is required every 6 months)
 
  Flunarizineb
 5每15 mg qd
 Drowsiness
 
    Weight gain
 
    Depression
 
    Parkinsonism
 
No convincing evidence from controlled trials
     
  Verapamil
     
Controlled trials demonstrate no effect
     
  Nimodipine
     
  Clonidine
     
  SSRIs: fluoxetine
     
 


aCommonly used preventives are listed with typical doses and common side effects. Not all listed medicines are approved by the FDA; local regulations and guidelines should be consulted.

bNot available in the United States.
 

The probability of success with any one of the antimigraine drugs is 50每75%. Many patients are managed adequately with low-dose amitriptyline, propranolol, topiramate, gabapentin, or valproate. If these agents fail or lead to unacceptable side effects, second-line agents such as methysergide or phenelzine can be used. Once effective stabilization is achieved, the drug is continued for ~6 months and then slowly tapered to assess the continued need. Many patients are able to discontinue medication and experience fewer and milder attacks for long periods, suggesting that these drugs may alter the natural history of migraine.

Tension-Type Headache

Clinical Features

The term tension-type headache (TTH) is commonly used to describe a chronic head-pain syndrome characterized by bilateral tight, bandlike discomfort. The pain typically builds slowly, fluctuates in severity, and may persist more or less continuously for many days. The headache may be episodic or chronic (present >15 days per month).

A useful clinical approach is to diagnose TTH in patients whose headaches are completely without accompanying features such as nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, throbbing, and aggravation with movement. Such an approach neatly separates migraine, which has one or more of these features and is the main differential diagnosis, from TTH. The International Headache Society's main definition of TTH allows an admixture of nausea, photophobia, or phonophobia in various combinations, although the appendix definition does not; this illustrates the difficulty in distinguishing these two clinical entities. In clinical practice, dichotomizing patients on the basis of the presence of associated features (migraine) and the absence of associated features (TTH) is highly recommended. Indeed patients whose headaches fit the TTH phenotype and who have migraine at other times, along with a family history of migraine, migrainous illnesses of childhood, or typical migraine triggers to their migraine attacks, may be biologically different from those who have TTH headache with none of the features.

Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of TTH is incompletely understood. It seems likely that TTH is due to a primary disorder of CNS pain modulation alone, unlike migraine, which involves a more generalized disturbance of sensory modulation. Data suggest a genetic contribution to TTH, but this may not be a valid finding: given the current diagnostic criteria, the studies undoubtedly included many migraine patients. The name tension-type headache implies that pain is a product of nervous tension, but there is no clear evidence for tension as an etiology. Muscle contraction has been considered to be a feature that distinguishes TTH from migraine, but there appear to be no differences in contraction between the two headache types.

Treatment: Tension-Type Headache

The pain of TTH can generally be managed with simple analgesics such as acetaminophen, aspirin, or NSAIDs. Behavioral approaches including relaxation can also be effective. Clinical studies have demonstrated that triptans in pure TTH are not helpful, although triptans are effective in TTH when the patient also has migraine. For chronic TTH, amitriptyline is the only proven treatment (Table 14每7); other tricyclics, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and the benzodiazepines have not been shown to be effective. There is no evidence for the efficacy of acupuncture. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum toxin type A in chronic TTH have not shown benefit.

Trigeminal Autonomic Cephalalgias, Including Cluster Headache

The trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias (TACs) describe a grouping of primary headaches including cluster headache, paroxysmal hemicrania, and SUNCT (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing)/SUNA (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms). TACs are characterized by relatively short-lasting attacks of head pain associated with cranial autonomic symptoms, such as lacrimation, conjunctival injection, or nasal congestion (Table 14每8). Pain is usually severe and may occur more than once a day. Because of the associated nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, patients are often misdiagnosed with "sinus headache" and treated with decongestants, which are ineffective.

Table 14-8 Clinical Features of the Trigeminal Autonomic Cephalalgias

 
 
  Cluster Headache
 Paroxysmal Hemicrania
 SUNCT
 
Gender Pain
 M > F
 F = M
 F  M
 
  Type
 Stabbing, boring
 Throbbing, boring, stabbing
 Burning, stabbing, sharp
 
  Severity
 Excruciating
 Excruciating
 Severe to excruciating
 
  Site
 Orbit, temple
 Orbit, temple
 Periorbital
 
Attack frequency
 1/alternate day每8/d
 1每40/d (>5/d for more than half the time)
 3每200/d
 
Duration of attack
 15每180 min
 2每30 min
 5每240 s
 
Autonomic features
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes (prominent conjunctival injection and lacrimation)a
 
Migrainous featuresb
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 
Alcohol trigger
 Yes
 No
 No
 
Cutaneous triggers
 No
 No
 Yes
 
Indomethacin effect
 〞
 Yesc
 〞
 
Abortive treatment
 Sumatriptan injection or nasal spray
 No effective treatment
 Lidocaine (IV)
 
  Oxygen
     
Prophylactic treatment
 Verapamil
 Indomethacin
 Lamotrigine Topiramate
 
  Methysergide
     
  Lithium
   Gabapentin
 
 


aIf conjunctival injection and tearing not present, consider SUNA.

b Nausea, photophobia, or phonophobia; photophobia and phonophobia are typically unilateral on the side of the pain.

cIndicates complete response to indomethacin.

Abbreviation: SUNCT, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing.
 

TACs must be differentiated from short-lasting headaches that do not have prominent cranial autonomic syndromes, notably trigeminal neuralgia, primary stabbing headache, and hypnic headache. The cycling pattern and length, frequency, and timing of attacks are useful in classifying patients. Patients with TACs should undergo pituitary imaging and pituitary function tests as there is an excess of TAC presentations in patients with pituitary tumor每related headache.

Cluster Headache

Cluster headache is a rare form of primary headache with a population frequency of approximately 0.1%. The pain is deep, usually retroorbital, often excruciating in intensity, nonfluctuating, and explosive in quality. A core feature of cluster headache is periodicity. At least one of the daily attacks of pain recurs at about the same hour each day for the duration of a cluster bout. The typical cluster headache patient has daily bouts of one to two attacks of relatively short-duration unilateral pain for 8 to 10 weeks a year; this is usually followed by a pain-free interval that averages a little less than 1 year. Cluster headache is characterized as chronic when there is no significant period of sustained remission. Patients are generally perfectly well between episodes. Onset is nocturnal in about 50% of patients, and men are affected three times more often than women. Patients with cluster headache tend to move about during attacks, pacing, rocking, or rubbing their head for relief; some may even become aggressive during attacks. This is in sharp contrast to patients with migraine, who prefer to remain motionless during attacks.

Cluster headache is associated with ipsilateral symptoms of cranial parasympathetic autonomic activation: conjunctival injection or lacrimation, rhinorrhea or nasal congestion, or cranial sympathetic dysfunction such as ptosis. The sympathetic deficit is peripheral and likely to be due to parasympathetic activation with injury to ascending sympathetic fibers surrounding a dilated carotid artery as it passes into the cranial cavity. When present, photophobia and phonophobia are far more likely to be unilateral and on the same side of the pain, rather than bilateral, as is seen in migraine. This phenomenon of unilateral photophobia/phonophobia is characteristic of TACs. Cluster headache is likely to be a disorder involving central pacemaker neurons in the region of the posterior hypothalamus (Fig. 14-3).

Treatment: Cluster Headache

The most satisfactory treatment is the administration of drugs to prevent cluster attacks until the bout is over. However, treatment of acute attacks is required for all cluster headache patients at some time.

Acute Attack Treatment

Cluster headache attacks peak rapidly, and thus a treatment with quick onset is required. Many patients with acute cluster headache respond very well to oxygen inhalation. This should be given as 100% oxygen at 10每12 L/min for 15每20 min. It appears that high flow and high oxygen content are important. Sumatriptan 6 mg SC is rapid in onset and will usually shorten an attack to 10每15 min; there is no evidence of tachyphylaxis. Sumatriptan (20 mg) and zolmitriptan (5 mg) nasal sprays are both effective in acute cluster headache, offering a useful option for patients who may not wish to self-inject daily. Oral sumatriptan is not effective for prevention or for acute treatment of cluster headache.

Preventive Treatments

(Table 14每9) The choice of a preventive treatment in cluster headache depends in part on the length of the bout. Patients with long bouts or those with chronic cluster headache require medicines that are safe when taken for long periods. For patients with relatively short bouts, limited courses of oral glucocorticoids or methysergide (not available in the United States) can be very useful. A 10-day course of prednisone, beginning at 60 mg daily for 7 days and followed by a rapid taper, may interrupt the pain bout for many patients. When ergotamine (1每2 mg) is used, it is most effective when given 1每2 h before an expected attack. Patients who use ergotamine daily must be educated regarding the early symptoms of ergotism, which may include vomiting, numbness, tingling, pain, and cyanosis of the limbs; a weekly limit of 14 mg should be adhered to. Lithium (600每900 mg qd) appears to be particularly useful for the chronic form of the disorder.

Table 14-9 Preventive Management of Cluster Headache

 
 
Short-Term Prevention
 Long-Term Prevention
 
Episodic Cluster Headache
 Episodic Cluster Headache & Prolonged Chronic Cluster Headache
 
Prednisone 1 mg/kg up to 60 mg qd, tapering over 21 days
 Verapamil 160每960 mg/d
 
  Lithium 400每800 mg/d
 
Methysergide 3每12 mg/d
 Methysergide 3每12 mg/d
 
Verapamil 160每960 mg/d
 Topiramatea 100每400 mg/d
 
Greater occipital nerve injection
 Gabapentina 1200每3600 mg/d
 
  Melatonina 9每12 mg/d
 
 


a Unproven but of potential benefit.
 

Many experts favor verapamil as the first-line preventive treatment for patients with chronic cluster headache or prolonged bouts. While verapamil compares favorably with lithium in practice, some patients require verapamil doses far in excess of those administered for cardiac disorders. The initial dose range is 40每80 mg twice daily; effective doses may be as high as 960 mg/d. Side effects such as constipation and leg swelling can be problematic. Of paramount concern, however, is the cardiovascular safety of verapamil, particularly at high doses. Verapamil can cause heart block by slowing conduction in the atrioventricular node, a condition that can be monitored by following the PR interval on a standard ECG. Approximately 20% of patients treated with verapamil develop ECG abnormalities, which can be observed with doses as low as 240 mg/d; these abnormalities can worsen over time in patients on stable doses. A baseline ECG is recommended for all patients. The ECG is repeated 10 days after a dose change in those patients whose dose is being increased above 240 mg daily. Dose increases are usually made in 80-mg increments. For patients on long-term verapamil, ECG monitoring every 6 months is advised.

Neurostimulation Therapy

When medical therapies fail in chronic cluster headache, neurostimulation strategies can be employed. Deep-brain stimulation of the region of the posterior hypothalamic gray matter has proven successful in a substantial proportion of patients. Favorable results have also been reported with the less-invasive approach of occipital nerve stimulation.

Paroxysmal Hemicrania

Paroxysmal hemicrania (PH) is characterized by frequent unilateral, severe, short-lasting episodes of headache. Like cluster headache, the pain tends to be retroorbital but may be experienced all over the head and is associated with autonomic phenomena such as lacrimation and nasal congestion. Patients with remissions are said to have episodic PH, whereas those with the nonremitting form are said to have chronic PH. The essential features of PH are unilateral, very severe pain; short-lasting attacks (2每45 min); very frequent attacks (usually more than five a day); marked autonomic features ipsilateral to the pain; rapid course (<72 h); and excellent response to indomethacin. In contrast to cluster headache, which predominantly affects males, the male:female ratio in PH is close to 1:1.

Indomethacin (25每75 mg tid), which can completely suppress attacks of PH, is the treatment of choice. Although therapy may be complicated by indomethacin-induced gastrointestinal side effects, currently there are no consistently effective alternatives. Topiramate is helpful in some cases. Piroxicam has been used, although it is not as effective as indomethacin. Verapamil, an effective treatment for cluster headache, does not appear to be useful for PH. In occasional patients, PH can coexist with trigeminal neuralgia (PH-tic syndrome); similar to cluster-tic syndrome, each component may require separate treatment.

Secondary PH has been reported with lesions in the region of the sella turcica, including arteriovenous malformation, cavernous sinus meningioma, and epidermoid tumors. Secondary PH is more likely if the patient requires high doses (>200 mg/d) of indomethacin. In patients with apparent bilateral PH, raised CSF pressure should be suspected. It is important to note that indomethacin reduces CSF pressure. When a diagnosis of PH is considered, MRI is indicated to exclude a pituitary lesion.

Sunct/Suna

SUNCT (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing) is a rare primary headache syndrome characterized by severe, unilateral orbital or temporal pain that is stabbing or throbbing in quality. Diagnosis requires at least 20 attacks, lasting for 5每240 s; ipsilateral conjunctival injection and lacrimation should be present. In some patients conjunctival injection or lacrimation is missing, and the diagnosis of SUNA (short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms) can be made.

Diagnosis

The pain of SUNCT/SUNA is unilateral and may be located anywhere in the head. Three basic patterns can be seen: single stabs, which are usually short-lived; groups of stabs; or a longer attack comprising many stabs between which the pain does not completely resolve, thus giving a "saw-tooth" phenomenon with attacks lasting many minutes. Each pattern may be seen in the context of an underlying continuous head pain. Characteristics that lead to a suspected diagnosis of SUNCT are the cutaneous (or other) triggerability of attacks, a lack of refractory period to triggering between attacks, and the lack of a response to indomethacin. Apart from trigeminal sensory disturbance, the neurologic examination is normal in primary SUNCT.

The diagnosis of SUNCT is often confused with trigeminal neuralgia (TN) particularly in first-division TN (Chap. 376). Minimal or no cranial autonomic symptoms and a clear refractory period to triggering indicate a diagnosis of TN.

Secondary (Symptomatic) Sunct

SUNCT can be seen with posterior fossa or pituitary lesions. All patients with SUNCT/SUNA should be evaluated with pituitary function tests and a brain MRI with pituitary views.

Treatment: Sunct/Suna

Abortive Therapy

Therapy of acute attacks is not a useful concept in SUNCT/SUNA since the attacks are of such short duration. However, IV lidocaine, which arrests the symptoms, can be used in hospitalized patients.

Preventive Therapy

Long-term prevention to minimize disability and hospitalization is the goal of treatment. The most effective treatment for prevention is lamotrigine, 200每400 mg/d. Topiramate and gabapentin may also be effective. Carbamazepine, 400每500 mg/d, has been reported by patients to offer modest benefit.

Surgical approaches such as microvascular decompression or destructive trigeminal procedures are seldom useful and often produce long-term complications. Greater occipital nerve injection has produced limited benefit in some patients. Occipital nerve stimulation is probably helpful in an important subgroup of these patients. Complete control with deep-brain stimulation of the posterior hypothalamic region was reported in a single patient. For intractable cases, short-term prevention with IV lidocaine can be effective, as can occipital nerve stimulation.

Chronic Daily Headache

The broad diagnosis of chronic daily headache (CDH) can be applied when a patient experiences headache on 15 days or more per month. CDH is not a single entity; it encompasses a number of different headache syndromes, including chronic TTH as well as headache secondary to trauma, inflammation, infection, medication overuse, and other causes (Table 14每10). Population-based estimates suggest that about 4% of adults have daily or near-daily headache. Daily headache may be primary or secondary, an important consideration in guiding management of this complaint.

Table 14-10 Classification of Chronic Daily Headache

 
 
Primary
 
>4 h Daily
 <4 h Daily
 Secondary
 
Chronic migrainea
 Chronic cluster headacheb
 Posttraumatic

   Head injury

   Iatrogenic

   Postinfectious
 
Chronic tension-type headachea
 Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania
 Inflammatory, such as 

   Giant cell arteritis

   Sarcoidosis

   Beh?et's syndrome
 
Hemicrania continuaa
 SUNCT/SUNA
 Chronic CNS infection
 
New daily persistent headachea
 Hypnic headache
 Medication-overuse headachea
 
 


a May be complicated by analgesic overuse.

b Some patients may have headache >4 h/d.

Abbreviations: SUNA, s hort-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms; SUNCT, short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing.
 

Approach to the Patient: Chronic Daily Headache

The first step in the management of patients with CDH is to diagnose any underlying condition (Table 14每10). For patients with primary headaches, diagnosis of the headache type will guide therapy. Preventive treatments such as tricyclics, either amitriptyline or nortriptyline at doses up to 1 mg/kg, are very useful in patients with CDH arising from migraine or tension-type headache. Tricyclics are started in low doses (10每25 mg) daily and may be given 12 h before the expected time of awakening in order to avoid excess morning sleepiness. Anticonvulsants, such as topiramate, valproate, and gabapentin, are also useful in migraineurs. Flunarizine can also be very effective for some patients, as can methysergide or phenelzine.

Management of Medically Intractable Disabling Chronic Daily Headache

The management of medically intractable headache is difficult. At this time, the only promising approach is occipital nerve stimulation, which appears to modulate thalamic processing in migraine and has also shown promise in chronic cluster headache, SUNCT/SUNA, and hemicrania continua (see below).

Medication-Overuse Headache

Overuse of analgesic medication for headache can aggravate headache frequency and induce a state of refractory daily or near-daily headache called medication-overuse headache. A proportion of patients who stop taking analgesics will experience substantial improvement in the severity and frequency of their headache. However, even after cessation of analgesic use, many patients continue to have headache, although they may feel clinically improved in some way, especially if they have been using codeine or barbiturates regularly. The residual symptoms probably represent the underlying headache disorder.

Management of Medication Overuse: Outpatients

For patients who overuse medications, it is essential that analgesic use be reduced and eliminated. One approach is to reduce the medication dose by 10% every 1每2 weeks. Immediate cessation of analgesic use is possible for some patients, provided there is no contraindication. Both approaches are facilitated by the use of a medication diary maintained during the month or two before cessation; this helps to identify the scope of the problem. A small dose of an NSAID such as naproxen, 500 mg bid, if tolerated, will help relieve residual pain as analgesic use is reduced. NSAID overuse is not usually a problem for patients with daily headache when the dose is taken once or twice daily; however, overuse problems may develop with more frequent dosing schedules. Once the patient has substantially reduced analgesic use, a preventive medication should be introduced. It must be emphasized that preventives generally do not work in the presence of analgesic overuse. The most common cause of unresponsiveness to treatment is the use of a preventive when analgesics continue to be used regularly. For some patients, discontinuing analgesics is very difficult; often the best approach is to directly inform the patient that some degree of pain is inevitable during this initial period.

Management of Medication Overuse: Inpatients

Some patients will require hospitalization for detoxification. Such patients have typically failed efforts at outpatient withdrawal or have a significant medical condition, such as diabetes mellitus, which would complicate withdrawal as an outpatient. Following admission to the hospital, acute medications are withdrawn completely on the first day, in the absence of a contraindication. Antiemetics and fluids are administered as required; clonidine is used for opiate withdrawal symptoms. For acute intolerable pain during the waking hours aspirin, 1 g IV (not approved in United States), is useful. IM chlorpromazine can be helpful at night; patients must be adequately hydrated. Three to five days into the admission as the effect of the withdrawn substance settles a course of IV dihydroergotamine (DHE) can be employed. DHE, administered every 8 h for 5 consecutive days, can induce a significant remission that allows a preventive treatment to be established. 5-HT3 antagonists, such as ondansetron or granisetron, are often required with DHE to prevent significant nausea, and domperidone (not approved in the United States) orally or by suppository can be very helpful.

New Daily Persistent Headache

New daily persistent headache (NDPH) is a clinically distinct syndrome; its causes are listed in Table 14每11.

Table 14-11 Differential Diagnosis of New Daily Persistent Headache

 
 
Primary
 Secondary
 
Migrainous-type
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage
 
Featureless (tension-type)
 Low CSF volume headache
 
  Raised CSF pressure headache
 
  Posttraumatic headachea
 
  Chronic meningitis
 
 


a Includes postinfectious forms.
 

Clinical Presentation

The patient with NDPH presents with headache on most if not all days and the patient can clearly, and often vividly, recall the moment of onset. The headache usually begins abruptly, but onset may be more gradual; evolution over 3 days has been proposed as the upper limit for this syndrome. Patients typically recall the exact day and circumstances of the onset of headache; the new, persistent head pain does not remit. The first priority is to distinguish between a primary and a secondary cause of this syndrome. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is the most serious of the secondary causes and must be excluded either by history or appropriate investigation (Chap. 275).

Secondary Ndph

Low CSF Volume Headache

In these syndromes, head pain is positional: it begins when the patient sits or stands upright and resolves upon reclining. The pain, which is occipitofrontal, is usually a dull ache but may be throbbing. Patients with chronic low CSF volume headache typically present with a history of headache from one day to the next that is generally not present on waking but worsens during the day. Recumbency usually improves the headache within minutes, but it takes only minutes to an hour for the pain to return when the patient resumes an upright position.

The most common cause of headache due to persistent low CSF volume is CSF leak following lumbar puncture (LP). Post-LP headache usually begins within 48 h but may be delayed for up to 12 days. Its incidence is between 10 and 30%. Beverages with caffeine may provide temporary relief. Besides LP, index events may include epidural injection or a vigorous Valsalva maneuver, such as from lifting, straining, coughing, clearing the eustachian tubes in an airplane, or multiple orgasms. Spontaneous CSF leaks are well recognized, and the diagnosis should be considered whenever the headache history is typical, even when there is no obvious index event. As time passes from the index event, the postural nature may become less apparent; cases in which the index event occurred several years before the eventual diagnosis have been recognized. Symptoms appear to result from low volume rather than low pressure: although low CSF pressures, typically 0每50 mmH2O, are usually identified, a pressure as high as 140 mmH2O has been noted with a documented leak.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome [POTS (Chap. 375)] can present with orthostatic headache similar to low CSF volume headache and is a diagnosis that needs consideration here.

When imaging is indicated to identify the source of a presumed leak, an MRI with gadolinium is the initial study of choice (Fig. 14-5). A striking pattern of diffuse meningeal enhancement is so typical that in the appropriate clinical context the diagnosis is established. Chiari malformations may sometimes be noted on MRI; in such cases, surgery to decompress the posterior fossa usually worsens the headache. Spinal MRI with T2 weighting may reveal a leak and spinal MRI may demonstrate spinal meningeal cysts whose role in these syndromes is yet to be elucidated. The source of CSF leakage may be identified by spinal MRI, by CT, or increasingly with MR myelography, or with 111In-DTPA CSF studies; in the absence of a directly identified site of leakage, early emptying of 111In-DTPA tracer into the bladder or slow progress of tracer across the brain suggests a CSF leak.

Figure 14-5

 
 
 
Magnetic resonance image showing diffuse meningeal enhancement after gadolinium administration in a patient with low CSF volume headache.
 
 

Initial treatment for low CSF volume headache is bed rest. For patients with persistent pain, IV caffeine (500 mg in 500 mL saline administered over 2 h) can be very effective. An ECG to screen for arrhythmia should be performed before administration. It is reasonable to administer at least two infusions of caffeine before embarking on additional tests to identify the source of the CSF leak. Since IV caffeine is safe and can be curative, it spares many patients the need for further investigations. If unsuccessful, an abdominal binder may be helpful. If a leak can be identified, an autologous blood patch is usually curative. A blood patch is also effective for post-LP headache; in this setting, the location is empirically determined to be the site of the LP. In patients with intractable pain, oral theophylline is a useful alternative; however, its effect is less rapid than caffeine.

Raised CSF Pressure Headache

Raised CSF pressure is well recognized as a cause of headache. Brain imaging can often reveal the cause, such as a space-occupying lesion. NDPH due to raised CSF pressure can be the presenting symptom for patients with idiopathicintracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) without visual problems, particularly when the fundi are normal. Persistently raised intracranial pressure can trigger chronic migraine. These patients typically present with a history of generalized headache that is present on waking and improves as the day goes on. It is generally worse with recumbency. Visual obscurations are frequent. The diagnosis is relatively straightforward when papilledema is present, but the possibility must be considered even in patients without funduscopic changes. Formal visual field testing should be performed even in the absence of overt ophthalmic involvement. Headache on rising in the morning or nocturnal headache is also characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea or poorly controlled hypertension.

Evaluation of patients suspected to have raised CSF pressure requires brain imaging. It is most efficient to obtain an MRI, including an MR venogram, as the initial study. If there are no contraindications, the CSF pressure should be measured by LP; this should be done when the patient is symptomatic so that both the pressure and the response to removal of 20每30 mL of CSF can be determined. An elevated opening pressure and improvement in headache following removal of CSF is diagnostic.

Initial treatment is with acetazolamide (250每500 mg bid); the headache may improve within weeks. If ineffective, topiramate is the next treatment of choice; it has many actions that may be useful in this setting, including carbonic anhydrase inhibition, weight loss, and neuronal membrane stabilization, likely mediated via effects on phosphorylation pathways. Severely disabled patients who do not respond to medical treatment require intracranial pressure monitoring and may require shunting.

Post-Traumatic Headache

A traumatic event can trigger a headache process that lasts for many months or years after the event. The term trauma is used in a very broad sense: headache can develop following an injury to the head, but it can also develop after an infectious episode, typically viral meningitis, a flulike illness, or a parasitic infection. Complaints of dizziness, vertigo, and impaired memory can accompany the headache. Symptoms may remit after several weeks or persist for months and even years after the injury. Typically the neurologic examination is normal and CT or MRI studies are unrevealing. Chronic subdural hematoma may on occasion mimic this disorder. In one series, one-third of patients with NDPH reported headache beginning after a transient flulike illness characterized by fever, neck stiffness, photophobia, and marked malaise. Evaluation reveals no apparent cause for the headache. There is no convincing evidence that persistent Epstein-Barr infection plays a role in this syndrome. A complicating factor is that many patients undergo LP during the acute illness; iatrogenic low CSF volume headache must be considered in these cases. Posttraumatic headache may also be seen after carotid dissection and subarachnoid hemorrhage, and following intracranial surgery. The underlying theme appears to be that a traumatic event involving the pain-producing meninges can trigger a headache process that lasts for many years.

Treatment is largely empirical. Tricyclic antidepressants, notably amitriptyline, and anticonvulsants such as topiramate, valproate, and gabapentin, have been used with reported benefit. The MAOI phenelzine may also be useful in carefully selected patients. The headache usually resolves within 3每5 years, but it can be quite disabling.

Primary NDPH

Primary NDPH occurs in both males and females. It can be of the migrainous type, with features of migraine, or it can be featureless, appearing as new-onset TTH (Table 14每11). Migrainous features are common and include unilateral headache and throbbing pain; each feature is present in about one-third of patients. Nausea, photophobia, and/or phonophobia occur in about half of patients. Some patients have a previous history of migraine; however, the proportion of NDPH sufferers with preexisting migraine is no greater than the frequency of migraine in the general population. At 24 months, ~86% of patients are headache-free. Treatment of migrainous-type primary NDPH consists of using the preventive therapies effective in migraine (Table 14每7). Featureless NDPH is one of the primary headache forms most refractory to treatment. Standard preventive therapies can be offered but are often ineffective.

Other Primary Headaches

Hemicrania Continua

The essential features of hemicrania continua are moderate and continuous unilateral pain associated with fluctuations of severe pain; complete resolution of pain with indomethacin; and exacerbations that may be associated with autonomic features, including conjunctival injection, lacrimation, and photophobia on the affected side. The age of onset ranges from 11 to 58 years; women are affected twice as often as men. The cause is unknown.

Treatment: Hemicrania Continua

Treatment consists of indomethacin; other NSAIDs appear to be of little or no benefit. The IM injection of 100 mg indomethacin has been proposed as a diagnostic tool and administration with a placebo injection in a blinded fashion can be very useful diagnostically. Alternatively, a trial of oral indomethacin, starting with 25 mg tid, then 50 mg tid, and then 75 mg tid, can be given. Up to two weeks at the maximal dose may be necessary to assess whether a dose has a useful effect. Topiramate can be helpful in some patients. Occipital nerve stimulation may have a role in patients with hemicrania continua who are unable to tolerate indomethacin.

Primary Stabbing Headache

The essential features of primary stabbing headache are stabbing pain confined to the head or, rarely, the face, lasting from 1 to many seconds or minutes and occurring as a single stab or a series of stabs; absence of associated cranial autonomic features; absence of cutaneous triggering of attacks; and a pattern of recurrence at irregular intervals (hours to days). The pains have been variously described as "ice-pick pains" or "jabs and jolts." They are more common in patients with other primary headaches, such as migraine, the TACs, and hemicrania continua.

Treatment: Primary Stabbing Headache

The response of primary stabbing headache to indomethacin (25每50 mg two to three times daily) is usually excellent. As a general rule, the symptoms wax and wane, and after a period of control on indomethacin, it is appropriate to withdraw treatment and observe the outcome.

Primary Cough Headache

Primary cough headache is a generalized headache that begins suddenly, lasts for several minutes, and is precipitated by coughing; it is preventable by avoiding coughing or other precipitating events, which can include sneezing, straining, laughing, or stooping. In all patients with this syndrome, serious etiologies must be excluded before a diagnosis of "benign" primary cough headache can be established. A Chiari malformation or any lesion causing obstruction of CSF pathways or displacing cerebral structures can be the cause of the head pain. Other conditions that can present with cough or exertional headache as the initial symptom include cerebral aneurysm, carotid stenosis, and vertebrobasilar disease. Benign cough headache can resemble benign exertional headache (below), but patients with the former condition are typically older.

Treatment: Primary Cough Headache

Indomethacin 25每50 mg two to three times daily is the treatment of choice. Some patients with cough headache obtain pain relief with LP; this is a simple option when compared to prolonged use of indomethacin, and it is effective in about one-third of patients. The mechanism of this response is unclear.

Primary Exertional Headache

Primary exertional headache has features resembling both cough headache and migraine. It may be precipitated by any form of exercise; it often has the pulsatile quality of migraine. The pain, which can last from 5 min to 24 h, is bilateral and throbbing at onset; migrainous features may develop in patients susceptible to migraine. Primary exertional headache can be prevented by avoiding excessive exertion, particularly in hot weather or at high altitude.

The mechanism of primary exertional headache is unclear. Acute venous distension likely explains one syndrome, the acute onset of headache with straining and breath holding, as in weightlifter's headache. As exertion can result in headache in a number of serious underlying conditions, these must be considered in patients with exertional headache. Pain from angina may be referred to the head, probably by central connections of vagal afferents, and may present as exertional headache (cardiac cephalgia). The link to exercise is the main clinical clue that headache is of cardiac origin. Pheochromocytoma may occasionally cause exertional headache. Intracranial lesions and stenosis of the carotid arteries are other possible etiologies.

Treatment: Primary Exertional Headache

Exercise regimens should begin modestly and progress gradually to higher levels of intensity. Indomethacin at daily doses from 25 to 150 mg is generally effective in benign exertional headache. Indomethacin (50 mg), ergotamine (1 mg orally), dihydroergotamine (2 mg by nasal spray), or methysergide (1每2 mg orally given 30每45 min before exercise) are useful prophylactic measures.

Primary Sex Headache

Sex headache is precipitated by sexual excitement. The pain usually begins as a dull bilateral headache that suddenly becomes intense at orgasm. The headache can be prevented or eased by ceasing sexual activity before orgasm. Three types of sex headache are reported: a dull ache in the head and neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases; a sudden, severe, explosive headache occurring at orgasm; and a postural headache developing after coitus that resembles the headache of low CSF pressure. The latter arises from vigorous sexual activity and is a form of low CSF pressure headache. Headaches developing at the time of orgasm are not always benign; 5每12% of cases of subarachnoid hemorrhage are precipitated by sexual intercourse. Sex headache is reported by men more often than women and may occur at any time during the years of sexual activity. It may develop on several occasions in succession and then not trouble the patient again, even without an obvious change in sexual activity. In patients who stop sexual activity when headache is first noticed, the pain may subside within a period of 5 min to 2 h. In about half of patients, sex headache will subside within 6 months. About half of patients with sex headache have a history of exertional headaches, but there is no excess of cough headache. Migraine is probably more common in patients with sex headache.

Treatment: Primary Sex Headache

Benign sex headaches recur irregularly and infrequently. Management can often be limited to reassurance and advice about ceasing sexual activity if a mild, warning headache develops. Propranolol can be used to prevent headache that recurs regularly or frequently, but the dosage required varies from 40 to 200 mg/d. An alternative is the calcium channel每blocking agent diltiazem, 60 mg tid. Ergotamine (1 mg) or indomethacin (25每50 mg) taken about 30每45 min prior to sexual activity can also be helpful.

Primary Thunderclap Headache

Sudden onset of severe headache may occur in the absence of any known provocation. The differential diagnosis includes the sentinel bleed of an intracranial aneurysm, cervicocephalic arterial dissection, and cerebral venous thrombosis. Headaches of explosive onset may also be caused by the ingestion of sympathomimetic drugs or of tyramine-containing foods in a patient who is taking MAOIs, or they may be a symptom of pheochromocytoma. Whether thunderclap headache can be the presentation of an unruptured cerebral aneurysm is uncertain. When neuroimaging studies and LP exclude subarachnoid hemorrhage, patients with thunderclap headache usually do very well over the long term. In one study of patients whose CT scans and CSF findings were negative, ~15% had recurrent episodes of thunderclap headache, and nearly half subsequently developed migraine or tension-type headache.

The first presentation of any sudden-onset severe headache should be vigorously investigated with neuroimaging (CT or, when possible, MRI with MR angiography) and CSF examination. Formal cerebral angiography should be reserved for those cases in which no primary diagnosis is forthcoming and for clinical situations that are particularly suggestive of intracranial aneurysm. Reversible segmental cerebral vasoconstriction may be seen in primary thunderclap headache without an intracranial aneurysm. In the presence of posterior leukoencephalopathy, the differential diagnosis includes cerebral angiitis, drug toxicity (cyclosporine, intrathecal methotrexate/cytarabine, pseudoephedrine, or cocaine), posttransfusion effects, and postpartum angiopathy. Treatment with nimodipine may be helpful, although by definition the vasoconstriction of primary thunderclap headache resolves spontaneously.

Hypnic Headache

This headache syndrome typically begins a few hours after sleep onset. The headaches last from 15 to 30 min and are typically moderately severe and generalized, although they may be unilateral and can be throbbing. Patients may report falling back to sleep only to be awakened by a further attack a few hours later; up to three repetitions of this pattern occur through the night. Daytime naps can also precipitate head pain. Most patients are female, and the onset is usually after age 60 years. Headaches are bilateral in most, but may be unilateral. Photophobia or phonophobia and nausea are usually absent. The major secondary consideration in this headache type is poorly controlled hypertension; 24-h blood pressure monitoring is recommended to detect this treatable condition.

Treatment: Hypnic Headache

Patients with hypnic headache generally respond to a bedtime dose of lithium carbonate (200每600 mg). For those intolerant of lithium, verapamil (160 mg) or methysergide (1每4 mg at bedtime) may be alternative strategies. One to two cups of coffee or caffeine, 60 mg orally, at bedtime may be effective in approximately one-third of patients. Case reports suggest that flunarizine, 5 mg nightly, can be effective.
 
Further Readings

Cittadini E, Goadsby PJ: Hemicrania continua: A clinical study of 39 patients with diagnostic implications. Brain 133:1973, 2010 [PMID: 20558416] 

 
Cohen AS et al: High-flow oxygen for treatment of cluster headache: A randomized trial. JAMA 302:2451, 2009 [PMID: 19996400] 

 
Goadsby PJ et al: Chronic Daily Headache for Clinicians. Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, BC Decker, 2005

 
Goadsby PJ et al: Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias: Paroxysmal hemicrania, SUNCT/SUNA and hemicrania continua. Semin Neurol 30:186, 2010 [PMID: 20352588] 

 
Headache Classification Committee of The International Headache Society: The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 2nd ed. Cephalalgia 24:1, 2004 

 
Lance JW, Goadsby PJ: Mechanism and Management of Headache, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2005 

 
Lipton RB, Bigal M: Migraine and Other Headache Disorders. New York, Marcel Dekker, Taylor & Francis, 2006 

 
Loder E: Triptan therapy in migraine. N Engl J Med 363:63, 2010 [PMID: 20592298] 

 
Olesen J et al: The Headaches. Philadelphia, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005 
 
 

^^
Back and Neck Pain: Introduction

The importance of back and neck pain in our society is underscored by the following: (1) the cost of back pain in the United States exceeds $100 billion annually; approximately one-third of these costs are direct health care expenses, and two-thirds are indirect costs resulting from loss of wages and productivity; (2) back symptoms are the most common cause of disability in those <45 years; (3) low back pain is the second most common reason for visiting a physician in the United States; and (4) ~1% of the U.S. population is chronically disabled because of back pain.
 
Anatomy of the Spine

The anterior portion of the spine consists of cylindrical vertebral bodies separated by intervertebral disks and held together by the anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments. The intervertebral disks are composed of a central gelatinous nucleus pulposus surrounded by a tough cartilaginous ring, the annulus fibrosis. Disks are responsible for 25% of spinal column length and allow the bony vertebrae to move easily upon each other (Figs. 15-1 and 15-2). Desiccation of the nucleus pulposus and degeneration of the annulus fibrosus increase with age and results in loss of height. The disks are largest in the cervical and lumbar regions where movements of the spine are greatest. The functions of the anterior spine are to absorb the shock of body movements such as walking and running, and to protect the contents of the spinal canal.

Figure 15-1

 
 
 
 
Vertebral anatomy. (From A Gauthier Cornuelle, DH Gronefeld: Radiographic Anatomy Positioning. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1998; with permission.)
 
 

Figure 15-2

 
 
 
Spinal column. (From A Gauthier Cornuelle, DH Gronefeld: Radiographic Anatomy Positioning. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1998; with permission.)
 
 


The posterior portion of the spine consists of the vertebral arches and processes. Each arch consists of paired cylindrical pedicles anteriorly and paired laminae posteriorly. The vertebral arch also gives rise to two transverse processes laterally, one spinous process posteriorly, plus two superior and two inferior articular facets. The apposition of a superior and inferior facet constitutes a facet joint. The functions of the posterior spine are to protect the spinal cord and nerves within the spinal canal and to provide an anchor for the attachment of muscles and ligaments. The contraction of muscles attached to the spinous and transverse processes and laminae works like a system of pulleys and levers that results in flexion, extension, and lateral bending movements of the spine.

Nerve root injury (radiculopathy) is a common cause of neck, arm, low back, buttock, and leg pain (Figs. 23-2 and 23-3). The nerve roots exit at a level above their respective vertebral bodies in the cervical region (e.g., the C7 nerve root exits at the C6-C7 level) and below their respective vertebral bodies in the thoracic and lumbar regions (e.g., the T1 nerve root exits at the T1-T2 level). The cervical nerve roots follow a short intraspinal course before exiting. By contrast, because the spinal cord ends at the vertebral L1 or L2 level, the lumbar nerve roots follow a long intraspinal course and can be injured anywhere from the upper lumbar spine to their exit at the intervertebral foramen. For example, disk herniation at the L4-L5 level can produce not only L5 root compression, but also compression of the traversing S1 nerve root (Fig. 15-3).

Figure 15-3

 
 
 
Compression of L5 and S1 roots by herniated disks. (From Adams and Victor's Principles of Neurology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009; with permission.)
 
 

Pain-sensitive structures of the spine include the periosteum of the vertebrae, dura, facet joints, annulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disk, epidural veins and arteries, and the posterior longitudinal ligament. Disease of these diverse structures may explain many cases of back pain without nerve root compression. The nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disk is not pain-sensitive under normal circumstances. Pain sensation from within the spinal canal is conveyed partially by the sinuvertebral nerve that arises from the spinal nerve at each spine segment and reenters the spinal canal through the intervertebral foramen at the same level.

Approach to the Patient: Back Pain

Types of Back Pain

Understanding the types of pain reported by patients is the essential first step. Attention is also focused on identification of risk factors for serious underlying diseases; the majority of these are due to radiculopathy, fracture, tumor, infection, or referred pain from visceral structures (Table 15-1).

Table 15-1 Acute Low Back Pain: Risk Factors for an Important Structural Cause

 
 
History
 
Pain worse at rest or at night
 
Prior history of cancer
 
History of chronic infection (esp. lung, urinary tract, skin)
 
History of trauma
 
Incontinence
 
Age >70 years
 
Intravenous drug use
 
Glucocorticoid use
 
History of a rapidly progressive neurologic deficit
 
Examination
 
Unexplained fever
 
Unexplained weight loss
 
Percussion tenderness over the spine
 
Abdominal, rectal, or pelvic mass
 
Patrick's sign or heel percussion sign
 
Straight leg or reverse straight leg每raising signs
 
Progressive focal neurologic deficit
 
 

 

Local pain is caused by injury to pain-sensitive structures that compress or irritate sensory nerve endings. The site of the pain is near the affected part of the back.

Pain referred to the back may arise from abdominal or pelvic viscera. The pain is usually described as primarily abdominal or pelvic but is accompanied by back pain and usually unaffected by posture. The patient may occasionally complain of back pain only.

Pain of spine origin may be located in the back or referred to the buttocks or legs. Diseases affecting the upper lumbar spine tend to refer pain to the lumbar region, groin, or anterior thighs. Diseases affecting the lower lumbar spine tend to produce pain referred to the buttocks, posterior thighs, or rarely the calves or feet. Referred or "sclerotomal" pain may explain instances where the pain crosses multiple dermatomes without evidence of nerve root compression.

Radicular back pain is typically sharp and radiates from the low back to a leg within the territory of a nerve root (see "Lumbar Disk Disease," below). Coughing, sneezing, or voluntary contraction of abdominal muscles (lifting heavy objects or straining at stool) may elicit the radiating pain. The pain may increase in postures that stretch the nerves and nerve roots. Sitting with the leg outstretched places traction on the sciatic nerve and L5 and S1 roots because the nerve passes posterior to the hip. The femoral nerve (L2, L3, and L4 roots) passes anterior to the hip and is not stretched by sitting. The description of the pain alone often fails to distinguish between sclerotomal pain and radiculopathy.

Pain associated with muscle spasm, although of obscure origin, is commonly associated with many spine disorders. The spasms are accompanied by abnormal posture, tense paraspinal muscles, and dull or achy pain in the paraspinal region.

Knowledge of the circumstances associated with the onset of back pain is important when weighing possible serious underlying causes for the pain. Some patients involved in accidents or work-related injuries may exaggerate their pain for the purpose of compensation or for psychological reasons.

Examination of the Back

A physical examination that includes the abdomen and rectum is advisable. Back pain referred from visceral organs may be reproduced during palpation of the abdomen [pancreatitis, abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)] or percussion over the costovertebral angles (pyelonephritis).

The normal spine has a cervical and lumbar lordosis, and a thoracic kyphosis. Exaggeration of these normal alignments may result in hyperkyphosis of the thoracic spine or hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine. Inspection may reveal a lateral curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or an asymmetry in the prominence of the paraspinal muscles, suggesting muscle spasm. Back pain of bony spine origin is often reproduced by palpation or percussion over the spinous process of the affected vertebrae.

Forward bending is often limited by paraspinal muscle spasm; the latter may flatten the usual lumbar lordosis. Flexion at the hips is normal in patients with lumbar spine disease, but flexion of the lumbar spine is limited and sometimes painful. Lateral bending to the side opposite the injured spinal element may stretch the damaged tissues, worsen pain, and limit motion. Hyperextension of the spine (with the patient prone or standing) is limited when nerve root compression, facet joint pathology, or other bony spine disease is present.

Pain from hip disease may mimic the pain of lumbar spine disease. Hip pain can be reproduced by internal and external rotation at the hip with the knee and hip in flexion (Patrick's sign) and by tapping the heel with the examiner's palm while the leg is extended (heel percussion sign).

With the patient supine, passive flexion of the extended leg at the hip stretches the L5 and S1 nerve roots and the sciatic nerve (straight leg每raising maneuver). Passive dorsiflexion of the foot during the maneuver adds to the stretch. While flexion to at least 80∼ is normally possible without causing pain, many patients normally report a tight, stretching sensation in the hamstring muscles unrelated to back pain. The straight leg每raising (SLR) test is positive if the maneuver reproduces the patient's usual back or limb pain. Eliciting the SLR sign in the sitting position can help determine if the finding is reproducible. The patient may describe pain in the low back, buttocks, posterior thigh, or lower leg, but the key feature is reproduction of the patient's usual pain. The crossed SLR sign is positive when flexion of one leg reproduces the usual pain in the opposite leg or buttocks. The crossed SLR sign is less sensitive but more specific for disk herniation than the SLR sign. The nerve or nerve root lesion is always on the side of the pain. The reverse SLR sign is elicited by standing the patient next to the examination table and passively extending each leg with the knee fully extended. This maneuver, which stretches the L2-L4 nerve roots, lumbosacral plexus, and femoral nerve, is considered positive if the patient's usual back or limb pain is reproduced.

The neurologic examination includes a search for focal weakness or muscle atrophy, focal reflex changes, diminished sensation in the legs, or signs of spinal cord injury. The examiner should be alert to the possibility of breakaway weakness, defined as fluctuating strength during muscle testing. Breakaway weakness may be due to pain or a combination of pain and underlying true weakness. Breakaway weakness without pain is almost always due to a lack of effort. In uncertain cases, electromyography (EMG) can determine whether or not true weakness due to nerve tissue injury is present. Findings with specific nerve lumbosacral nerve root lesions are shown in Table 15-2 and are discussed below.

Table 15-2 Lumbosacral Radiculopathy〞Neurologic Features

 
 
  Examination Findings
   
Lumbosacral Nerve Roots
 Reflex
 Sensory
 Motor
 Pain Distribution
 
L2a
 〞
 Upper anterior thigh
 Psoas (hip flexion)
 Anterior thigh
 
L3a
 〞
 Lower anterior thigh Anterior knee
 Psoas (hip flexion) Quadriceps (knee extension) Thigh adduction
 Anterior thigh, knee
 
L4a
 Quadriceps (knee)
 Medial calf
 Quadriceps (knee extension)b Thigh adduction Tibialis anterior (foot dorsiflexion)
 Knee, medial calf Anterolateral thigh
 
L5c
 〞
 Dorsal surface〞foot Lateral calf
 Peroneii (foot eversion)b Tibialis anterior (foot dorsiflexion) Gluteus medius (hip abduction) Toe dorsiflexors
 Lateral calf, dorsal foot, posterolateral thigh, buttocks
 
S1c
 Gastrocnemius/soleus (ankle)
 Plantar surface〞foot 

Lateral aspect〞foot
 Gastrocnemius/soleus (foot plantar flexion)b

Abductor hallucis (toe flexors)b

Gluteus maximus (hip extension)
 Bottom foot, posterior calf, posterior thigh, buttocks
 
 


aReverse straight leg每raising sign present〞see "Examination of the Back."

bThese muscles receive the majority of innervation from this root.

cStraight leg每raising sign present〞see "Examination of the Back."
 

Laboratory, Imaging, and EMG Studies

Routine laboratory studies are rarely needed for the initial evaluation of nonspecific acute (<3 months duration) low back pain (ALBP). If risk factors for a serious underlying cause are present (Table 15-1), then laboratory studies [complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), urinalysis] are indicated.

CT scanning is superior to routine x-rays for the detection of fractures involving posterior spine structures, craniocervical and craniothoracic junctions, C1 and C2 vertebrae, bone fragments within the spinal canal, or misalignment; CT scans are increasingly used as a primary screening modality for moderate to severe trauma. In the absence of risk factors, these imaging studies are rarely helpful in nonspecific ALBP. MRI and CT-myelography are the radiologic tests of choice for evaluation of most serious diseases involving the spine. MRI is superior for the definition of soft tissue structures, whereas CT-myelography provides optimal imaging of the lateral recess of the spinal canal, and is better tolerated by claustrophobic patients. While the added diagnostic value of modern neuroimaging is significant, there is concern that these studies may be overutilized in patients with benign ALBP.

Electrodiagnostic studies can be used to assess the functional integrity of the peripheral nervous system (Chap. e45). Sensory nerve conduction studies are normal when focal sensory loss is due to nerve root damage because the nerve roots are proximal to the nerve cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia. Injury to nerve tissue distal to the dorsal root ganglion (e.g., plexus or peripheral nerve) results in reduced sensory nerve signals. Needle EMG complements nerve conduction studies by detecting denervation or reinnervation changes in a myotomal (segmental) distribution. Multiple muscles supplied by different nerve roots and nerves are sampled; the pattern of muscle involvement indicates the nerve root(s) responsible for the injury. Needle EMG provides objective information about motor nerve fiber injury when clinical evaluation of weakness is limited by pain or poor effort. EMG and nerve conduction studies will be normal when sensory nerve root injury or irritation is the source of the pain.
 
Causes of Back Pain

(Table 15-3)

Table 15-3 Causes of Back or Neck Pain

 
 
Congenital/Developmental
 
Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis
 
Kyphoscoliosis
 
Spina bifida occulta
 
Tethered spinal cord
 
Minor Trauma
 
Strain or sprain
 
Whiplash injury
 
Fractures
 
Trauma〞falls, motor vehicle accidents
 
Atraumatic fractures〞osteoporosis, neoplastic infiltration, exogenous steroids, osteomyelitis
 
Intervertebral Disk Herniation
 
Degenerative
 
  Intervertebral foraminal narrowing
 
  Disk-osteophyte complex
 
  Internal disk disruption
 
  LSS with neurogenic claudication
 
  Uncovertebral joint disease
 
  Atlantoaxial joint disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)
 
  Arthritis
 
  Spondylosis
 
  Facet or sacroiliac arthropathy
 
  Neoplasms〞metastatic, hematologic, primary bone tumors
 
Infection/Inflammation
 
  Vertebral osteomyelitis
 
  Spinal epidural abscess
 
  Septic disk (discitis)
 
  Meningitis
 
  Lumbar arachnoiditis
 
  Autoimmune [e.g., ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome)]
 
Metabolic
 
  Osteoporosis〞hyperparathyroidism, immobility
 
  Osteosclerosis (e.g., Paget's disease)
 
Vascular
 
  Abdominal aortic aneurysm
 
  Vertebral artery dissection
 
Other
 
  Referred pain from visceral disease
 
  Postural
 
  Psychiatric, malingering, chronic pain syndromes
 
 

 

Congenital Anomalies of the Lumbar Spine

Spondylolysis is a bony defect in the vertebral pars interarticularis (a segment near the junction of the pedicle with the lamina); the cause is usually a stress microfracture in a congenitally abnormal segment. It occurs in up to 6% of adolescents. The defect (usually bilateral) is best visualized on plain x-rays, CT scan, or bone scan and is frequently asymptomatic. Symptoms may occur in the setting of a single injury, repeated minor injuries, or growth. Spondylolysis is the most common cause of persistent low back pain in adolescents and is often associated with sports-related activities.

Spondylolisthesis is the anterior slippage of the vertebral body, pedicles, and superior articular facets, leaving the posterior elements behind. Spondylolisthesis can be associated with spondylolysis, congenital anomalies, degenerative spine disease, or other causes of mechanical weakness of the pars (e.g., infection, osteoporosis, tumor, trauma, prior surgery). The slippage may be asymptomatic or may cause low back pain and hamstring tightness, nerve root injury (the L5 root most frequently), symptomatic spinal stenosis, or cauda equina syndrome (CES) in severe cases. Tenderness may be elicited near the segment that has "slipped" forward (most often L4 on L5 or occasionally L5 on S1). A "step" may be present on deep palpation of the posterior elements of the segment above the spondylolisthetic joint. The trunk may be shortened and the abdomen protuberant as a result. Anterolisthesis or retrolisthesis can also occur at other cervical or lumbar levels in adults and be the source of neck or low back pain. Plain x-rays with the neck or low back in flexion and extension will reveal the movement at the abnormal spinal segment. Surgery is considered for pain symptoms that do not respond to conservative measures (e.g., rest, physical therapy), and in cases with progressive neurologic deficit, postural deformity, slippage >50%, or scoliosis.

Spina bifida occulta is a failure of closure of one or several vertebral arches posteriorly; the meninges and spinal cord are normal. A dimple or small lipoma may overlie the defect. Most cases are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally during an evaluation for back pain.

Tethered cord syndrome usually presents as a progressive cauda equina disorder (see below), although myelopathy may also be the initial manifestation. The patient is often a young adult who complains of perineal or perianal pain, sometimes following minor trauma. MRI studies reveal a low-lying conus (below L1-L2) and a short and thickened filum terminale.

Trauma

A patient complaining of back pain and an inability to move the legs may have a spinal fracture or dislocation, and, with fractures above L1, spinal cord compression. Care must be taken to avoid further damage to the spinal cord or nerve roots by immobilizing the back pending the results of radiologic studies.

Sprains and Strains

The terms low back sprain, strain, and mechanically induced muscle spasm refer to minor, self-limited injuries associated with lifting a heavy object, a fall, or a sudden deceleration such as in an automobile accident. These terms are used loosely and do not clearly describe a specific anatomic lesion. The pain is usually confined to the lower back, and there is no radiation to the buttocks or legs. Patients with paraspinal muscle spasm often assume unusual postures.

Traumatic Vertebral Fractures

Most traumatic fractures of the lumbar vertebral bodies result from injuries producing anterior wedging or compression. With severe trauma, the patient may sustain a fracture-dislocation or a "burst" fracture involving the vertebral body and posterior elements. Traumatic vertebral fractures are caused by falls from a height (a pars interarticularis fracture of the L5 vertebra is common), sudden deceleration in an automobile accident, or direct injury. Neurologic impairment is common, and early surgical treatment is indicated. In victims of blunt trauma, CT scans of the chest, abdomen, or pelvis can be reformatted to detect associated vertebral fractures.

Lumbar Disk Disease

This is a common cause of chronic or recurrent low back and leg pain (Figs. 15-3 and 15-4). Disk disease is most likely to occur at the L4-L5 or L5-S1 levels, but upper lumbar levels are involved occasionally. The cause is often unknown; the risk is increased in overweight individuals. Disk herniation is unusual prior to age 20 years and is rare in the fibrotic disks of the elderly. Genetic factors may play a role in predisposing some patients to disk disease. The pain may be located in the low back only or referred to a leg, buttock, or hip. A sneeze, cough, or trivial movement may cause the nucleus pulposus to prolapse, pushing the frayed and weakened annulus posteriorly. With severe disk disease, the nucleus may protrude through the annulus (herniation) or become extruded to lie as a free fragment in the spinal canal.

Figure 15-4

 
 
 
 
Left L5 radiculopathy. A. Sagittal T2-weighted image on the left reveals disk herniation at the L4-5 level. B. Axial T1-weighted image shows paracentral disk herniation with displacement of the thecal sac medially and the left L5 nerve root posteriorly in the left lateral recess
 
 

The mechanism by which intervertebral disk injury causes back pain is controversial. The inner annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus are normally devoid of innervation. Inflammation and production of proinflammatory cytokines within the protruding or ruptured disk may trigger or perpetuate back pain. Ingrowth of nociceptive (pain) nerve fibers into inner portions of a diseased disk may be responsible for chronic "diskogenic" pain. Nerve root injury (radiculopathy) from disk herniation may be due to compression, inflammation, or both; pathologically, demyelination and axonal loss are usually present.

A ruptured disk may be asymptomatic or cause back pain, abnormal posture, limitation of spine motion (particularly flexion), a focal neurologic deficit or radicular pain. A dermatomal pattern of sensory loss or a reduced or absent deep tendon reflex is more suggestive of a specific root lesion than is the pattern of pain. Motor findings (focal weakness, muscle atrophy, or fasciculations) occur less frequently than focal sensory or reflex changes. Symptoms and signs are usually unilateral, but bilateral involvement does occur with large central disk herniations that compress multiple roots or cause inflammation of nerve roots within the spinal canal. Clinical manifestations of specific nerve root lesions are summarized in Table 15-2. There is suggestive evidence that lumbar disk herniation with a nonprogressive nerve root deficit can be managed nonsurgically.

The differential diagnosis covers a variety of serious and treatable conditions, including epidural abscess, hematoma, fracture, or tumor. Fever, constant pain uninfluenced by position, sphincter abnormalities, or signs of spinal cord disease suggest an etiology other than lumbar disk disease. Absence of ankle reflexes can be a normal finding in persons older than age 60 years or a sign of bilateral S1 radiculopathy. An absent deep tendon reflex or focal sensory loss may indicate injury to a nerve root, but other sites of injury along the nerve must also be considered. For example, an absent knee reflex may be due to a femoral neuropathy or an L4 nerve root injury. A loss of sensation over the foot and lateral lower calf may result from a peroneal or lateral sciatic neuropathy or an L5 nerve root injury. Focal muscle atrophy may reflect a nerve root, peripheral nerve, anterior horn cell disease, or disuse.

A lumbar spine MRI scan or CT-myelogram is necessary to establish the location and type of pathology. Spine MRIs yield exquisite views of intraspinal and adjacent soft tissue anatomy. Bony lesions of the lateral recess or intervertebral foramen are optimally visualized by CT-myelography. The correlation of neuroradiologic findings to symptoms, particularly pain, is not simple. Contrast-enhancing tears in the annulus fibrosus or disk protrusions are widely accepted as common sources of back pain; however, studies have found that many asymptomatic adults have similar findings. Asymptomatic disk protrusions are also common and may enhance with contrast. Furthermore, in patients with known disk herniation treated either medically or surgically, persistence of the herniation 10 years later had no relationship to the clinical outcome. In summary, MRI findings of disk protrusion, tears in the annulus fibrosus, or contrast enhancement are common incidental findings that, by themselves, should not dictate management decisions for patients with back pain.

The diagnosis of nerve root injury is most secure when the history, examination, results of imaging studies, and the EMG are concordant. The correlation between CT and EMG for localization of nerve root injury is between 65 and 73%. Up to one-third of asymptomatic adults have a lumbar disk protrusion detected by CT or MRI scans.

Management of lumbar disc disease is discussed below.

Cauda equina syndrome (CES) signifies an injury of multiple lumbosacral nerve roots within the spinal canal distal to the termination of the spinal cord at L1-2. Low back pain, weakness and areflexia in the legs, saddle anesthesia, or loss of bladder function may occur. The problem must be distinguishedfrom disorders of the lower spinal cord (conus medullaris syndrome), acute transverse myelitis (Chap. 377), and Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome (Chap. 385). Combined involvement of the conus medullaris and cauda equina can occur. CES is commonly due to a ruptured lumbosacral intervertebral disk, lumbosacral spine fracture, hematoma within the spinal canal (e.g., following lumbar puncture in patients with coagulopathy), compressive tumor, or other mass lesion. Treatment options include surgical decompression, sometimes urgently, in an attempt to restore or preserve motor or sphincter function, or radiotherapy for metastatic tumors (Chap. 379).

Degenerative Conditions

Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) describes a narrowed lumbar spinal canal and is frequently asymptomatic. Neurogenic claudication is the usual symptom, consisting of back and buttock or leg pain induced by walking or standing and relieved by sitting. Symptoms in the legs are usually bilateral. Lumbar stenosis, by itself, is frequently asymptomatic, and the correlation between the severity of symptoms and degree of stenosis of the spinal canal is poor. Unlike vascular claudication, symptoms are often provoked by standing without walking. Unlike lumbar disk disease, symptoms are usually relieved by sitting. Patients with neurogenic claudication can often walk much farther when leaning over a shopping cart and can pedal a stationary bike while sitting with ease. These flexed positions increase the anteroposterior spinal canal diameter and reduce intraspinal venous hypertension, resulting in pain relief. Focal weakness, sensory loss, or reflex changes may occur when spinal stenosis is associated with neural foraminal narrowing and radiculopathy. Severe neurologic deficits, including paralysis and urinary incontinence, occur only rarely.

LSS can be acquired (75%), congenital, or due to a combination of these factors. Congenital forms (achondroplasia, idiopathic) are characterized by short, thick pedicles that produce both spinal canal and lateral recess stenosis. Acquired factors that contribute to spinal stenosis include degenerative diseases (spondylosis, spondylolisthesis, scoliosis), trauma, spine surgery, metabolic or endocrine disorders (epidural lipomatosis, osteoporosis, acromegaly, renal osteodystrophy, hypoparathyroidism), and Paget's disease. MRI provides the best definition of the abnormal anatomy (Fig. 15-5).

Figure 15-5

 
 
 
 
Axial T2-weighted images of the lumbar spine. A. The image shows a normal thecal sac within the lumbar spinal canal. The thecal sac is bright. The lumbar roots are dark punctuate dots in the posterior thecal sac with the patient supine. B. The thecal sac is not well visualized due to severe lumbar spinal canal stenosis, partially the result of hypertrophic facet joints.
 
 


Conservative treatment of symptomatic LSS includes nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, exercise programs, and symptomatic treatment of acute pain episodes. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of epidural glucocorticoid injections. Surgical therapy is considered when medical therapy does not relieve symptoms sufficiently to allow for activities of daily living or when significant focal neurologic signs are present. Most patients with neurogenic claudication treated surgically experience significant relief of back and leg pain within 6 weeks post-operation, and pain relief persists for at least 2 years. Patients treated nonoperatively improve uncommonly. Up to one-quarter develop recurrent stenosis at the same spinal level or an adjacent level 7每10 years after the initial surgery; recurrent symptoms usually respond to a second surgical decompression.

Neural foraminal narrowing with radiculopathy is a common degenerative disorder most often caused by the same processes that cause lumbar spinal stenosis (Figs. 15-1 and 15-6), including osteophytes, lateral disc protrusion, calcified disk-osteophytes, facet joint hypertrophy, uncovertebral joint hypertrophy (cervical spine), congenitally shortened pedicles, or, frequently, a combination of these processes. Neoplasms (primary or metastatic), fractures, infections (epidural abscess), or hematomas are other considerations. These conditions can produce unilateralnerve root symptoms or signs due to bony compression at the intervertebral foramen or lateral recess; symptoms are indistinguishable from disk-related radiculopathy, but treatment may differ depending upon the specific etiology. The history and neurologic examination alone cannot distinguish between these possibilities, and a spinal neuroimaging (CT or MRI) procedure is required to identify the underlying cause. Neurologic findings from the examination and EMG can help direct the attention of the radiologist to specific nerve or root structures that are best visualized on axial images. For facet joint hypertrophy, surgical foraminotomy produces long-term relief of leg and back pain in 80每90% of patients. The usefulness of therapeutic facet joint blocks for pain has not been rigorously studied.

Figure 15-6

 
 
 
Right C7 radiculopathy. A. Sagittal T2-weighted image shows mild disk bulging at C6-C7 and a mildly narrowed spinal canal, but no visible nerve root compression. B. Axial T2-weighted image. The combination of uncinate hypertrophy and facet hypertrophy (ovoid dark space just lateral to the C7 root) narrows the right C6-C7 intervertebral foramen resulting in right C7 nerve root compression.
 
 

Arthritis

Spondylosis, or osteoarthritic spine disease, typically occurs in later life and primarily involves the cervical and lumbosacral spine. Patients often complain of back pain that increases with movement and is associated with stiffness. The relationship between clinical symptoms and radiologic findings is usually not straightforward. Pain may be prominent when x-ray, CT, or MRI findings are minimal, and prominent degenerative spine disease can be seen in asymptomatic patients. Osteophytes or combined disk-osteophytes may cause or contribute to central spinal canal stenosis, lateral recess stenosis, or neural foraminal narrowing.

Ankylosing Spondylitis

(See also Chap. 325) This distinctive arthritic spine disease typically presents with the insidious onset of low back and buttock pain. Patients are often males below age 40. Associated features include morning back stiffness, nocturnal pain, pain unrelieved by rest, an elevated ESR, and the histocompatibility antigen HLA-B27. Onset at a young age and back pain improving with exercise are characteristic. Loss of the normal lumbar lordosis and exaggeration of thoracic kyphosis develop as the disease progresses. Inflammation and erosion of the outer fibers of the annulus fibrosus at the point of contact with the vertebral body are followed by ossification and bony growth that bridges adjacent vertebral bodies and reduces spine mobility in all planes. MRI has been used to assess the presence of inflammation in joints as well as response to treatment and is more sensitive than plain x-rays. In later stages, plain x-rays reveal bridging of vertebral bodies to produce the fused "bamboo spine."

Stress fractures after minimal or no trauma can occur through the spontaneously ankylosed posterior bony elements of the rigid, osteoporotic spine and can produce focal pain, spinal instability, spinal cord compression, or CES. Atlantoaxial subluxation with spinal cord compression can occur in up to 20% of patients over time. Ankylosis of the ribs to the spine and a decrease in the height of the thoracic spine may compromise respiratory function. Therapy with anti每tumor necrosis factor agents is effective in reducing disease activity and improving function. Similar to ankylosing spondylitis, restricted movements may accompany reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome), psoriatic arthritis, and chronic inflammatory bowel disease.

Neoplasms

Back pain is the most common neurologic symptom in patients with systemic cancer and is the presenting symptom in 20%. The cause is usually vertebral body metastasis but can also result from spread of cancer through the intervertebral foramen (especially with lymphoma) or from carcinomatous meningitis. Cancer-related back pain tends to be constant, dull, unrelieved by rest, and worse at night. By contrast, mechanical low back pain usually improves with rest. MRI, CT, and CT-myelography are the studies of choice when spinal metastasis is suspected. Once a metastasis is found, imaging of the entire spine reveals additional tumor deposits in 1/3 of patients. MRI is preferred for soft tissue definition, but the most rapidly available imaging modality is best because the patient's condition may worsen quickly without intervention. Fewer than 5% of patients who are nonambulatory at the time of diagnosis ever regain the ability to walk; thus, early diagnosis is crucial. The management of spinal metastasis is discussed in detail in Chap. 379.

Infections/Inflammation

Vertebral osteomyelitis is often caused by staphylococci, but other bacteria or tuberculosis (Pott's disease) may be responsible. The primary source of infection is usually the urinary tract, skin, or lungs. Intravenous drug use is a well-recognized risk factor. Whenever pyogenic osteomyelitis is found, the possibility of bacterial endocarditis should be considered. Back pain unrelieved by rest, spine tenderness over the involved spine segment, and an elevated ESR are the most common findings in vertebral osteomyelitis. Fever or an elevated white blood cell count is found in a minority of patients. MRI and CT are sensitive and specific for early detection of osteomyelitis; CT may be more readily available in emergency settings and better tolerated by some patients with severe back pain. The intervertebral disk can also be affected by infection (discitis), and very rarely by tumor.

Spinal epidural abscess (Chap. 377) presents with back pain (aggravated by movement or palpation), fever, radiculopathy, or signs of spinal cord compression. The subacute development of two or more of these findings should increase the index of suspicion for spinal epidural abscess. The abscess may track over multiple spinal levels and is best delineated by spine MRI.

Lumbar adhesive arachnoiditis with radiculopathy is due to fibrosis following inflammation within the subarachnoid space. The fibrosis results in nerve root adhesions, and presents as back and leg pain associated with motor, sensory, or reflex changes. Causes of arachnoiditis include multiple lumbar operations, chronic spinal infections (especially tuberculosis in the developing world), spinal cord injury, intrathecal hemorrhage, myelography (rare), intrathecal injections (glucocorticoids, anesthetics, or other agents), and foreign bodies. The MRI shows clumped nerve roots or loculations of cerebrospinal fluid within the thecal sac. Clumped nerve roots may also occur with demyelinating polyneuropathy or neoplastic infiltration. Treatment is usually unsatisfactory. Microsurgical lysis of adhesions, dorsal rhizotomy, dorsal root ganglionectomy, and epidural steroids have been tried, but outcomes have been poor. Dorsal column stimulation for pain relief has produced varying results.

Metabolic Causes

Osteoporosis and Osteosclerosis

Immobilization or underlying conditions such as osteomalacia, the postmenopausal state, renal disease, multiple myeloma, hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, metastatic carcinoma, or glucocorticoid use may accelerate osteoporosis and weaken the vertebral body, leading to compression fractures and pain. Up to two-thirds of compression fractures seen on radiologic imaging are asymptomatic. The most common nontraumatic vertebral body fractures are due to postmenopausal or senile osteoporosis (Chap. 354). The risk of an additional vertebral fracture at 1 year following a first vertebral fracture is 20%. The presence of fever, weight loss, fracture at a level above T4, or other conditions described above should increase the suspicion for a cause other than senile osteoporosis. If tumor is suspected, a bone biopsy or diagnostic search for a primary tumor is indicated. The sole manifestation of a compression fracture may be localized back pain or radicular pain exacerbated by movement and often reproduced by palpation over the spinous process of the affected vertebra. The clinical context, neurologic signs, and radiologic appearance of the spine establish the diagnosis.

Relief of acute pain can often be achieved with acetaminophen or a combination of opioids and acetaminophen. The role of NSAIDs is controversial. Both pain and disability are improved with bracing. Antiresorptive drugs, especially bisphosphonates (e.g., alendronate), have been shown to reduce the risk of osteoporotic fractures and are the preferred treatment to prevent additional fractures. Less than one-third of patients with prior compression fractures are adequately treated for osteoporosis despite the increased risk for future fractures; even fewer at-risk patients without a history of fracture are adequately treated. Interventions [percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP), kyphoplasty] exist for osteoporotic compression fractures associated with debilitating pain. Controlled studies suggest a benefit for pain reduction acutely, but not at 2 months, when compared with conservative care. Relief of pain following PVP has also been reported in patients with vertebral metastases, myeloma, or hemangiomas.

Osteosclerosis, an abnormally increased bone density often due to Paget's disease, is readily identifiable on routine x-ray studies and can sometimes be a source of back pain. It may be associated with an isolated increase in alkaline phosphatase in an otherwise healthy older person. Spinal cord or nerve root compression can result from bony encroachment. It should not be assumed that Paget's disease is the cause of a patient's back pain until other etiologies have been carefully considered.

For further discussion of these bone disorders, see Chaps. 353, 354, and 355.

Referred Pain from Visceral Disease

Diseases of the thorax, abdomen, or pelvis may refer pain to the posterior portion of the spinal segment that innervates the diseased organ. Occasionally, back pain may be the first and only manifestation. Upper abdominal diseases generally refer pain to the lower thoracic or upper lumbar region (eighth thoracic to the first and second lumbar vertebrae), lower abdominal diseases to the midlumbar region (second to fourth lumbar vertebrae), and pelvic diseases to the sacral region. Local signs (pain with spine palpation, paraspinal muscle spasm) are absent, and little or no pain accompanies routine movements of the spine.

Low Thoracic or Lumbar Pain with Abdominal Disease

Tumors of the posterior wall of the stomach or duodenum typically produce epigastric pain (Chaps. 91 and 293), but midline back or paraspinal pain may occur if retroperitoneal extension is present. Fatty foods occaionally induce back pain associated with biliary disease. Diseases of the pancreas can produce right paraspinal back pain (head of the pancreas involved) or left paraspinal pain (body or tail involved). Pathology in retroperitoneal structures (hemorrhage, tumors, pyelonephritis) can produce paraspinal pain that radiates to the lower abdomen, groin, or anterior thighs. A mass in the iliopsoas region can produce unilateral lumbar pain with radiation toward the groin, labia, or testicle. The sudden appearance of lumbar pain in a patient receiving anticoagulants suggests retroperitoneal hemorrhage.

Isolated low back pain occurs in some patients with a contained rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). The classic clinical triad of abdominal pain, shock, and back pain occurs in <20% of patients. The typical patient at risk is an elderly male smoker with back pain. Frequently, the diagnosis is initially missed because the symptoms and signs can be nonspecific. Misdiagnoses include nonspecific back pain, diverticulitis, renal colic, sepsis, and myocardial infarction. A careful abdominal examination revealing a pulsatile mass (present in 50每75% of patients) is an important physical finding. Patients with suspected AAA should be evaluated with abdominal ultrasound, CT, or MRI (Chap. 248).

Sacral Pain with Gynecologic and Urologic Disease

Pelvic organs rarely cause low back pain, except for gynecologic disorders involving the uterosacral ligaments. The pain is referred to the sacral region. Endometriosis or uterine cancers may invade the uterosacral ligaments. Pain associated with endometriosis is typically premenstrual and often continues until it merges with menstrual pain. Uterine malposition may cause uterosacral ligament traction (retroversion, descensus, and prolapse) or produce sacral pain after prolonged standing.

Menstrual pain may be felt in the sacral region. Poorly localized, cramping pain can radiate down the legs. Pain due to neoplastic infiltration of nerves is typically continuous, progressive in severity, and unrelieved by rest at night. Less commonly, radiation therapy of pelvic tumors may produce sacral pain from late radiation necrosis of tissue. Low back pain that radiates into one or both thighs is common in the last weeks of pregnancy.

Urologic sources of lumbosacral back pain include chronic prostatitis, prostate cancer with spinal metastasis (Chap. 95), and diseases of the kidney or ureter. Lesions of the bladder and testes do not often produce back pain. Infectious, inflammatory, or neoplastic renal diseases may produce ipsilateral lumbosacral pain, as can renal artery or vein thrombosis. Paraspinal lumbar pain may be a symptom of ureteral obstruction due to nephrolithiasis.

Other Causes of Back Pain

Postural Back Pain

There is a group of patients with nonspecific chronic low back pain (CLBP) in whom no specific anatomic lesion can be found despite exhaustive investigation. These individuals complain of vague, diffuse back pain with prolonged sitting or standing that is relieved by rest. Exercises to strengthen the paraspinal and abdominal muscles are sometimes helpful.

Psychiatric Disease

CLBP may be encountered in patients who seek financial compensation; in malingerers; or in those with concurrent substance abuse. Many patients with CLBP have a history of psychiatric illness (depression, anxiety states), or childhood trauma (physical or sexual abuse) that antedates the onset of back pain. Preoperative psychological assessment has been used to exclude patients with marked psychological impairments that predict a poor surgical outcome from spine surgery.

Idiopathic

The cause of low back pain occasionally remains unclear. Some patients have had multiple operations for disk disease but have persistent pain and disability. The original indications for surgery may have been questionable, with back pain only, no definite neurologic signs, or a minor disk bulge noted on CT or MRI. Scoring systems based upon neurologic signs, psychological factors, physiologic studies, and imaging studies have been devised to minimize the likelihood of unsuccessful surgery.

Treatment: Back Pain

Acute Low Back Pain (Albp) Without Radiculopathy

ALBP is defined as pain of <3 months' duration. Full recovery can be expected in 85% of adults with ALBP without leg pain. Most have purely "mechanical" symptoms (i.e., pain that is aggravated by motion and relieved by rest).

The initial assessment excludes serious causes of spine pathology that require urgent intervention, including infection, cancer, or trauma. Risk factors for a serious cause of ALBP are shown in Table 15-1. Laboratory and imaging studies are unnecessary if risk factors are absent. CT or plain spine films are rarely indicated in the first month of symptoms unless a spine fracture is suspected.

The prognosis is generally excellent. Many patients do not seek medical care and apparently improve on their own. Even among those seen in primary care, two-thirds report being substantially improved after seven weeks. This spontaneous improvement can mislead clinicians and researchers about the efficacy of treatment interventions. Perhaps as a result, many ineffective treatments have become widespread in the past, such as bed rest, lumbar traction, sacroiliac fusion, and coccygectomy.

Clinicians should reassure patients that improvement is very likely, and instruct them in self-care. Education is an important part of treatment. Satisfaction and the likelihood of follow-up increase when patients are educated about prognosis, treatment methods, activity modifications, and strategies to prevent future exacerbations. In one study, patients who felt they did not receive an adequate explanation for their symptoms wanted further diagnostic tests. In general, bed rest should be avoided, or kept to a day or two at most, for relief of severe symptoms. Several randomized trials suggest that bed rest does not accelerate the pace of recovery. In general, the best activity recommendation is for walking and early resumption of normal physical activity, avoiding only strenuous manual labor. Possible advantages of early ambulation for acute back pain include maintenance of cardiovascular conditioning, improved disk and cartilage nutrition, improved bone and muscle strength, and increased endorphin levels. Specific back exercises or early vigorous exercise have not shown benefits for acute back pain, but may be useful for chronic pain. Application of heat by heating pads or heated blankets is sometimes helpful.

Evidence-based guidelines suggest that over-the-counter medicines such as acetaminophen and NSAIDs are first-line options for the treatment of ALBP. Skeletal muscle relaxants, such as cyclobenzaprine or methocarbamol, may be useful, but sedation is a common side effect. Limiting the use of muscle relaxants to nighttime only may be an option for some patients. Because of the risk of abuse of some drugs in this category, including benzodiazepines and carisoprodol, short courses are generally recommended.

It is unclear whether opioid analgesics and tramadol are more effective than NSAIDs or acetaminophen for treating ALBP; most of the available efficacy data are for treatment of chronic back pain. Their use is best reserved for patients who cannot tolerate acetaminophen or NSAIDs, or for those with severe refractory pain. As with muscle relaxants, these drugs are often sedating, so it may be useful to prescribe them at nighttime only, Side effects of short-term opioid use include nausea, constipation and pruritis; risks of long-term opioid use include hypersensitivity to pain, hypogonadism, and dependency.

There is no evidence to support use of oral or injected glucocorticoids for acute low back pain without radiculopathy. Antiepileptic drugs, such as gabapentin, are not FDA approved for treating low back pain, and there is insufficient evidence to support their use in this setting.

Nonpharmacologic treatments for acute low back pain include spinal manipulation, physical therapy, massage, acupuncture, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, ultrasound, diathermy, and magnets. Spinal manipulation appears to be roughly equivalent to conventional medical treatments and may be a useful alternative for patients who wish to avoid or who cannot tolerate drug therapy. There is little evidence to support the use of physical therapy, massage, acupuncture, laser therapy, therapeutic ultrasound, magnets, corsets, or lumbar traction. Though important for chronic pain, back exercises for acute back pain are generally not supported by clinical evidence. There is no useful evidence regarding the value of ice or heat applications for ABLP; many patients report temporary symptomatic relief from ice, and heat may produce a short-term reduction in pain after the first week.

Chronic Low Back Pain Without Radiculopathy

Chronic low back pain is defined as pain lasting >12 weeks; it accounts for 50% of total back pain costs. Risk factors include obesity, female gender, older age, prior history of back pain, restricted spinal mobility, pain radiating into a leg, high levels of psychological distress, poor self-rated health, minimal physical activity, smoking, job dissatisfaction, and widespread pain. In general, the same treatments that are recommended for acute low back pain can be useful for patients with chronic low back pain. In this setting, however, the benefit of opioid therapy or muscle relaxants is less clear.

Evidence supports the use of exercise therapy, and this can be one of the mainstays of treatment for chronic back pain. Effective regimens have generally included a combination of gradually increasing aerobic exercise, strengthening exercises, and stretching exercises. Motivating patients is sometimes challenging, and supervised exercise is best, for example, with a supportive physical therapist. In general, activity tolerance is the primary goal, while pain relief is secondary. Exercise programs can reverse atrophy in paraspinal muscles and strengthen extensors of the trunk. Supervised intensive physical exercise or "work hardening" regimens have been effective in returning some patients to work, improving walking distance, and reducing pain. In addition, some forms of yoga have been evaluated in randomized trials and may be helpful for patients who are interested.

Medications for chronic low back pain may include acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and tricyclic antidepressants. Trials of the latter suggest some benefit even for patients without evidence of depression. Trials do not support the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for back pain. However, depression is common among patients with chronic pain and should be appropriately treated.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy is based on evidence that psychological and social factors, as well as somatic pathology, are important in the genesis of chronic pain and disability. The patient's attitudes and beliefs, psychological distress, and patterns of illness behavior may all influence responses to chronic pain. Thus, in addition to addressing pathophysiologic mechanisms, psychological treatments are aimed at reducing disability by modifying cognitive processes and environmental contingencies. Cognitive-behavioral therapy includes efforts to identify and modify patients' thinking about their pain and disability by strategies that may involve imagery, attention diversion, or modifying maladaptive thoughts, feelings, and beliefs. This approach includes educating patients about a multidimensional view of pain, identifying pain-eliciting or pain-aggravating thoughts and feelings, using coping strategies and relaxation techniques, and even hypnosis. A systematic review concluded that such treatments are more effective than a waiting list control group for short-term pain relief; however, long-term results remain unclear. Behavioral treatments may have effects similar in magnitude to exercise therapy.

Back pain is the most common reason for seeking complementary and alternative treatments. The most common of these for back pain are spinal manipulation, acupuncture, and massage. The role of complementary and alternative medicine approaches, aside from spinal manipulation, remains unclear. Biofeedback has not been studied rigorously. As with acute back pain, spinal manipulation may on average offer benefits similar to conventional care. Rigorous recent trials of acupuncture suggest that true acupuncture is not superior to sham acupuncture, but that both may offer an advantage over routine care. Whether this is due entirely to placebo effects or to stimulation provided even by sham acupuncture is uncertain. Some trials of massage therapy have been encouraging, but this has been less well studied than manipulation or acupuncture.

Studies of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) have reached conflicting conclusions, but a recent evidence-based guideline suggested that there was no convincing evidence for its efficacy in treating chronic back pain.

Various injections, including epidural glucocorticoid injections, facet joint injections, and trigger point injections have been used for treating chronic low back pain. However, in the absence of radiculopathy, there is no evidence that epidural glucocorticoids are effective for treating chronic back pain. Several randomized trials suggest that facet joint injections are not more effective than saline injections, and recent evidence-based guidelines recommend against their use. Similarly, there is little evidence to support the use of trigger point injections. Injection studies are sometimes used diagnostically to help determine the anatomic source of back pain. Reproduction of the patient's typical pain with discography has been used as evidence that a specific disk is the pain generator. Pain relief following a foraminal nerve root block or glucocorticoid injection into a facet has been similarly used as evidence that the facet joint or nerve root is the source. However, the possibility that the injection response was a placebo effect or due to systemic absorption of the glucocorticoids is often not excluded.

Another category of intervention for chronic back pain includes electrothermal and radiofrequency therapies. Intradiscal therapy has been proposed using both types of energy to thermocoagulate and destroy nerves in the intervertebral disc, using specially designed catheters or electrodes. A systematic review has suggested that current evidence does not support the use of these intradiscal therapies.

Radiofrequency denervation is sometimes used to destroy nerves that are thought to mediate pain, and this technique has been used for facet joint pain (with the target nerve being the medial branch of the primary dorsal ramus), for back pain thought to arise from the intervertebral disc (ramus communicans), and radicular back pain (dorsal root ganglia). A few small trials have resulted in conflicting results for facet joint pain. The evidence for presumed discogenic pain and for radicular pain is similarly meager. A trial for patients with chronic radicular pain found no difference between radiofrequency denervation of the dorsal root ganglia and sham treatment. Recent systematic reviews have thus concluded that there is insufficient evidence to reliably evaluate these interventional therapies.

Surgical intervention for chronic low back pain in the absence of radiculopathy has been evaluated in a small number of randomized trials, all conducted in Europe. Each of these studies included patients with back pain and a degenerative disc, but no sciatica. Three of the four trials concluded that lumbar fusion surgery was no more effective than highly structured, rigorous rehabilitation combined with cognitive-behavioral therapy. The fourth trial found an advantage of fusion surgery over haphazard "usual care," which appeared to be less effective than the structured rehabilitation in other trials. Given conflicting evidence, indications for surgery for chronic back pain alone have remained controversial. Both U.S. and British guidelines suggest considering referral for an opinion on spinal fusion for people who have completed an optimal nonsurgical treatment program (including combined physical and psychological treatment) and who have persistent severe back pain for which they would consider surgery.

The newest surgical treatment for degenerated discs with back pain is disc replacement with prosthetic disks. These are generally designed as metal plates with a polyethylene cushion sandwiched in between. The trials that led to approval of these devices compared them to spine fusion, and concluded that the artificial discs were "not inferior." Serious complications appeared to be somewhat more likely with the artificial disc. This treatment remains controversial for low back pain.

Intensive multidisciplinary rehabilitation programs may involve daily or frequent care involving physical therapy, exercise, cognitive-behavioral therapy, a workplace evaluation, and other interventions. For patients who have not responded to other interventions, such programs appear to offer some benefit. Systematic reviews suggest that the evidence is limited and effects are moderate.

Some observers have raised concern that chronic back pain may often be overtreated. The use of opioids, epidural glucocorticoid injections, facet joint injections, and surgical intervention has increased rapidly in the past decade, without corresponding population-level improvements in pain or functioning among patients with back pain. In each case, randomized trials provide only minimal support for these treatments in the setting of chronic back pain without radiculopathy. For low back pain without radiculopathy, new British guidelines explicitly recommend against use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), any type of injection, TENS, lumbar supports, traction, radiofrequency facet joint denervation, intradiscal electrothermal therapy, or intradiscal radio frequency thermocoagulation. Similarly, these treatments are not recommended in guidelines from the American College of Physicians and the American Pain Society. On the other hand, exercise therapy and treatment of depression appear to be underused.

Low Back Pain with Radiculopathy

A common cause of back pain with radiculopathy is a herniated disc with nerve root impingement, resulting in back pain with radiation down the leg. The prognosis for acute low back pain with radiculopathy due to disk herniation (sciatica) is generally favorable, with most patients demonstrating substantial improvement over a matter of months. Serial imaging studies suggest spontaneous regression of the herniated portion of the disc in two-thirds of patients over 6 months. Nonetheless, there are several important treatment options for providing symptom relief while this natural healing process unfolds.

Resumption of normal activity as much as possible is usually the best activity recommendation. Randomized trial evidence suggests that bed rest is ineffective for treating sciatica as well as for back pain alone. Acetaminophen and NSAIDs are appropriate for pain relief, although severe pain may require short courses of opioid analgesics.

Epidural glucocorticoid injections have a role in providing temporary symptom relief for sciatica due to a herniated disc. Although randomized trial evidence is conflicting, there appears to be some overall short-term benefit for pain relief of sciatica. However, there does not appear to be a benefit in terms of reducing subsequent surgical interventions. Diagnostic nerve root blocks have been advocated to determine if pain originates from a specific nerve root. However, improvement may result even when the nerve root is not responsible for the pain; this may occur as a placebo effect, from a pain-generating lesion located distally along the peripheral nerve, or from anesthesia of the sinuvertebral nerve. The utility of diagnostic nerve root blocks remains a subject of debate.

Surgical intervention is indicated for patients who have progressive motor weakness, demonstrated on clinical examination or EMG, as a result of nerve root injury. Urgent surgery is recommended for patients who have evidence of the cauda equina syndrome or spinal cord compression, generally suggested by bowel or bladder dysfunction, diminished sensation in a saddle distribution, a sensory level, bilateral leg weakness, or bilateral leg spasticity.

Surgery is also an important option for patients who have disabling radicular pain despite optimal conservative treatment. Sciatica is perhaps the most common reason for recommending spine surgery. Because patients with a herniated disc and sciatica generally experience rapid improvement over a matter of weeks, most experts do not recommend considering surgery unless the patient has failed to respond to 6每8 weeks of appropriate nonsurgical management. For patients who have not improved, randomized trials indicate that, compared to nonsurgical treatment, surgery results in more rapid pain relief. However, after the first year or two of follow-up, patients with sciatica appear to have much the same level of pain relief and functional improvement with or without surgery. Thus, both treatment approaches are reasonable, and patient preferences should play a major role in decision making. Some patients will want the fastest possible relief and find surgical risks acceptable. Others will be more risk-averse and more tolerant of symptoms, and will choose watchful waiting if they understand that improvement is likely in the end.

The usual surgical procedure is a partial hemilaminectomy with excision of the prolapsed disk. Fusion of the involved lumbar segments should be considered only if significant spinal instability is present (i.e., degenerative spondylolisthesis). The costs associated with lumbar interbody fusion have increased dramatically in recent years. There are no large prospective, randomized trials comparing fusion to other types of surgical intervention. In one study, patients with persistent low back pain despite an initial diskectomy fared no better with spine fusion than with a conservative regimen of cognitive intervention and exercise. Artificial disks have been in use in Europe for the past decade; their utility remains controversial in the United States.
 
Pain in the Neck and Shoulder

(Table 15-4) Neck pain, which usually arises from diseases of the cervical spine and soft tissues of the neck, is common. Neck pain arising from the cervical spine is typically precipitated by movement and may be accompanied by focal tenderness and limitation of motion. Pain arising from the brachial plexus, shoulder, or peripheral nerves can be confused with cervical spine disease, but the history and examination usually identify a more distal origin for the pain. Cervical spine trauma, disk disease, or spondylosis with intervertebral foraminal narrowing may be asymptomatic or painful and can produce a myelopathy, radiculopathy, or both. The same risk factors for a serious cause of low back pain are thought to apply to neck pain with the addition that neurologic signs of myelopathy (incontinence, sensory level, spastic legs) may also occur. Lhermitte's sign, an electrical shock down the spine with neck flexion, suggests cervical spinal cord involvement from any cause.

Table 15-4 Cervical Radiculopathy〞Neurologic Features

 
 
  Examination Findings
   
Cervical Nerve Roots
 Reflex
 Sensory
 Motor
 Pain Distribution
 
C5
 Biceps
 Over lateral deltoid
 Supraspinatus* (initial arm abduction) 

Infraspinatus* (arm external rotation) 

Deltoid* (arm abduction) 

Biceps (arm flexion)
 Lateral arm, medial scapula
 
C6
 Biceps
 Thumb, index fingers 

Radial hand/forearm
 Biceps (arm flexion) 

Pronator teres (internal forearm rotation)
 Lateral forearm, thumb, index finger
 
C7
 Triceps
 Middle fingers 

Dorsum forearm
 Triceps* (arm extension) 

Wrist extensors*

Extensor digitorum* (finger extension)
 Posterior arm, dorsal forearm, lateral hand
 
C8
 Finger flexors
 Little finger 

Medial hand and forearm
 Abductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1)

First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2) 

Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)
 4th and 5th fingers, medial forearm
 
T1
 Finger flexors
 Axilla and medial arm
 Abductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1) 

First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2) 

Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)
 Medial arm, axilla
 
 


* These muscles receive the majority of innervation from this root.
 

Trauma to the Cervical Spine

Trauma to the cervical spine (fractures, subluxation) places the spinal cord at risk for compression. Motor vehicle accidents, violent crimes, or falls account for 87% of cervical spinal cord injuries (Chap. 377). Immediate immobilization of the neck is essential to minimize further spinal cord injury from movement of unstable cervical spine segments. The decision to obtain imaging should be based upon the nature of the injury. The NEXUS low-risk criteria established that normally alert patients without palpation tenderness in the midline; intoxication; neurologic deficits; and painful distracting injuries had a very low likelihood of a clinically significant traumatic injury to the cervical spine. The Canadian C-spine rule recommends that imaging should be obtained following neck region trauma if the patient is >65 years old, has limb paresthesias, or a dangerous mechanism for the injury (e.g., bicycle collision with tree or parked car, fall from height >3 feet or 5 stairs, diving accident). A CT scan is the diagnostic procedure of choice for detection of acute fractures. When traumatic injury to the vertebral arteries or cervical spinal cord is suspected, visualization by MRI with MR angiography is preferred.

Whiplash injury is due to rapid flexion and extension of the neck, usually in automobile accidents, and causes cervical musculoligamental injury. This diagnosis should not be applied to patients with fractures, disk herniation, head injury, focal neurologic findings, or altered consciousness. Up to 50% of persons reporting whiplash injury acutely have persistent neck pain 1 year later. Once personal compensation for pain and suffering was removed from the Australian health care system, the prognosis for recovery at 1 year from whiplash injury improved also. Imaging of the cervical spine is not cost-effective acutely but is useful to detect disk herniations when symptoms persist for >6 weeks following the injury. Severe initial symptoms have been associated with a poor long-term outcome.

Cervical Disk Disease

Herniation of a lower cervical disk is a common cause of neck, shoulder, arm, or hand pain or tingling. Neck pain, stiffness, and a range of motion limited by pain are the usual manifestations. A herniated cervical disk is responsible for ~25% of cervical radiculopathies. Extension and lateral rotation of the neck narrows the ipsilateral intervertebral foramen and may reproduce radicular symptoms (Spurling's sign). In young persons, acute nerve root compression from a ruptured cervical disk is often due to trauma. Cervical disk herniations are usually posterolateral near the lateral recess. The cervical nerve roots most commonly affected are C7 and C6. Typical patterns of reflex, sensory, and motor changes that accompany specific cervical nerve root lesions are summarized in Table 15-4. While the classic patterns are clinically helpful, there are numerous exceptions because (1) there is overlap in function between adjacent nerve roots, (2) symptoms and signs may be evident in only part of the injured nerve root territory, and (3) the location of pain is the most variable of the clinical features.

Cervical Spondylosis

Osteoarthritis of the cervical spine may produce neck pain that radiates into the back of the head, shoulders, or arms, or may be the source of headaches in the posterior occipital region (supplied by the C2-C4 nerve roots). Osteophytes, disk protrusions, or hypertrophic facet or uncovertebral joints may alone or in combination compress one or several nerve roots at the intervertebral foramina (Fig. 15-6); this compression accounts for 75% of cervical radiculopathies. The roots most commonly affected are C7 and C6. Narrowing of the spinal canal by osteophytes, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL), or a large central disk may compress the cervical spinal cord. Combinations of radiculopathy and myelopathy may be present. When little or no neck pain accompanies cord compression, the diagnosis may be confused with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Chap. 374), multiple sclerosis (Chap. 380), spinal cord tumors, or syringomyelia (Chap. 377). The possibility of cervical spondylosis should be considered even when the patient presents with symptoms or signs in the legs only. MRI is the study of choice to define the anatomic abnormalities, but plain CT is adequate to assess bony spurs, foraminal narrowing, lateral recess stenosis, or OPLL. EMG and nerve conduction studies can localize and assess the severity of the nerve root injury.

Other Causes of Neck Pain

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (Chap. 321) of the cervical apophyseal joints produces neck pain, stiffness, and limitation of motion. In advanced RA, synovitis of the atlantoaxial joint (C1-C2; Fig. 15-2) may damage the transverse ligament of the atlas, producing forward displacement of the atlas on the axis (atlantoaxial subluxation). Radiologic evidence of atlantoaxial subluxation occurs in 30% of patients with RA. Not surprisingly, the degree of subluxation correlates with the severity of erosive disease. When subluxation is present, careful assessment is important to identify early signs of myelopathy. Occasional patients develop high spinal cord compression leading to quadriparesis, respiratory insufficiency, and death. Surgery should be considered when myelopathy or spinal instability is present. MRI is the imaging modality of choice.

Ankylosing spondylitis can cause neck pain and less commonly atlantoaxial subluxation; surgery may be required to prevent spinal cord compression. Acute herpes zoster presents as acute posterior occipital or neck pain prior to the outbreak of vesicles. Neoplasms metastatic to the cervical spine, infections (osteomyelitis and epidural abscess), and metabolic bone diseases may be the cause of neck pain. Neck pain may also be referred from the heart with coronary artery ischemia (cervical angina syndrome).

Thoracic Outlet

The thoracic outlet contains the first rib, the subclavian artery and vein, the brachial plexus, the clavicle, and the lung apex. Injury to these structures may result in postural or movement-induced pain around the shoulder and supraclavicular region. True neurogenicthoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) is an uncommon disorder resulting from compression of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus or ventral rami of the C8 or T1 nerve roots most often by an anomalous band of tissue connecting an elongate transverse process at C7 with the first rib. Pain is mild or absent. Signs include weakness and wasting of intrinsic muscles of the hand and diminished sensation on the palmar aspect of the fifth digit. An anteroposterior cervical spine x-ray will show the elongate C7 transverse process, and EMG and nerve conduction studies confirm the diagnosis. Treatment consists of surgical resection of the anomalous band. The weakness and wasting of intrinsic hand muscles typically does not improve, but surgery halts the insidious progression of weakness. Arterial TOS results from compression of the subclavian artery by a cervical rib resulting in poststenotic dilatation of the artery and thrombus formation. Blood pressure is reduced in the affected limb, and signs of emboli may be present in the hand. Neurologic signs are absent. Ultrasound can confirm the diagnosis noninvasively. Treatment is with thrombolysis or anticoagulation (with or without embolectomy) and surgical excision of the cervical rib compressing the subclavian artery. Venous TOS is due to subclavian vein thrombosis resulting in swelling of the arm and pain. The vein may be compressed by a cervical rib or anomalous scalene muscle. Venography is the diagnostic test of choice. Disputed TOS includes a large number of patients with chronic arm and shoulder pain of unclear cause. The lack of sensitive and specific findings on physical examination or laboratory markers for this condition frequently results in diagnostic uncertainty. The role of surgery in disputed TOS is controversial. Multidisciplinary pain management is a conservative approach, although treatment is often unsuccessful.

Brachial Plexus and Nerves

Pain from injury to the brachial plexus or peripheral nerves of the arm can occasionally mimic pain of cervical spine origin. Neoplastic infiltration of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus may produce shoulder or supraclavicular pain radiating down the arm, numbness of the fourth and fifth fingers or medial forearm, and weakness of intrinsic hand muscles innervated by the ulnar and median nerves. Delayed radiation injury may produce similar findings, although pain is less often present and almost always less severe. A Pancoast tumor of the lung (Chap. 89) is another cause and should be considered, especially when a Horner's syndrome is present. Suprascapular neuropathy may produce severe shoulder pain, weakness, and wasting of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles. Acute brachial neuritis is often confused with radiculopathy; the acute onset of severe shoulder or scapular pain is followed typically over days by weakness of the proximal arm and shoulder girdle muscles innervated by the upper brachial plexus. The onset is often preceded by an infection. The long thoracic nerve may be affected; the latter results in a winged scapula. Brachial neuritis may also present as an isolated paralysis of the diaphragm or with involvement of other nerves of the upper limb. Recovery is generally good but may take up to 3 years to be complete.

Occasional cases of carpal tunnel syndrome produce pain and paresthesias extending into the forearm, arm, and shoulder resembling a C5 or C6 root lesion. Lesions of the radial or ulnar nerve can mimic a radiculopathy at C7 or C8, respectively. EMG and nerve conduction studies can accurately localize lesions to the nerve roots, brachial plexus, or peripheral nerves.

For further discussion of peripheral nerve disorders, see Chap. 384.

Shoulder

Pain arising from the shoulder can on occasion mimic pain from the spine. If symptoms and signs of radiculopathy are absent, then the differential diagnosis includes mechanical shoulder pain (tendonitis, bursitis, rotator cuff tear, dislocation, adhesive capsulitis, and cuff impingement under the acromion) and referred pain (subdiaphragmatic irritation, angina, Pancoast tumor). Mechanical pain is often worse at night, associated with local shoulder tenderness and aggravated by abduction, internal rotation, or extension of the arm. Pain from shoulder disease may radiate into the arm or hand, but sensory, motor, and reflex changes are absent.

Treatment: Neck Pain Without Radiculopathy

The evidence regarding treatment for neck pain is less complete than that for low back pain. As with low back pain, spontaneous improvement is the norm for acute neck pain, and the usual goal of therapy is to provide symptom relief while natural healing processes proceed.

The evidence in support of nonsurgical treatments for whiplash-associated disorders is generally of poor quality and neither supports nor refutes the effectiveness of common treatments used for symptom relief. Gentle mobilization of the cervical spine combined with exercise programs may be more beneficial than usual care. Evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against the use of cervical traction, neck collars, TENS, ultrasound, diathermy, or massage. The role of acupuncture for neck pain also remains ambiguous, with poor-quality studies and conflicting results.

For patients with neck pain unassociated with trauma, supervised exercise, with or without mobilization, appears to be effective. Exercises often include shoulder rolls and neck stretches. Although there is relatively little evidence about the use of muscle relaxants, analgesics, and NSAIDs in neck pain, many clinicians use these medications in much the same way as for low back pain.

Low-level laser therapy directed at areas of tenderness, local acupuncture points, or a grid of predetermined points is a controversial approach to the treatment of neck pain. The putative benefits might be mediated by anti-inflammatory effects, reduction of skeletal muscle fatigue, or inhibition of transmission at neuromuscular junctions. A 2009 meta-analysis suggested that this treatment may provide greater pain relief than sham therapy for both acute and chronic neck pain. Comparison to other conservative treatment measures is needed.

Although some surgical studies have proposed a role for anterior diskectomy and fusion in patients with neck pain, these studies generally have not been rigorously conducted. A systematic review suggested that there was no valid clinical evidence to support either cervical fusion or cervical disc arthroplasty in patients with neck pain without radiculopathy. Similarly, there is no evidence to support radiofrequency neurotomy or cervical facet injections for neck pain without radiculopathy.

Treatment: Neck Pain with Radiculopathy

The natural history of neck pain even with radiculopathy is favorable, and many patients will improve without specific therapy. Although there are no randomized trials of NSAIDs for neck pain, a course of NSAIDs, with or without muscle relaxants, may be appropriate initial therapy. Other nonsurgical treatments are commonly used, including opioid analgesics, oral glucocorticoids, cervical traction, and immobilization with a hard or soft cervical collar. However, there are no randomized trials to establish the effectiveness of these treatments in comparison to natural history alone. Soft cervical collars can be modestly helpful by limiting spontaneous and reflex neck movements that exacerbate pain.

As for lumbar radiculopathy, epidural glucocorticoids may provide short-term symptom relief in cervical radiculopathy. If cervical radiculopathy is due to bony compression from cervical spondylosis with foraminal narrowing, then surgical decompression is generally indicated to forestall progression of neurologic signs.

Surgical treatment can produce rapid and substantial symptom relief, although it is unclear whether long-term outcomes are improved over nonsurgical therapy. Reasonable indications for cervical disk surgery include a progressive radicular motor deficit, functionally limiting pain that fails to respond to conservative management, or spinal cord compression.

Surgical treatments include anterior cervical diskectomy alone, laminectomy with discectomy, discectomy with fusion, and disk arthroplasty (implanting an artificial cervical disk). Fusions can be performed with a variety of techniques. The risk of subsequent radiculopathy or myelopathy at cervical segments adjacent to a fusion is ~3% per year and 26% per decade. Although this risk is sometimes portrayed as a late complication of surgery, it may also reflect the natural history of degenerative cervical disk disease. The durability of disk prostheses is uncertain. Available data do not strongly support one surgical technique over another.
 
Further Readings

Bagley LJ: Imaging of spinal trauma. Radiol Clin North Am 44:1, 2006 [PMID: 16297679] 

 
Bhangle SD et al: Back pain made simple: An approach based on principles and evidence. Cleve Clin J Med 76:393, 2009 [PMID: 19570970] 

 
Cassidy JD et al: Effect of eliminating compensation for pain and suffering on the outcome of insurance claims for whiplash injury. N Engl J Med 342:1179, 2000 [PMID: 10770984] 

 
Cavalier R et al: Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis in children and adolescents: Diagnosis, natural history, and non-surgical management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 14:417, 2006 [PMID: 16822889] 

 
Cowan JA JR et al: Changes in the utilization of spinal fusion in the United States. Neurosurgery 59:1, 2006 

 
Datta S et al: Systematic assessment of diagnostic accuracy and therapeutic utility of lumbar facet joint interventions. Pain Physician 12:437, 2009 [PMID: 19305489] 

 
Lamb SE et al: Group cognitive behavioural treatment for low-back pain in primary care: A randomised controlled trial and cost-effectiveness analysis. Lancet 375:916, 2010 Mummaneni PV et al: Clinical and radiographic analysis of cervical disk arthroplasty compared with allograft fusion: A randomized controlled clinical trial. J Neurosurg Spine 6:198, 2007 

 
Peul WC et al: Surgery versus prolonged conservative treatment for sciatica. N Engl J Med 356:2245, 2007 [PMID: 17538084] 

 
Weinstein JN et al: Surgical versus nonsurgical therapy for lumbar spinal stenosis. N Engl J Med 358:794, 2008 [PMID: 18287602] 

 
Weinstein JN et al: Surgical versus nonsurgical treatment for lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis. N Engl J Med 356:2257, 2007 [PMID: 17538085] 

 
Weinstein JN et al: Surgical vs nonoperative treatment for lumbar disc herniation. The spine patient outcomes research trial (SPORT): A randomized trial. JAMA 296:2441, 2006 [PMID: 17119140] 
 
 

^^
Fever and Hyperthermia: Introduction

Body temperature is controlled by the hypothalamus. Neurons in both the preoptic anterior hypothalamus and the posterior hypothalamus receive two kinds of signals: one from peripheral nerves that transmit information from warmth/cold receptors in the skin and the other from the temperature of the blood bathing the region. These two types of signals are integrated by the thermoregulatory center of the hypothalamus to maintain normal temperature. In a neutral temperature environment, the metabolic rate of humans produces more heat than is necessary to maintain the core body temperature in the range of 36.5每37.5∼C (97.7每99.5∼F).

A normal body temperature is maintained ordinarily, despite environmental variations, because the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center balances the excess heat production derived from metabolic activity in muscle and the liver with heat dissipation from the skin and lungs. According to studies of healthy individuals 18每40 years of age, the mean oral temperature is 36.8∼ ㊣ 0.4∼C (98.2∼ ㊣ 0.7∼F), with low levels at 6 a.m. and higher levels at 4每6 p.m. The maximum normal oral temperature is 37.2∼C (98.9∼F) at 6 a.m. and 37.7∼C (99.9∼F) at 4 p.m.; these values define the 99th percentile for healthy individuals. In light of these studies, an a.m. temperature of >37.2∼C (>98.9∼F) or a p.m. temperature of >37.7∼C (>99.9∼F) defines a fever. The normal daily temperature variation is typically 0.5∼C (0.9∼F). However, in some individuals recovering from a febrile illness, this daily variation can be as great as 1.0∼C. During a febrile illness, the diurnal variation usually is maintained, but at higher, febrile levels. The daily temperature variation appears to be fixed in early childhood; in contrast, elderly individuals can exhibit a reduced ability to develop fever, with only a modest fever even in severe infections.

Rectal temperatures are generally 0.4∼C (0.7∼F) higher than oral readings. The lower oral readings are probably attributable to mouth breathing, which is a factor in patients with respiratory infections and rapid breathing. Lower-esophageal temperatures closely reflect core temperature. Tympanic membrane (TM) thermometers measure radiant heat from the tympanic membrane and nearby ear canal and display that absolute value (unadjusted mode) or a value automatically calculated from the absolute reading on the basis of nomograms relating the radiant temperature measured to actual core temperatures obtained in clinical studies (adjusted mode). These measurements, although convenient, may be more variable than directly determined oral or rectal values. Studies in adults show that readings are lower with unadjusted-mode than with adjusted-mode TM thermometers and that unadjusted-mode TM values are 0.8∼C (1.6∼F) lower than rectal temperatures.

In women who menstruate, the a.m. temperature is generally lower in the 2 weeks before ovulation; it then rises by 0.6∼C (1∼F) with ovulation and remains at that level until menses occur. Body temperature can be elevated in the postprandial state. Pregnancy and endocrinologic dysfunction also affect body temperature.
 
Fever versus Hyperthermia

Fever

Fever is an elevation of body temperature that exceeds the normal daily variation and occurs in conjunction with an increase in the hypothalamic set point [e.g., from 37∼C to 39∼C (98.6∼F to 102.2∼F)]. This shift of the set point from "normothermic" to febrile levels very much resembles the resetting of the home thermostat to a higher level to raise the ambient temperature in a room. Once the hypothalamic set point is raised, neurons in the vasomotor center are activated and vasoconstriction commences. The individual first notices vasoconstriction in the hands and feet. Shunting of blood away from the periphery to the internal organs essentially decreases heat loss from the skin, and the person feels cold. For most fevers, body temperature increases by 1∼每2∼C (33.8∼每35.6∼F). Shivering, which increases heat production from the muscles, may begin at this time; however, shivering is not required if heat conservation mechanisms raise blood temperature sufficiently. Nonshivering heat production from the liver also contributes to increasing core temperature. In humans, behavioral adjustments (e.g., putting on more clothing or bedding) help raise body temperature by decreasing heat loss.

The processes of heat conservation (vasoconstriction) and heat production (shivering and increased nonshivering thermogenesis) continue until the temperature of the blood bathing the hypothalamic neurons matches the new thermostat setting. Once that point is reached, the hypothalamus maintains the temperature at the febrile level by the same mechanisms of heat balance that function in the afebrile state. When the hypothalamic set point is again reset downward (in response to either a reduction in the concentration of pyrogens or the use of antipyretics), the processes of heat loss through vasodilation and sweating are initiated. Loss of heat by sweating and vasodilation continues until the blood temperature at the hypothalamic level matches the lower setting. Behavioral changes (e.g., removal of clothing) facilitate heat loss.

A fever of >41.5∼C (>106.7∼F) is called hyperpyrexia. This extraordinarily high fever can develop in patients with severe infections but most commonly occurs in patients with central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhages. In the preantibiotic era, fever due to a variety of infectious diseases rarely exceeded 41.1∼C (106∼F), and there has been speculation that this natural "thermal ceiling" is mediated by neuropeptides that function as central antipyretics.

In rare cases, the hypothalamic set point is elevated as a result of local trauma, hemorrhage, tumor, or intrinsic hypothalamic malfunction. The term hypothalamic fever sometimes is used to describe elevated temperature caused by abnormal hypothalamic function. However, most patients with hypothalamic damage have subnormal, not supranormal, body temperatures.

Hyperthermia

Although most patients with elevated body temperature have fever, there are circumstances in which elevated temperature represents not fever but hyperthermia (also called heat stroke; Table 16-1). Hyperthermia is characterized by an uncontrolled increase in body temperature that exceeds the body's ability to lose heat. The setting of the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center is unchanged. In contrast to fever in infections, hyperthermia does not involve pyrogenic molecules (see "Pyrogens," below). Exogenous heat exposure and endogenous heat production are two mechanisms by which hyperthermia can result in dangerously high internal temperatures. Excessive heat production can easily cause hyperthermia despite physiologic and behavioral control of body temperature. For example, work or exercise in hot environments can produce heat faster than peripheral mechanisms can lose it.

Table 16-1 Causes of Hyperthermia Syndromes

 
 
Heat Stroke  
Exertional: Exercise in higher than normal heat and/or humidity 
Nonexertional: Anticholinergics, including antihistamines; antiparkinsonian drugs; diuretics; phenothiazines 
Drug-Induced Hyperthermia  
Amphetamines, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; "ecstasy"), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), salicylates, lithium, anticholinergics, sympathomimetics 
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome  
Phenothiazines; butyrophenones, including haloperidol and bromperidol; fluoxetine; loxapine; tricyclic dibenzodiazepines; metoclopramide; domperidone; thiothixene; molindone; withdrawal of dopaminergic agents 
Serotonin Syndrome  
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), tricyclic antidepressants 
Malignant Hyperthermia  
Inhalational anesthetics, succinylcholine 
Endocrinopathy  
Thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma 
Central Nervous System Damage  
Cerebral hemorrhage, status epilepticus, hypothalamic injury 
 


Source: After FJ Curley et al (eds): Intensive Care Medicine, 3rd ed. Boston, Little, Brown, 1996.
 

Heat stroke in association with a warm environment may be categorized as exertional or nonexertional. Exertional heat stroke typically occurs in individuals exercising at elevated ambient temperatures and/or humidity. In a dry environment and at maximal efficiency, sweating can dissipate 600 kcal/h, requiring the production of >1 L of sweat. Even in healthy individuals, dehydration or the use of common medications (e.g., over-the-counter antihistamines with anticholinergic side effects) may precipitate exertional heat stroke. Nonexertional heat stroke typically occurs in either very young or elderly individuals, particularly during heat waves. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, there were 7000 deaths attributed to heat injury in the United States from 1979 to 1997. The elderly, the bedridden, persons taking anticholinergic or antiparkinsonian drugs or diuretics, and individuals confined to poorly ventilated and non-air-conditioned environments are most susceptible.

Drug-induced hyperthermia has become increasingly common as a result of the increased use of prescription psychotropic drugs and illicit drugs. Drug-induced hyperthermia may be caused by monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), tricyclic antidepressants, and amphetamines and by the illicit use of phencyclidine (PCP), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, "ecstasy"), or cocaine.

Malignant hyperthermia occurs in individuals with an inherited abnormality of skeletal-muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum that causes a rapid increase in intracellular calcium levels in response to halothane and other inhalational anesthetics or to succinylcholine. Elevated temperature, increased muscle metabolism, muscle rigidity, rhabdomyolysis, acidosis, and cardiovascular instability develop within minutes. This rare condition is often fatal. The neuroleptic malignant syndrome occurs in the setting of the use of neuroleptic agents (antipsychotic phenothiazines, haloperidol, prochlorperazine, metoclopramide) or the withdrawal of dopaminergic drugs and is characterized by "lead-pipe" muscle rigidity, extrapyramidal side effects, autonomic dysregulation, and hyperthermia. This disorder appears to be caused by the inhibition of central dopamine receptors in the hypothalamus, which results in increased heat generation and decreased heat dissipation. The serotonin syndrome, seen with selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), MAOIs, and other serotonergic medications, has many features that overlap with those of the neuroleptic malignant syndrome (including hyperthermia) but may be distinguished by the presence of diarrhea, tremor, and myoclonus rather than lead-pipe rigidity. Thyrotoxicosis and pheochromocytoma also can cause increased thermogenesis.

It is important to distinguish between fever and hyperthermia since hyperthermia can be rapidly fatal and characteristically does not respond to antipyretics. In an emergency situation, however, making this distinction can be difficult. For example, in systemic sepsis, fever (hyperpyrexia) can be rapid in onset, and temperatures can exceed 40.5∼C (104.9∼F). Hyperthermia often is diagnosed on the basis of the events immediately preceding the elevation of core temperature〞e.g., heat exposure or treatment with drugs that interfere with thermoregulation. In patients with heat stroke syndromes and in those taking drugs that block sweating, the skin is hot but dry, whereas in fever the skin can be cold as a consequence of vasoconstriction. Antipyretics do not reduce the elevated temperature in hyperthermia, whereas in fever〞and even in hyperpyrexia〞adequate doses of either aspirin or acetaminophen usually result in some decrease in body temperature.
 
Pathogenesis of Fever

Pyrogens

The term pyrogen is used to describe any substance that causes fever. Exogenous pyrogens are derived from outside the patient; most are microbial products, microbial toxins, or whole microorganisms. The classic example of an exogenous pyrogen is the lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin) produced by all gram-negative bacteria. Pyrogenic products of gram-positive organisms include the enterotoxins of Staphylococcus aureus and the group A and B streptococcal toxins, also called superantigens. One staphylococcal toxin of clinical importance is that associated with isolates of S. aureus from patients with toxic shock syndrome. These products of staphylococci and streptococci cause fever in experimental animals when injected intravenously at concentrations of 1每10 g/kg. Endotoxin is a highly pyrogenic molecule in humans: When it is injected intravenously into volunteers, a dose of 2每3 ng/kg produces fever, leukocytosis, acute-phase proteins, and generalized symptoms of malaise.

Pyrogenic Cytokines

Cytokines are small proteins (molecular mass, 10,000每20,000 Da) that regulate immune, inflammatory, and hematopoietic processes. For example, the elevated leukocytosis seen in several infections with an absolute neutrophilia is the result of the cytokines interleukin (IL) 1 and IL-6. Some cytokines also cause fever; formerly referred to as endogenous pyrogens, they are now called pyrogenic cytokines. The pyrogenic cytokines include IL-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), ciliary neurotropic factor (CNTF), and interferon (IFN) . (IL-18, a member of the IL-1 family, does not appear to be a pyrogenic cytokine.) Other pyrogenic cytokines probably exist. Each cytokine is encoded by a separate gene, and each pyrogenic cytokine has been shown to cause fever in laboratory animals and in humans. When injected into humans, IL-1 and TNF produce fever at low doses (10每100 ng/kg); in contrast, for IL-6, a dose of 1每10 g/kg is required for fever production.

A wide spectrum of bacterial and fungal products induce the synthesis and release of pyrogenic cytokines, as do viruses. However, fever can be a manifestation of disease in the absence of microbial infection. For example, inflammatory processes, trauma, tissue necrosis, and antigen-antibody complexes can induce the production of IL-1, TNF, and/or IL-6, which〞individually or in combination〞trigger the hypothalamus to raise the set point to febrile levels.

Elevation of the Hypothalamic Set Point by Cytokines

During fever, levels of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2 ) are elevated in hypothalamic tissue and the third cerebral ventricle. The concentrations of PGE2 are highest near the circumventricular vascular organs (organum vasculosum of lamina terminalis)〞networks of enlarged capillaries surrounding the hypothalamic regulatory centers. Destruction of these organs reduces the ability of pyrogens to produce fever. Most studies in animals have failed to show, however, that pyrogenic cytokines pass from the circulation into the brain itself. Thus, it appears that both exogenous and endogenous pyrogens interact with the endothelium of these capillaries and that this interaction is the first step in initiating fever〞i.e., in raising the set point to febrile levels.

The key events in the production of fever are illustrated in Fig. 16-1. As has been mentioned, several cell types can produce pyrogenic cytokines. Pyrogenic cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF are released from the cells and enter the systemic circulation. Although the systemic effects of these circulating cytokines lead to fever by inducing the synthesis of PGE2 , they also induce PGE2 in peripheral tissues. The increase in PGE2 in the periphery accounts for the nonspecific myalgias and arthralgias that often accompany fever. It is thought that some systemic PGE2 escapes destruction by the lung and gains access to the hypothalamus via the internal carotid. However, it is the elevation of PGE2 in the brain that starts the process of raising the hypothalamic set point for core temperature.

Figure 16-1

 
 
 
Chronology of events required for the induction of fever. AMP, adenosine 5'-monophosphate; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; PGE2 , prostaglandin E2 ; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
 

There are four receptors for PGE2 , and each signals the cell in different ways. Of the four receptors, the third (EP-3) is essential for fever: when the gene for this receptor is deleted in mice, no fever follows the injection of IL-1 or endotoxin. Deletion of the other PGE2 receptor genes leaves the fever mechanism intact. Although PGE2 is essential for fever, it is not a neurotransmitter. Rather, the release of PGE2 from the brain side of the hypothalamic endothelium triggers the PGE2 receptor on glial cells, and this stimulation results in the rapid release of cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP), which is a neurotransmitter. As shown in Fig. 16-1, the release of cyclic AMP from the glial cells activates neuronal endings from the thermoregulatory center that extend into the area. The elevation of cyclic AMP is thought to account for changes in the hypothalamic set point either directly or indirectly (by inducing the release of neurotransmitters). Distinct receptors for microbial products are located on the hypothalamic endothelium. These receptors are called Toll-like receptors and are similar in many ways to IL-1 receptors. The direct activation of Toll-like receptors also results in PGE2 production and fever.

Production of Cytokines in the CNS

Cytokines produced in the brain may account for the hyperpyrexia of CNS hemorrhage, trauma, or infection. Viral infections of the CNS induce microglial and possibly neuronal production of IL-1, TNF, and IL-6. In experimental animals, the concentration of a cytokine required to cause fever is several orders of magnitude lower with direct injection into the brain substance or brain ventricles than with systemic injection. Therefore, cytokines produced in the CNS can raise the hypothalamic set point, bypassing the circumventricular organs. CNS cytokines probably account for the hyperpyrexia of CNS hemorrhage, trauma, or infection.

Approach to the Patient: Fever or Hyperthermia

Physical Examination

The chronology of events preceding the fever (e.g., exposure to other infected individuals or to vectors of disease) should be ascertained. Electronic devices for measuring oral, tympanic membrane, and rectal temperatures are reliable, but the same site should be used consistently to monitor a febrile disease. Moreover, physicians should be aware that newborns, elderly patients, patients with chronic hepatic or renal failure, and patients taking glucocorticoids may have infections in the absence of fever.

Laboratory Tests

The workup should include a complete blood count; a differential count should be performed manually or with an instrument sensitive to the identification of juvenile or band forms, toxic granulations, and D?hle bodies, which are suggestive of bacterial infection. Neutropenia may be present with some viral diseases.

Measurement of circulating cytokines in patients with fever is of little use since levels of pyrogenic cytokines in the circulation often are below the detection limit of the assay or do not coincide with fever. In patients with low-grade fevers, the most valuable measurements are C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. These markers of inflammatory processes are particularly helpful in detecting the possible presence of occult disease. Acute-phase reactants are discussed in Chap. 271.

Fever in Recipients of Anticytokine Therapy

With the increasing use of anticytokines to reduce the activity of IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, or TNF in Crohn's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, or psoriasis, the potential of these therapies to blunt the febrile response must be considered. Chronic administration of anticytokines to block cytokine activity has the distinct clinical drawback of lowering the level of host defenses against both routine bacterial and opportunistic infections. The opportunistic infections reported in patients treated with agents that neutralize TNF- are similar to those reported in the HIV-1-infected population (e.g., new infection with or reactivation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with dissemination). In nearly all reported cases of infection associated with anticytokine therapy, fever is among the presenting signs. However, the extent to which the febrile response is blunted in these patients remains unknown. This situation is similar to that in patients receiving high-dose glucocorticoid therapy or anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen. Therefore, low-grade fever is of considerable concern in patients receiving anticytokine therapies. The physician must undertake early and rigorous diagnostic evaluation of these patients.

Treatment: Fever or Hyperthermia

The Decision to Treat Fever

Most fevers are associated with self-limited infections, such as common viral diseases. The use of antipyretics is not contraindicated in these infections: there is no significant clinical evidence that antipyretics delay the resolution of viral or bacterial infections, nor is there evidence that fever facilitates recovery from infection or acts as an adjuvant to the immune system. In short, routine treatment of fever and its symptoms with antipyretics does no harm and does not slow the resolution of common viral and bacterial infections.

However, with bacterial infections, withholding antipyretic therapy can be helpful in evaluating the effectiveness of a particular antibiotic, particularly in the absence of positive cultures of the infecting organism. Therefore, the routine use of antipyretics can mask an inadequately treated bacterial infection. Withholding antipyretics in some cases may facilitate the diagnosis of an unusual febrile disease. Temperature-pulse dissociation (relative bradycardia) occurs in typhoid fever, brucellosis, leptospirosis, some drug-induced fevers, and factitious fever. In newborns, the elderly, patients with chronic hepatic or renal failure, and patients taking glucocorticoids, fever may not be present despite infection. Hypothermia can be observed in patients with septic shock.

Some infections have characteristic patterns in which febrile episodes are separated by intervals of normal temperature. For example, Plasmodium vivax causes fever every third day, whereas fever occurs every fourth day with P. malariae. Another relapsing fever is related to Borrelia infection, with days of fever followed by a several-day afebrile period and then a relapse of days of fever. In the Pel-Ebstein pattern, fever lasting 3每10 days is followed by afebrile periods of 3每10 days; this pattern can be classic for Hodgkin's disease and other lymphomas. In cyclic neutropenia, fevers occur every 21 days and accompany the neutropenia. There is no periodicity of fever in patients with familial Mediterranean fever. However, these patterns have limited or no diagnostic value compared with specific and rapid laboratory tests.

Anticytokine Therapy to Reduce Fever in Autoimmune and Autoinflammatory Diseases

Recurrent fever is documented at some point in most autoimmune diseases but in all autoinflammatory diseases. Although fever also can be a manifestation of autoimmune diseases, recurrent fevers are characteristic of autoinflammatory diseases. The autoinflammatory diseases (Table 16-2) include adult and juvenile Still's disease, familial Mediterranean fever, and hyper-IgD syndrome. In addition to recurrent fevers, neutrophilia and serosal inflammation characterize autoinflammatory diseases. The fevers associated with these illnesses are reduced dramatically by blocking of IL-1 activity. Anticytokines therefore reduce fever in autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases. Although fevers in autoinflammatory diseases are mediated by IL-1, these patients also respond to antipyretics.

Table 16-2 Autoinflammatory Diseases

 
 
Adult and juvenile Still's disease 
Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS) 
Familial Mediterranean fever 
Hyper-IgD syndrome 
Beh?et's syndrome 
Macrophage activation syndrome 
Normocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis 
Antisynthetase myositis 
PAPAa syndrome
  
Blau syndrome 
Gouty arthritis 
 


aPyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne.
 

Mechanisms of Antipyretic Agents

The reduction of fever by lowering of the elevated hypothalamic set point is a direct function of reducing the level of PGE2 in the thermoregulatory center. The synthesis of PGE2 depends on the constitutively expressed enzyme cyclooxygenase. The substrate for cyclooxygenase is arachidonic acid released from the cell membrane, and this release is the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of PGE2. Therefore, inhibitors of cyclooxygenase are potent antipyretics. The antipyretic potency of various drugs is directly correlated with the inhibition of brain cyclooxygenase. Acetaminophen is a poor cyclooxygenase inhibitor in peripheral tissue and lacks noteworthy anti-inflammatory activity; in the brain, however, acetaminophen is oxidized by the p450 cytochrome system, and the oxidized form inhibits cyclooxygenase activity. Moreover, in the brain, the inhibition of another enzyme, COX-3, by acetaminophen may account for the antipyretic effect of this agent. However, COX-3 is not found outside the CNS.

Oral aspirin and acetaminophen are equally effective in reducing fever in humans. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen and specific inhibitors of COX-2 are also excellent antipyretics. Chronic high-dose therapy with antipyretics such as aspirin or any NSAID does not reduce normal core body temperature. Thus, PGE2 appears to play no role in normal thermoregulation.

As effective antipyretics, glucocorticoids act at two levels. First, similar to the cyclooxygenase inhibitors, glucocorticoids reduce PGE2 synthesis by inhibiting the activity of phospholipase A2, which is needed to release arachidonic acid from the cell membrane. Second, glucocorticoids block the transcription of the mRNA for the pyrogenic cytokines. Limited experimental evidence indicates that ibuprofen and COX-2 inhibitors reduce IL-1-induced IL-6 production and may contribute to the antipyretic activity of NSAIDs.

Regimens for the Treatment of Fever

The objectives in treating fever are first to reduce the elevated hypothalamic set point and second to facilitate heat loss. Reducing fever with antipyretics also reduces systemic symptoms of headache, myalgias, and arthralgias.

Oral aspirin and NSAIDs effectively reduce fever but can adversely affect platelets and the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, use of acetaminophen is preferred as an antipyretic. In children, acetaminophen or oral ibuprofen must be used because aspirin increases the risk of Reye's syndrome. If the patient cannot take oral antipyretics, parenteral preparations of NSAIDs and rectal suppositories of various antipyretics can be used.

Treatment of fever in some patients is highly recommended. Fever increases the demand for oxygen (i.e., for every increase of 1∼C over 37∼C, there is a 13% increase in oxygen consumption) and can aggravate the condition of patients with preexisting impairment of cardiac, pulmonary, or CNS function. Children with a history of febrile or nonfebrile seizure should be treated aggressively to reduce fever. However, it is unclear what triggers the febrile seizure, and there is no correlation between absolute temperature elevation and onset of a febrile seizure in susceptible children.

In hyperpyrexia, the use of cooling blankets facilitates the reduction of temperature; however, cooling blankets should not be used without oral antipyretics. In hyperpyretic patients with CNS disease or trauma (CNS bleeding), reducing core temperature mitigates the detrimental effects of high temperature on the brain.

Treating Hyperthermia

A high core temperature in a patient with an appropriate history (e.g., environmental heat exposure or treatment with anticholinergic or neuroleptic drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, succinylcholine, or halothane) along with appropriate clinical findings (dry skin, hallucinations, delirium, pupil dilation, muscle rigidity, and/or elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase) suggests hyperthermia. Antipyretics are of no use in treating hyperthermia. Physical cooling with sponging, fans, cooling blankets, and even ice baths should be initiated immediately in conjunction with the administration of IV fluids and appropriate pharmacologic agents (see below). If sufficient cooling is not achieved by external means, internal cooling can be achieved by gastric or peritoneal lavage with iced saline. In extreme circumstances, hemodialysis or even cardiopulmonary bypass with cooling of blood may be performed.

Malignant hyperthermia should be treated immediately with cessation of anesthesia and IV administration of dantrolene sodium. The recommended dose of dantrolene is 1每2.5 mg/kg given intravenously every 6 h for at least 24每48 h〞until oral dantrolene can be administered, if needed. Dantrolene at similar doses is indicated in the neuroleptic malignant syndrome and in drug-induced hyperthermia and may even be useful in the hyperthermia of the serotonin syndrome and thyrotoxicosis. The neuroleptic malignant syndrome also may be treated with bromocriptine, levodopa, amantadine, or nifedipine or by induction of muscle paralysis with curare and pancuronium. Tricyclic antidepressant overdose may be treated with physostigmine.
 
Further Readings

De Koning HD et al: Beneficial response to anakinra and thalidomide in Schnitzler's syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis 65:542, 2006 

 
Dinarello CA: Immunological and inflammatory functions of the interleukin-1 family. Annu Rev Immunol 27:519, 2009 [PMID: 19302047] 

 
〞〞〞: Infection, fever, and exogenous and endogenous pyrogens: Some concepts have changed. J Endotoxin Res 10:202, 2004 

 
Hawkins PN et al: Spectrum of clinical features in Muckle-Wells syndrome and response to anakinra. Arthritis Rheum 50:607, 2004 [PMID: 14872505] 

 
Hoffman HM et al: Prevention of cold-associated acute inflammation in familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome by interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Lancet 364:1779, 2004 [PMID: 15541451] 

 
Kastner DL et al: Autoinflammatory disease reloaded: A clinical perspective. Cell 140:784; 2010 

 
Keane J et al: Tuberculosis associated with infliximab, a tumor necrosis factor--neutralizing agent. N Engl J Med 345:1098, 2001 [PMID: 11596589] 

 
Pascual V et al: Role of interleukin-1 (IL-1) in the pathogenesis of systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis and clinical response to IL-1 blockade. J Exp Med 201:1479, 2005 [PMID: 15851489] 

 
Simon A, van der Meer JW: Pathogenesis of familial periodic fever syndromes or hereditary autoinflammatory syndromes. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 292:R86, 2007 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Beneficial response to interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in TRAPS. Am J Med 117:208, 2004 

 
Wallis RS et al: Differential effects of TNF blockers on TB immunity. Ann Rheum Dis 64(Suppl 3):132, 2005 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Granulomatous infectious diseases associated with tumor necrosis factor antagonists. Clin Infect Dis 38:1261, 2004 
 
 

^^
Fever and Rash: Introduction

The acutely ill patient with fever and rash often presents a diagnostic challenge for physicians. The distinctive appearance of an eruption in concert with a clinical syndrome may facilitate a prompt diagnosis and the institution of life-saving therapy or critical infection-control interventions. Representative images of many of the rashes discussed in this chapter are included in Chap. e7.

Approach to the Patient: Fever and Rash

A thorough history of patients with fever and rash includes the following relevant information: immune status, medications taken within the previous month, specific travel history, immunization status, exposure to domestic pets and other animals, history of animal (including arthropod) bites, existence of cardiac abnormalities, presence of prosthetic material, recent exposure to ill individuals, and exposure to sexually transmitted diseases. The history should also include the site of the onset of the rash and its direction and rate of spread.

A thorough physical examination entails close attention to the rash, with an assessment and precise definition of its salient features. First, it is critical to determine the type of lesions that make up the eruption. Macules are flat lesions defined by an area of changed color (i.e., a blanchable erythema). Papules are raised, solid lesions <5 mm in diameter; plaques are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a flat, plateaulike surface; and nodules are lesions >5 mm in diameter with a more rounded configuration. Wheals (urticaria, hives) are papules or plaques that are pale pink and may appear annular (ringlike) as they enlarge; classic (nonvasculitic) wheals are transient, lasting only 24 h in any defined area. Vesicles (<5 mm) and bullae (>5 mm) are circumscribed, elevated lesions containing fluid. Pustules are raised lesions containing purulent exudate; vesicular processes such as varicella or herpes simplex may evolve to pustules. Nonpalpable purpura is a flat lesion that is due to bleeding into the skin. If <3 mm in diameter, the purpuric lesions are termed petechiae; if >3 mm, they are termed ecchymoses. Palpable purpura is a raised lesion that is due to inflammation of the vessel wall (vasculitis) with subsequent hemorrhage. An ulcer is a defect in the skin extending at least into the upper layer of the dermis, and an eschar (tache noire) is a necrotic lesion covered with a black crust.

Other pertinent features of rashes include their configuration (i.e., annular or target), the arrangement of their lesions, and their distribution (i.e., central or peripheral).

For further discussion, see Chaps. 51, 53, and 121.
 
Classification of Rash

This chapter reviews rashes that reflect systemic disease, but it does not include localized skin eruptions (i.e., cellulitis, impetigo) that may also be associated with fever (Chap. 125). This chapter does not intend to be all-inclusive, but it covers the most important and most common diseases associated with fever and rash. Rashes are classified herein on the basis of the morphology and distribution of lesions. For practical purposes, this classification system is based on the most typical disease presentations. However, morphology may vary as rashes evolve, and the presentation of diseases with rashes is subject to many variations (Chap. 53). For instance, the classic petechial rash of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) (Chap. 174) may initially consist of blanchable erythematous macules distributed peripherally; at times, however, the rash associated with RMSF may not be predominantly acral or no rash may develop at all.

Diseases with fever and rash may be classified by type of eruption: centrally distributed maculopapular, peripheral, confluent desquamative erythematous, vesiculobullous, urticaria-like, nodular, purpuric, ulcerated, or eschar. Diseases are listed by these categories in Table 17-1, and many are highlighted in the text. However, for a more detailed discussion of each disease associated with a rash, the reader is referred to the chapter dealing with that specific disease. (Reference chapters are cited in the text and listed in Table 17-1.)

Table 17-1 Diseases Associated with Fever and Rash

 
 
Disease Etiology Description Group Affected/Epidemiologic Factors Clinical Syndrome Chapter 
Centrally distributed maculopapular eruptions  
Acute meningococcemiaa  〞 〞 〞 〞 143 
Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DIHS/DRESS)b  〞 〞 〞 〞 55 
Rubeola (measles, first disease) Paramyxovirus Discrete lesions that become confluent as rash spreads from hairline downward, sparing palms and soles; lasts 3 days; Koplik's spots Nonimmune individuals Cough, conjunctivitis, coryza, severe prostration 192 
Rubella (German measles, third disease) Togavirus Spreads from hairline downward, clearing as it spreads; Forschheimer spots Nonimmune individuals Adenopathy, arthritis 193 
Erythema infectiosum (fifth disease) Human parvovirus B19 Brightred "slapped-cheeks" appearance followed by lacy reticular rash that waxes and wanes over 3 weeks; rarely, papular-purpuric "gloves-and-socks" syndrome on hands and feet Most common among children 3每12 years old; occurs in winter and spring Mild fever; arthritis in adults; rash following resolution of fever 184 
Exanthem subitum (roseola, sixth disease) Human herpesvirus 6 Diffuse maculopapular eruption over trunk and neck; resolves within 2 days Usually affects children <3 years old Rash following resolution of fever; similar to Boston exanthem (echovirus 16); febrile seizures may occur 182 
Primary HIV infection HIV Nonspecific diffuse macules and papules; less commonly, urticarial or vesicular oral or genital ulcers Individuals recently infected with HIV Pharyngitis, adenopathy, arthralgias 189 
Infectious mononucleosis Epstein-Barr virus Diffuse maculopapular eruption (5% of cases; 90% if ampicillin is given); urticaria, petechiae in some cases; periorbital edema (50%); palatal petechiae (25%) Adolescents, young adults Hepatosplenomegaly, pharyngitis, cervical lymphadenopathy, atypical lymphocytosis, heterophile antibody 181 
Other viral exanthems Echoviruses 2, 4, 9, 11, 16, 19, 25; coxsackieviruses A9, B1, B5; etc. Wide range of skin findings that may mimic rubella or measles Affect children more commonly than adults Nonspecific viral syndromes 191 
Exanthematous drug-induced eruption Drugs (antibiotics, anticonvulsants, diuretics, etc.) Intensely pruritic, brightred macules and papules, symmetric on trunk and extremities; may become confluent Occurs 2每3 days after exposure in previously sensitized individuals; otherwise, after 2每3 weeks (but can occur anytime, even shortly after drug is discontinued) Variable findings: fever and eosinophilia 55 
Epidemic typhus Rickettsia prowazekii  Maculopapular eruption appearing in axillae, spreading to trunk and later to extremities; usually spares face, palms, soles; evolves from blanchable macules to confluent eruption with petechiae; rash evanescent in recrudescent typhus (Brill-Zinsser disease) Exposure to body lice; occurrence of recrudescent typhus as relapse after 30每50 years Headache, myalgias; 10每40% mortality if untreated; milder clinical presentation in recrudescent form 174 
Endemic (murine) typhus Rickettsia typhi  Maculopapular eruption, usually sparing palms, soles Exposure to rat or cat fleas Headache, myalgias 174 
Scrub typhus Orientia tsutsugamushi  Diffuse macular rash starting on trunk; eschar at site of mite bite Endemic in South Pacific, Australia, Asia; transmitted by mites Headache, myalgias, regional adenopathy; mortality up to 30% if untreated 174 
Rickettsial spotted fevers Rickettsia conorii (boutonneuse fever), Rickettsia australis (North Queensland tick typhus), Rickettsia sibirica (Siberian tick typhus), and others  Eschar common at bite site; maculopapular (rarely, vesicular and petechial) eruption on proximal extremities, spreading to trunk and face Exposure to ticks; R. conorii in Mediterranean region, India, Africa; R. australis in Australia; R. sibirica in Siberia, Mongolia  Headache, myalgias, regional adenopathy 174 
Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosisc  Ehrlichia chaffeensis  Maculopapular eruption (40% of cases), involves trunk and extremities; may be petechial Tickborne; most common in U.S. Southeast, southern Midwest, and mid-Atlantic regions Headache, myalgias, leukopenia 174 
Leptospirosis Leptospira interrogans  Maculopapular eruption; conjunctivitis; scleral hemorrhage in some cases Exposure to water contaminated with animal urine Myalgias; aseptic meningitis; fulminant form?: icterohemorrhagic fever (Weil's disease)  171 
Lyme disease Borrelia burgdorferi  Papule expanding to erythematous annular lesion with central clearing (erythema migrans; average diameter, 15 cm), sometimes with concentric rings, sometimes with indurated or vesicular center; multiple secondary erythema migrans lesions in some cases Bite of tick vector Headache, myalgias, chills, photophobia occurring acutely; CNS disease, myocardial disease, arthritis weeks to months later in some cases 173 
Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI, Master's disease) Borrelia lonestari  Similar to erythema migrans of Lyme disease with several differences, including: multiple secondary lesions less likely; lesions tending to be smaller (average diameter, 8 cm); central clearing more likely Bite of tick vector Amblyomma americanum (Lone Star tick); often found in regions where Lyme disease is uncommon, including southern United States  Compared with Lyme disease: fewer constitutional symptoms, tick bite more likely to be recalled; other Lyme disease sequelae lacking 173 
Typhoid fever Salmonella typhi  Transient, blanchable erythematous macules and papules, 2每4 mm, usually on trunk (rose spots) Ingestion of contaminated food or water (rare in U.S.) Variable abdominal pain and diarrhea; headache, myalgias, hepatosplenomegaly 153 
Dengue feverd  Dengue virus (4 serotypes; flaviviruses) Rash in 50% of cases; initially diffuse flushing; midway through illness, onset of maculopapular rash, which begins on trunk and spreads centrifugally to extremities and face; pruritus, hyperesthesia in some cases; after defervescence, petechiae on extremities in some cases Occurs in tropics and subtropics; transmitted by mosquito Headache, musculoskeletal pain ("breakbone fever"); leukopenia; occasionally biphasic ("saddleback") fever 196 
Ratbite fever (sodoku) Spirillum minus  Eschar at bite site; then blotchy violaceous or redbrown rash involving trunk and extremities Rat bite; primarily found in Asia; rare in U.S. Regional adenopathy, recurrent fevers if untreated e24 
Relapsing fever Borrelia species  Central rash at end of febrile episode; petechiae in some cases Exposure to ticks or body lice Recurrent fever, headache, myalgias, hepatosplenomegaly 172 
Erythema marginatum (rheumatic fever) Group A Streptococcus  Erythematous annular papules and plaques occurring as polycyclic lesions in waves over trunk, proximal extremities; evolving and resolving within hours Patients with rheumatic fever Pharyngitis preceding polyarthritis, carditis, subcuta-neous nodules, chorea 322 
Systemic lupus erythematosus Autoimmune disease Macular and papular erythema, often in sun-exposed areas; discoid lupus lesions (local atrophy, scale, pigmentary changes); periungual telangiectasis; malar rash; vasculitis sometimes causing urticaria, palpable purpura; oral erosions in some cases Most common in young to middle-aged women; flares precipitated by sun exposure Arthritis; cardiac, pulmonary, renal, hematologic, and vasculitic disease 319 
Still's disease Autoimmune disease Transient 2- to 5-mm erythematous papules appearing at height of fever on trunk, proximal extremities; lesions evanescent Children and young adults High spiking fever, polyarthritis, splenomegaly; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, >100 mm/h 337 
African trypanosomiasis Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense/gambiense  Blotchy or annular erythematous macular and papular rash (trypanid), primarily on trunk; pruritus; chancre at site of tsetse fly bite may precede rash by several weeks Tsetse fly bite in East (T. brucei rho-desiense) or West (T. brucei gambiense) Africa  Hemolymphatic disease followed by meningoencephali-tis; Winterbottom's sign (posterior cervical lymphadenopathy) (T. brucei gambiense)  213 
Arcanobacterial pharyngitis Arcanobacterium (Corynebacterium) haemolyticum  Diffuse, erythematous, maculopapular eruption involving trunk and proximal extremities; may desquamate Children and young adults Exudative pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy 138 
Peripheral eruptions  
Chronic meningococcemia, disseminated gonococcal infection,a human parvovirus B19 infectione  〞 〞 〞 〞 143, 144, 184 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever Rickettsia rickettsii  Rash beginning on wrists and ankles and spreading centripetally; appears on palms and soles later in disease; lesion evolution from blanchable macules to petechiae Tick vector; wide-spread but more common in south-eastern and southwest-central U.S. Headache, myalgias, abdominal pain; mortality up to 40% if un-treated 174 
Secondary syphilis Treponema pallidum  Coincident primary chancre in 10% of cases; copper-colored, scaly papular eruption, diffuse but prominent on palms and soles; rash never vesicular in adults; condyloma latum, mucous patches, and alopecia in some cases Sexually transmitted Fever, constitutional symptoms 169 
Chikungunya fever Chikungunya virus Maculopapular eruption; prominent on upper extremities and face, but can also occur on trunk and lower extremities Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus mosquito bites; primarily in Africa and Indian Ocean region  Severe polyarticular, migratory arthralgias, especially involving small joints (e.g., hands, wrists, an-kles) 196 
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease Coxsackievirus A16 most common cause Tender vesicles, erosions in mouth; 0.25-cm papules on hands and feet with rim of erythema evolving into tender vesicles Summer and fall; primarily children <10 years old; multiple family members Transient fever 191 
Erythema multiforme (EM) Infection, drugs, idiopathic causes Target lesions (central erythema surrounded by area of clearing and another rim of erythema) up to 2 cm; symmetric on knees, elbows, palms, soles; spreads centripetally; papular, sometimes vesicular; when extensive and involving mucous membranes, termed EM major  Herpes simplex virus or Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection; drug intake (i.e., sulfa, phenytoin, penicillin) 50% younger than 20 years old; fever more common in most severe form, EM major, which can be confused with Stevens-Johnson syndrome (but EM major lacks prominent skin sloughing) 〞f  
Rat-bite fever (Haverhill fever) Streptobacillus monili-formis  Maculopapular eruption over palms, soles, and extremities; tends to be more severe at joints; eruption sometimes becoming generalized; may be purpuric; may desqua-mate Rat bite, inges-tion of contami-nated food Myalgias; arthritis (50%); fever recur-rence in some cases e24 
Bacterial endocarditis Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, etc.  Subacute course: Osler's nodes (tender pink nodules on finger or toe pads); petechiae on skin and mucosa; splinter hemorrhages.

Acute course (Staphylococcus aureus): Janeway lesions (painless erythematous or hemorrhagic macules, usually on palms and soles)
 Abnormal heart valve (Streptococcus), intravenous drug use  New or changing heart murmur 124 
Confluent desquamative erythemas  
Scarlet fever (second disease) Group A Streptococcus (pyrogenic exotoxins A, B, C)  Diffuse blanchable erythema beginning on face and spreading to trunk and extremities; circumoral pallor; "sandpaper" texture to skin; accentuation of linear erythema in skin folds (Pastia's lines); enanthem of white evolving into red "strawberry" tongue; desquamation in second week Most common among children 2每10 years old; usually follows group A streptococcal pharyngitis Fever, pharyngitis, headache 136 
Kawasaki disease Idiopathic causes Rash similar to scarlet fever (scarlatiniform) or erythema multiforme; fissuring of lips, strawberry tongue; conjunctivitis; edema of hands, feet; desquamation later in disease Children <8 years old Cervical adenopathy, pharyngitis, coronary artery vasculitis 53, 326 
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome Group A Streptococcus (associated with pyrogenic exotoxin A and/or B or certain M types)  When present, rash often scarlatiniform May occur in setting of severe group A streptococcal infections (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis, bacteremia, pneumonia) Multiorgan failure, hypotension; 30% mortality rate 136 
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome S. aureus (toxic shock syndrome toxin 1, enterotoxin B or C) Diffuse erythema involving palms; pronounced erythema of mucosal surfaces; conjunctivitis; desquamation 7每10 days into illness Colonization with toxin-producing S. aureus  Fever >39∼C (>102∼F), hypotension, multiorgan dysfunction 135 
Staphylococcal scaldedskin syndrome S. aureus, phage group II  Diffuse tender erythema, often with bullae and desquamation; Nikolsky's sign Colonization with toxin-producing S. aureus; occurs in children <10 years old (termed "Ritter's disease" in neonates) or adults with renal dysfunction Irritability; nasal or conjunctival secretions 135 
Exfoliative erythroderma syndrome Underlying psoriasis, eczema, drug eruption, mycosis fungoides Diffuse erythema (often scaling) interspersed with lesions of underlying condition Usually occurs in adults over age 50; more common among men Fever, chills (i.e., difficulty with thermoregulation); lymphadenopathy 52, 55 
DIHS/DRESS Aromatic anticonvulsants; other drugs, including sulfonamides, minocycline Maculopapular eruption (mimicking exanthematous drug rash) sometimes progressing to exfoliative erythroderma; profound edema, especially facial; pustules may occur Individuals genetically unable to detoxify arene oxides (anticonvulsants), patients with slow N-acetylating capacity (sulfonamides)  Lymphadenopathy, multiorgan failure (especially hepatic), eosinophilia, atypical lymphocytes; mimics sepsis 55 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) Drugs (80% of cases; often allopurinol, anticonvulsants, antibiotics), infection, idiopathic Erythematous and purpuric macules, sometimes targetoid, or diffuse erythema progressing to bullae, with sloughing and necrosis of entire epidermis; Nikolsky's sign; involves mucosal surfaces; TEN (>30% epidermal necrosis) is maximal form; SJS involves <10%; SJS/TEN overlap involves 10每30% of epidermis Uncommon among children; more common among patients with HIV infection, SLE, certain HLA types, or slow acetylators Dehydration, sepsis sometimes resulting from lack of normal skin integrity; up to 30% mortality 55 
Vesiculobullous or pustular eruptions  
Hand-foot-and-mouth syndromeg; staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome; toxic epidermal necrolysisb;DIHS/DRESSb  〞 〞 〞 〞 〞f  
Varicella (chicken-pox) Varicella-zoster virus Macules (2每3 mm) evolving into papules, then vesicles (sometimes umbilicated), on an erythematous base ("dewdrops on a rose petal"); pustules then forming and crusting; lesions appearing in crops; may involve scalp, mouth; intensely pruritic Usually affects children; 10% of adults susceptible; most common in late winter and spring Malaise; generally mild disease in healthy children; more severe disease with complications in adults and immunocompromised children 180 
Pseudomonas "hot-tub" folliculitis  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  Pruritic erythematous follicular, papular, vesicular, or pustular lesions that may involve axillae, buttocks, abdomen, and especially areas occluded by bathing suits; can mani-fest as tender isolated nodules on palmar or plantar surfaces (the latter designated "Pseudomonas hot-foot syndrome")  Bathers in hot tubs or swimming pools; occurs in out-breaks Earache, sore eyes and/or throat; generally self-limited 152 
Variola (smallpox) Variola major virus Red macules on tongue, palate evolving to papules and vesicles; skin macules evolving to papules, then vesicles, then pustules over 1 week, with subsequent lesion crusting; lesions initially appearing on face and spreading centrifugally from trunk to extremities; differs from varicella in that (1) skin lesions in any given area are at same stage of development and (2) there is a prominent distribution of lesions on face and extremities (including palms, soles) Nonimmune individuals exposed to smallpox Prodrome of fever, headache, backache, myalgias; vomiting in 50% of cases 221 
Primary herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection HSV Erythema rapidly followed by hallmark painful grouped vesicles that may evolve into pustules that ulcerate, especially on mucosal surfaces; lesions at site of inoculation: commonly gingivostomatitis for HSV-1 and genital lesions for HSV-2; recurrent disease milder (e.g., herpes labialis does not involve oral mucosa)  Primary infection most common among children and young adults for HSV-1 and among sexually active young adults for HSV-2; no fever in recurrent infection Regional lymphadenopathy 179 
Disseminated herpesvirus infection Varicella-zoster virus or HSV Generalized vesicles that can evolve to pustules and ulcerations; individual lesions similar for varicella-zoster and HSV. Zoster cutaneous dissemination: >25 lesions extending outside involved dermatome.

HSV: extensive, progressive mucocutaneous lesions that may occur in absence of dissemination, sometimes disseminate in eczematous skin (eczema herpeticum); HSV visceral dissemination may occur with only localized mucocutaneous disease; in disseminated neonatal disease, skin lesions diagnostically helpful when present, but rash absent in a substantial minority of cases
 Patients with immunosuppression, eczema; neonates Visceral organ involvement (especially liver) in some cases; neonatal disease particularly severe 179, 180, 381 
Rickettsialpox Rickettsia akari  Eschar found at site of mite bite; generalized rash involving face, trunk, extremities; may involve palms and soles; <100 papules and plaques (2每10 mm); tops of lesions developing vesicles that may evolve into pustules Seen in urban settings; transmitted by mouse mites Headache, myalgias, regional adenopathy; mild disease 174 
Acute generalized eruptive pustulosis (AGEP) Drugs (mostly anticonvulsants or antimicrobials); also viral Tiny sterile nonfollicular pustules on erythematous, edema-tous skin; begins on face and in body folds, then becomes general-ized Appears 2每21 days after start of drug therapy, depend-ing on whether previously sensitized Acute fever, pruritus, leukocytosis 55 
Disseminated Vibrio vulnificus infection  V. vulnificus  Erythematous lesions evolving into hemorrhagic bullae and then into necrotic ulcers Patients with cirrhosis, diabetes, renal failure; ex-posure by ingestion of contaminated saltwater, seafood Hypotension; 50% mortality 156 
Ecthyma gangrenosum P. aeruginosa, other gram-negative rods, fungi  Indurated plaque evolving into hemorrhagic bulla or pustule that sloughs, resulting in eschar formation; erythema-tous halo; most common in axillary, groin, perianal regions Usually affects neutropenic patients; occurs in up to 28% of individuals with Pseudomonas bacteremia  Clinical signs of sepsis 152 
Urticaria-like eruptions  
Urticarial vasculitis Serum sickness, often due to infection (including hepatitis B, enteroviral, para-sitic), drugs; connective tissue disease Erythematous, edematous "urticaria-like" plaques, pruritic or burning; unlike urticaria: typical lesion duration >24 h (up to 5 days) and lack of complete lesion blanching with compression due to hemorrhage Patients with serum sickness (including hepatitis B), connective tissue disease Fever variable; arthralgias/arthritis 326f  
Nodular eruptions  
Disseminated infection Fungi (e.g., candidiasis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, sporotrichosis, coccidioidomycosis); mycobacteria Subcutaneous nodules (up to 3 cm); fluctuance, draining common with mycobacteria; necrotic nodules (extremities, periorbital or nasal regions) common with Aspergillus, Mucor  Immunocompromised hosts (i.e., bone marrow transplant recipients, patients undergoing chemotherapy, HIV-infected patients, alcoholics) Features vary with organism 〞f  
Erythema nodosum (septal panniculitis) Infections (e.g., streptococcal, fungal, mycobacterial, yersinial); drugs (e.g., sulfas, penicillins, oral contraceptives); sarcoidosis; idiopathic causes Large, violaceous, nonulcerative, subcutaneous nodules; exquisitely tender; usually on lower legs but also on upper extremities More common among girls and women 15每30 years old Arthralgias (50%); features vary with associated condi-tion 〞f  
Sweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis) Yersinial infection; lymphoproliferative disorders; idiopathic causes Tender red or blue edematous nodules giving impression of vesiculation; usually on face, neck, upper extremities; when on lower extremities, may mimic erythema nodosum More common among women and among persons 30每60 years old; 20% of cases associated with malignancy (men and women equally affected in this group) Headache, arthralgias, leukocytosis 53 
Bacillary angiomatosis Bartonella henselae, B. quintana  Many forms, including erythematous, smooth vascular nodules; friable, exophytic lesions; erythematous plaques (may be dry, scaly); subcutaneous nodules (may be erythematous) Usually patients with HIV infection Peliosis of liver and spleen in some cases; lesions sometimes involving multiple organs; bacteremia 160 
Purpuric eruptions  
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, rat-bite fever, endocarditisg; epidemic typhuse; dengue feverd; human parvovirus B19 infectione  〞 〞 〞 〞 〞f  
Acute meningococcemia Neisseria meningitidis  Initially pink maculopapular lesions evolving into petechiae; petechiae rapidly becoming numerous, sometimes enlarging and becoming vesicular; trunk, extremities most commonly involved; may appear on face, hands, feet; may include purpura fulminans (see below) reflecting disseminated intravascular coagulation Most common among children, individuals with asplenia or terminal complement component deficiency (C5每C8) Hypotension, meningitis (sometimes preceded by upper respiratory infection) 143 
Purpura fulminans Severe disseminated intravascular coagulation Large ecchymoses with sharply irregular shapes evolving into hemorrhagic bullae and then into black necrotic lesions Individuals with sepsis (e.g., involving N. meningitidis), malignancy, or massive trauma; asplenic patients at high risk for sepsis  Hypotension 143, 271 
Chronic meningococcemia N. meningitidis  Variety of recurrent eruptions, including pink maculopapular; nodular (usually on lower extremities); petechial (sometimes developing vesicular centers); purpuric areas with pale bluegray centers Individuals with complement deficiencies Fevers, sometimes intermittent; arthritis, myalgias, headache 143 
Disseminated gonococcal infection Neisseria gonorrhoeae  Papules (1每5 mm) evolving over 1每2 days into hemorrhagic pustules with gray necrotic centers; hemorrhagic bullae occurring rarely; lesions (usually <40) distributed peripherally near joints (more commonly on upper extremities) Sexually active individuals (more often females), some with complement deficiency Low-grade fever, tenosynovitis, arthritis 144 
Enteroviral petechial rash Usually echovirus 9 or coxsackievirus A9 Disseminated petechial lesions (may also be maculopapular, vesicular, or urticarial) Often occurs in outbreaks Pharyngitis, headache; aseptic meningitis with echovirus 9 191 
Viral hemorrhagic fever Arboviruses (including dengue) and arenaviruses Petechial rash Residence in or travel to endemic areas, other virus exposure Triad of fever, shock, hemorrhage from mucosa or gastrointestinal tract 196, 197 
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic-uremic syndrome Idiopathic, Escherichia coli O157:H7 (Shiga toxin), drugs  Petechiae Individuals with E. coli O157:H7 gastroenteritis (especially children), cancer chemotherapy, HIV infection, autoimmune diseases; pregnant/postpartum women  Fever (not always present), hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal dysfunction, neurologic dysfunction; coagulation studies normal 53, 106, 115, 149, 154 
Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis (leukocytoclastic vasculitis) Infections (including group A Streptococcus, viral hepatitis), drugs, chemicals, food allergens, idio-pathic causes  Palpable purpuric lesions appearing in crops on legs or other dependent areas; may become vesicular or ulcerative; usually resolve over 3每4 weeks Occurs in a wide spectrum of diseases, including connective tissue disease, cryoglobulinemia, malignancy, Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura (HSP); more common among children Fever, malaise, arthralgias, myalgias; systemic vasculitis in some cases; renal, joint, and gastrointestinal involvement commonly seen in HSP 53 
Eruptions with ulcers and/or eschars  
Scrub typhus, rickettsial spotted fevers, rat-bite fevere; rickettsialpox, ecthyma gangrenosumh  〞 〞 〞 〞 〞f  
Tularemia Francisella tularensis  Ulceroglandular form: erythematous, tender papule evolves into necrotic, tender ulcer with raised borders; in 35% of cases, eruptions (maculo-papular, vesiculopapular, acneiform, urticarial, erythema nodosum, or erythema multiforme) may occur Exposure to ticks, biting flies, infected animals Fever, headache, lymphadenopathy 158 
Anthrax Bacillus anthracis  Pruritic papule enlarging and evolving into a 1- by 3-cm painless ulcer surrounded by vesicles and then developing a central eschar with edema; residual scar Exposure to infected animals or animal products, other exposure to anthrax spores Lymphadenopathy, headache 221 
 


aSee "Purpuric erup-tions."

bSee "Confluent desquamative erythemas."

cIn human granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis (caused by Anaplasma phagocytophila; most common in the upper midwestern and northeastern regions of the United States), rash is rare.

dSee "Viral hemorrhagic fever" under "Purpuric erup-tions" for dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome.

eSee "Centrally distributed maculopapular eruptions."

fSee etiology-specific chapters. 

gSee "Peripheral eruptions."

hSee "Vesiculobullous or pustular eruptions."
 

Centrally Distributed Maculopapular Eruptions

Centrally distributed rashes, in which lesions are primarily truncal, are the most common type of eruption. The rash of rubeola (measles) starts at the hairline 2每3 days into the illness and moves down the body, sparing the palms and soles (Chap. 192). It begins as discrete erythematous lesions, which become confluent as the rash spreads. Koplik's spots (1- to 2-mm white or bluish lesions with an erythematous halo on the buccal mucosa) are pathognomonic for measles and are generally seen during the first 2 days of symptoms. They should not be confused with Fordyce's spots (ectopic sebaceous glands), which have no erythematous halos and are found in the mouth of healthy individuals. Koplik's spots may briefly overlap with the measles exanthem.

Rubella (German measles) also spreads from the hairline downward; unlike that of measles, however, the rash of rubella tends to clear from originally affected areas as it migrates, and it may be pruritic (Chap. 193). Forchheimer spots (palatal petechiae) may develop but are nonspecific because they also develop in mononucleosis (Chap. 181) and scarlet fever (Chap. 136). Postauricular and suboccipital adenopathy and arthritis are common among adults with rubella. Exposure of pregnant women to ill individuals should be avoided, as rubella causes severe congenital abnormalities. Numerous strains of enteroviruses (Chap. 191), primarily echoviruses and coxsackieviruses, cause nonspecific syndromes of fever and eruptions that may mimic rubella or measles. Patients with infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein-Barr virus (Chap. 181) or with primary infection caused by HIV (Chap. 189) may exhibit pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and a nonspecific maculopapular exanthem.

The rash of erythema infectiosum (fifth disease), which is caused by human parvovirus B19, primarily affects children 3每12 years old; it develops after fever has resolved as a bright blanchable erythema on the cheeks ("slapped cheeks") with perioral pallor (Chap. 184). A more diffuse rash (often pruritic) appears the next day on the trunk and extremities and then rapidly develops into a lacy reticular eruption that may wax and wane (especially with temperature change) over 3 weeks. Adults with fifth disease often have arthritis, and fetal hydrops can develop in association with this condition in pregnant women.

Exanthem subitum (roseola) is caused by human herpesvirus 6 and is most common among children <3 years of age (Chap. 182). As in erythema infectiosum, the rash usually appears after fever has subsided. It consists of 2- to 3-mm rose-pink macules and papules that rarely coalesce, which occur initially on the trunk and sometimes on the extremities (sparing the face) and fade within 2 days.

Although drug reactions have many manifestations, including urticaria, exanthematous drug-induced eruptions (Chap. 55) are most common and are often difficult to distinguish from viral exanthems. Eruptions elicited by drugs are usually more intensely erythematous and pruritic than viral exanthems, but this distinction is not reliable. A history of new medications and an absence of prostration may help to distinguish a drug-related rash from an eruption of another etiology. Rashes may persist for up to two weeks after administration of the offending agent is discontinued. Certain populations are more prone than others to drug rashes. Of HIV-infected patients, 50每60% develop a rash in response to sulfa drugs; 90% of patients with mononucleosis due to Epstein-Barr virus develop a rash when given ampicillin.

Rickettsial illnesses (Chap. 174) should be considered in the evaluation of individuals with centrally distributed maculopapular eruptions. The usual setting for epidemic typhus is a site of war or natural disaster in which people are exposed to body lice. Endemic typhus or leptospirosis (the latter caused by a spirochete) (Chap. 171) may be seen in urban environments where rodents proliferate. Outside the United States, other rickettsial diseases cause a spotted-fever syndrome and should be considered in residents of or travelers to endemic areas. Similarly, typhoid fever, a nonrickettsial disease caused by Salmonella typhi (Chap. 153), is usually acquired during travel outside the United States. Dengue fever, caused by a mosquito-transmitted flavivirus, occurs in tropical and subtropical regions of the world (Chap. 196).

Some centrally distributed maculopapular eruptions have distinctive features. Erythema migrans, the rash of Lyme disease (Chap. 173), typically manifests as singular or multiple annular plaques. Untreated erythema migrans lesions usually fade within a month but may persist for more than a year. Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI) has an erythema migrans每like rash but is less severe than Lyme disease and often occurs in regions where Lyme is not endemic. Erythema marginatum, the rash of acute rheumatic fever (Chap. 322), has a distinctive pattern of enlarging and shifting transient annular lesions.

Collagen vascular diseases may cause fever and rash. Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 319) typically develop a sharply defined, erythematous eruption in a butterfly distribution on the cheeks (malar rash) as well as many other skin manifestations. Still's disease (Chap. 337) presents as an evanescent, salmon-colored rash on the trunk and proximal extremities that coincides with fever spikes.

Peripheral Eruptions

These rashes are alike in that they are most prominent peripherally or begin in peripheral (acral) areas before spreading centripetally. Early diagnosis and therapy are critical in RMSF (Chap. 174) because of its grave prognosis if untreated. Lesions evolve from macular to petechial, start on the wrists and ankles, spread centripetally, and appear on the palms and soles only later in the disease. The rash of secondary syphilis (Chap. 169), which may be generalized but is prominent on the palms and soles, should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pityriasis rosea, especially in sexually active patients. Chikungunya fever (Chap. 196), which is transmitted by mosquito bite in Africa and the Indian Ocean region, is associated with a maculopapular eruption and severe polyarticular small-joint arthralgias. Hand-foot-and-mouth disease (Chap. 191), most commonly caused by coxsackievirus A16, is distinguished by tender vesicles distributed peripherally and in the mouth; outbreaks commonly occur within families. The classic target lesions of erythema multiforme appear symmetrically on the elbows, knees, palms, soles, and face. In severe cases, these lesions spread diffusely and involve mucosal surfaces. Lesions may develop on the hands and feet in endocarditis (Chap. 124).

Confluent Desquamative Erythemas

These eruptions consist of diffuse erythema frequently followed by desquamation. The eruptions caused by group A Streptococcus or Staphylococcus aureus are toxin-mediated. Scarlet fever (Chap. 136) usually follows pharyngitis; patients have a facial flush, a "strawberry" tongue, and accentuated petechiae in body folds (Pastia's lines). Kawasaki disease (Chaps. 53 and 326) presents in the pediatric population as fissuring of the lips, a strawberry tongue, conjunctivitis, adenopathy, and sometimes cardiac abnormalities. Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (Chap. 136) manifests with hypotension, multiorgan failure, and, often, a severe group A streptococcal infection (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis). Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome (Chap. 135) also presents with hypotension, and multiorgan failure, but usually only S. aureus colonization〞not a severe S. aureus infection〞is documented. Staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome (Chap. 135) is seen primarily in children and in immunocompromised adults. Generalized erythema is often evident during the prodrome of fever and malaise; profound tenderness of the skin is distinctive. In the exfoliative stage, the skin can be induced to form bullae with light lateral pressure (Nikolsky's sign). In a mild form, a scarlatiniform eruption mimics scarlet fever, but the patient does not exhibit a strawberry tongue or circumoral pallor. In contrast to the staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome, in which the cleavage plane is superficial in the epidermis, toxic epidermal necrolysis (Chap. 55), a maximal variant of Stevens-Johnson syndrome, involves sloughing of the entire epidermis, resulting in severe disease. Exfoliative erythroderma syndrome (Chaps. 52 and 55) is a serious reaction associated with systemic toxicity that is often due to eczema, psoriasis, a drug reaction, or mycosis fungoides. Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS) due to antiepileptic and antibiotic agents (Chap. 55) initially appears similar to an exanthematous drug reaction but may progress to exfoliative erythroderma; it is accompanied by multiorgan failure and has an associated mortality rate of 10%.

Vesiculobullous or Pustular Eruptions

Varicella (Chap. 180) is highly contagious, often occurring in winter or spring. At any point in time, within a given region of the body, varicella lesions are in different stages of development. In immunocompromised hosts, varicella vesicles may lack the characteristic erythematous base or may appear hemorrhagic. Lesions of Pseudomonas "hot-tub" folliculitis (Chap. 152) are also pruritic and may appear similar to those of varicella. However, hot-tub folliculitis generally occurs in outbreaks after bathing in hot tubs or swimming pools, and lesions occur in regions occluded by bathing suits. Lesions of variola (smallpox) (Chap. 221) also appear similar to those of varicella but are all at the same stage of development in a given region of the body. Variola lesions are most prominent on the face and extremities, while varicella lesions are most prominent on the trunk. Herpes simplex virus infection (Chap. 179) is characterized by hallmark grouped vesicles on an erythematous base. Primary herpes infection is accompanied by fever and toxicity, while recurrent disease is milder. Rickettsialpox (Chap. 174) is often documented in urban settings and is characterized by vesicles followed by pustules. It can be distinguished from varicella by an eschar at the site of the mouse-mite bite and the papule/plaque base of each vesicle. Acute generalized eruptive pustulosis (AGEP) should be considered in individuals who are acutely febrile and are taking new medications, especially anticonvulsant or antimicrobial agents (Chap. 55). Disseminated Vibrio vulnificus infection (Chap. 156) or ecthyma gangrenosum due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Chap. 152) should be considered in immunosuppressed individuals with sepsis and hemorrhagic bullae.

Urticaria-Like Eruptions

Individuals with classic urticaria ("hives") usually have a hypersensitivity reaction without associated fever. In the presence of fever, urticaria-like eruptions are usually due to urticarial vasculitis(Chap. 326). Unlike individual lesions of classic urticaria, which last up to 24 h, these lesions may last 3每5 days. Etiologies include serum sickness (often induced by drugs such as penicillins, sulfas, salicylates, or barbiturates), connective-tissue disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus or Sj?gren's syndrome), and infection (e.g., with hepatitis B virus, enteroviruses, or parasites). Malignancy, especially lymphoma, may be associated with fever and chronic urticaria (Chap. 53).

Nodular Eruptions

In immunocompromised hosts, nodular lesions often represent disseminated infection. Patients with disseminated candidiasis (often due to Candida tropicalis) may have a triad of fever, myalgias, and eruptive nodules (Chap. 203). Disseminated cryptococcosis lesions (Chap. 202) may resemble molluscum contagiosum (Chap. 183). Necrosis of nodules should raise the suspicion of aspergillosis (Chap. 204) or mucormycosis (Chap. 205). Erythema nodosum presents with exquisitely tender nodules on the lower extremities. Sweet's syndrome (Chap. 53) should be considered in individuals with multiple nodules and plaques, often so edematous that they give the appearance of vesicles or bullae. Sweet's syndrome may affect either healthy individuals or persons with lymphoproliferative disease.

Purpuric Eruptions

Acute meningococcemia (Chap. 143) classically presents in children as a petechial eruption, but initial lesions may appear as blanchable macules or urticaria. RMSF should be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute meningococcemia. Echovirus 9 infection (Chap. 191) may mimic acute meningococcemia; patients should be treated as if they have bacterial sepsis because prompt differentiation of these conditions may be impossible. Large ecchymotic areas of purpura fulminans (Chaps. 143 and 271) reflect severe underlying disseminated intravascular coagulation, which may be due to infectious or noninfectious causes. The lesions of chronic meningococcemia (Chap. 143) may have a variety of morphologies, including petechial. Purpuric nodules may develop on the legs and resemble erythema nodosum but lack its exquisite tenderness. Lesions of disseminated gonococcemia (Chap. 144) are distinctive, sparse, countable hemorrhagic pustules, usually located near joints. The lesions of chronic meningococcemia and those of gonococcemia may be indistinguishable in terms of appearance and distribution. Viral hemorrhagic fever (Chaps. 196 and 197) should be considered in patients with an appropriate travel history and a petechial rash. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (Chaps. 53,106, and 115) and hemolytic-uremic syndrome (Chaps. 115,149, and 154) are closely related and are noninfectious causes of fever and petechiae. Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis (leukocytoclastic vasculitis) typically manifests as palpable purpura and has a wide variety of causes (Chap. 53).

Eruptions with Ulcers or Eschars

The presence of an ulcer or eschar in the setting of a more widespread eruption can provide an important diagnostic clue. For example, the presence of an eschar may suggest the diagnosis of scrub typhus or rickettsialpox (Chap. 174) in the appropriate setting. In other illnesses (e.g., anthrax) (Chap. 221), an ulcer or eschar may be the only skin manifestation.
 
Further Readings

Cherry JD: Contemporary infectious exanthems. Clin Infect Dis 16:199, 1993 [PMID: 8443297] 

 
〞〞〞: Cutaneous manifestations of systemic infections, in Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, vol. 1, 4th ed, RD Feigin, JD Cherry (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998, pp 713每737 

 
Eichenfield LF et al (eds): Neonatal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008 

 
Levin S, Goodman LJ: An approach to acute fever and rash (AFR) in the adult. Curr Clin Top Infect Dis 15:19, 1995 [PMID: 7546368] 

 
Paller AS, Mancini AJ (eds): Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2006 

 
Schlossberg D: Fever and rash. Infect Dis Clin North Am 10:101, 1996 [PMID: 8698985] 

 
Weber DJ et al: The acutely ill patient with fever and rash, in Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, vol 1, 7th ed, GL Mandell et al (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2010, pp 791每807 

 
Wenner HA: Virus diseases associated with cutaneous eruptions. Prog Med Virol 16:269, 1973 [PMID: 4356897] 

 
Wolff K, Johnson Raj: Fitzpatrick's Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009 

 
〞〞〞 et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008 
 
 

^^
Atlas of Rashes Associated with Fever

Given the extremely broad differential diagnosis, the presentation of a patient with fever and rash often poses a thorny diagnostic challenge for even the most astute and experienced clinician. Rapid narrowing of the differential by prompt recognition of a rash's key features can result in appropriate and sometimes life-saving therapy. This atlas presents high-quality images of a variety of rashes that have an infectious etiology and are commonly associated with fever.

Figure e7-1

 
 
 
Lacy reticular rash of erythema infectiosum (fifth disease) caused by parvovirus B19.
 
 

Figure e7-2

 
 
 
Koplik's spots, which manifest as white or bluish lesions with an erythematous halo on the buccal mucosa, usually occur in the first two days of measles symptoms and may briefly overlap the measles exanthem. The presence of the erythematous halo differentiates Koplik's spots from Fordyce's spots (ectopic sebaceous glands), which occur in the mouths of healthy individuals. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
 
 

Figure e7-3

 
 
 
In measles, discrete erythematous lesions become confluent on the face and neck over 2每3 days as the rash spreads downward to the trunk and arms, where lesions remain discrete. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005, p 788.)
 
 

Figure e7-4

 
 
 
In rubella, an erythematous exanthem spreads from the hairline downward and clears as it spreads. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-5

 
 
 
Exanthem subitum (roseola) occurs most commonly in young children. A diffuse maculopapular exanthem follows resolution of fever. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-6

 
 
 
Erythematous macules and papules are apparent on the trunk and arm of this patient with primary HIV infection.(Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.)
 
 

Figure e7-7

 
 
 
This exanthematous, drug-induced eruption consists of brightly erythematous macules and papules, some of which are confluent, distributed symmetrically on the trunk and extremities. Ampicillin caused this rash. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.)
 
 

Figure e7-8

 
 
 
Erythema migrans is the early cutaneous manifestation of Lyme disease and is characterized by erythematous annular patches, often with a central erythematous papule at the tick-bite site. (Courtesy of Yale Resident's Slide Collection; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-9

 
 
 
Rose spots are evident as erythematous macules on the trunk of this patient with typhoid fever. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
 
 

Figure e7-10

 
 
 
Systemic lupus erythematosus showing prominent, scaly, malar erythema. Involvement of other sun-exposed sites is also common.
 
 

Figure e7-11

 
 
 
Acute lupus erythematosus on the upper chest, with brightly erythematous and slightly edematous coalescent papules and plaques. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-12

 
 
 
Discoid lupus erythematosus. Violaceous, hyperpigmented, atrophic plaques, often with evidence of follicular plugging (which may result in scarring), are characteristic of this cutaneous form of lupus. (Courtesy of Marilynne McKay, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-13

 
 
 
The rash of Still's disease typically exhibits evanescent, erythematous papules that appear at the height of fever on the trunk and proximal extremities. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-14

 
 
 
Impetigo is a superficial group A streptococcal or Staphylococcus aureus infection consisting of honey-colored crusts and erythematous weeping erosions. Occasionally, bullous lesions may be seen. (Courtesy of Mary Spraker, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-15

 
 
 
Erysipelas is a group A streptococcal infection of the superficial dermis and consists of well-demarcated, erythematous, edematous, warm plaques.
 
 

Figure e7-16

 
 
 
Top: Petechial lesions of Rocky Mountain spotted fever on the lower legs and soles of a young, otherwise healthy patient. Bottom: Close-up of lesions from the same patient. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-17

 
 
 
Primary syphilis with a firm, nontender chancre.
 
 

Figure e7-18

 
 
 
Secondary syphilis, demonstrating the papulosquamous truncal eruption.
 
 

Figure e7-19

 
 
 
Secondary syphilis commonly affects the palms and soles with scaling, firm, red-brown papules.
 
 

Figure e7-20

 
 
 
Condylomata lata are moist, somewhat verrucous intertriginous plaques seen in secondary syphilis.
 
 

Figure e7-21

 
 
 
Mucous patches on the tongue of a patient with secondary syphilis. (Courtesy of Ron Roddy; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-22

 
 
 
Petechial lesions in a patient with atypical measles. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-23

 
 
 
Tender vesicles and erosions in the mouth of a patient with hand-foot-and-mouth disease. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-24

 
 
 
Septic emboli with hemorrhage and infarction due to acute Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-25

 
 
 
Erythema multiforme is characterized by multiple erythematous plaques with a target or iris morphology and usually represents a hypersensitive reaction to drugs or infections (especially herpes simplex virus). (Courtesy of the Yale Resident's Slide Collection; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-26

 
 
 
Scarlet fever exanthem. Finely punctuated erythema has become confluent (scarlatiniform); accentuation of linear erythema in body folds (Pastia's lines) is seen here. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 

Figure e7-27

 
 
 
Erythema progressing to bullae with resulting sloughing of the entire thickness of the epidermis occurs in toxic epidermal necrolysis. This reaction was due to a sulfonamide. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.)
 
 

Figure e7-28

 
 
 
Diffuse erythema and scaling are present in this patient with psoriasis and the exfoliative erythroderma syndrome. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 

Figure e7-29

 
 
 
This infant with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome demonstrates generalized desquamation. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 

Figure e7-30

 
 
 
Fissuring of the lips and an erythematous exanthem are evident in this patient with Kawasaki's disease. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-31

 
 
 
Numerous varicella lesions at various stages of evolution: vesicles on an erythematous base, umbilicated vesicles, and crusting lesions. (Courtesy of R. Hartman; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-32

 
 
 
Close-up of lesions of disseminated zoster. Note lesions at different stages of evolution, including pustules and crusting. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-33

 
 
 
Herpes zoster is seen in this HIV-infected patient as hemorrhagic vesicles and pustules on an erythematous base grouped in a dermatomal distribution.
 
 

Figure e7-34

 
 
 
Top: Eschar at the site of the mite bite in a patient with rickettsialpox. Middle: Papulovesicular lesions on the trunk of the same patient. Bottom: Close-up of lesions from the same patient. (Reprinted from A Krusell et al: Emerg Infect Dis 8:727, 2002.)
 
 

Figure e7-35

 
 
 
Ecthyma gangrenosum in a neutropenic patient with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia.
 
 

Figure e7-36

 
 
 
Urticaria showing characteristic discrete and confluent, edematous, erythematous papules and plaques.
 
 

Figure e7-37

 
 
 
Disseminated cryptococcal infection. A liver-transplant recipient developed six cutaneous lesions similar to the one shown. Biopsy and serum-antigen testing demonstrated Cryptococcus. Important features of the lesion include a benign-appearing fleshy papule with central umbilication resembling molluscum contagiosum. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-38

 
 
 
Disseminated candidiasis. Tender, erythematous, nodular lesions developed in a neutropenic patient with leukemia who was undergoing induction chemotherapy. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-39

 
 
 
Disseminated Aspergillus infection. Multiple necrotic lesions developed in this neutropenic patient undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The lesion in the photograph is on the inner thigh and is several centimeters in diameter. Biopsy demonstrated infarction caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-40

 
 
 
Erythema nodosum is a panniculitis characterized by tender, deep-seated nodules and plaques usually located on the lower extremities. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-41

 
 
 
Sweet's syndrome: an erythematous indurated plaque with a pseudovesicular border. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-42

 
 
 
Fulminant meningococcemia with extensive angular purpuric patches. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-43

 
 
 
Erythematous papular lesions are seen on the leg of this patient with chronic meningococcemia.
 
 

Figure e7-44

 
 
 
Disseminated gonococcemia in the skin is seen as hemorrhagic papules and pustules with purpuric centers in a centrifugal distribution. (Courtesy of Daniel M. Musher, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-45

 
 
 
Palpable purpuric papules on the lower legs are seen in this patient with cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-46

 
 
 
The thumb of a patient with a necrotic ulcer of tularemia. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
 
 

Figure e7-47

 
 
 
This 50-year-old man developed high fever and massive inguinal lymphadenopathy after a small ulcer healed on his foot. Tularemia was diagnosed. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-48

 
 
 
This painful trypanosomal chancre developed at the site of a tsetse-fly bite on the dorsum of the foot. Trypanosoma brucei was diagnosed from an aspirate of the ulcer. (Courtesy of Edward T. Ryan, MD. N Engl J Med 346: 2069, 2002; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-49

 
 
 
Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS/DRESS): This patient developed a progressive eruption exhibiting early desquamation after taking phenobarbital. There was also associated lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly. (Courtesy of Peter Lio, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure e7-50

 
 
 
Many small, nonfollicular pustules are seen against a background of erythema in this patient with acute generalized eruptive pustulosis (AGEP). The rash began in body folds and progressed to cover the trunk and face. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009, p. 561.)
 
 

Figure e7-51

 
 
 
 
 
Smallpox is shown with many pustules on the face, becoming confluent (A), and on the trunk (B). Pustules are all in the same stage of development. In (C), crusting, healing lesions are noted on the trunk, arms, and hands. (Reprinted from K Wolff, RA Johnson: Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009, p. 780.)
 
 
 

^^
Fever of Unknown Origin: Introduction

Definition and Classification

Fever of unknown origin (FUO) was defined by Petersdorf and Beeson in 1961 as (1) temperatures of >38.3∼C (>101∼F) on several occasions; (2) a duration of fever of >3 weeks; and (3) failure to reach a diagnosis despite 1 week of inpatient investigation. While this classification has stood for more than 30 years, Durack and Street have proposed a revised system for classification of FUO that better accounts for nonendemic and emerging diseases, improved diagnostic technologies, and adverse reactions to new therapeutic interventions. This updated classification includes (1) classic FUO, (2) nosocomial FUO, (3) neutropenic FUO, and (4) FUO associated with HIV infection.

Classic FUO corresponds closely to the earlier definition of FUO, differing only with regard to the prior requirement for 1 week's study in the hospital. The newer definition is broader, stipulating three outpatient visits or 3 days in the hospital without elucidation of a cause or 1 week of "intelligent and invasive" ambulatory investigation. In nosocomial FUO, a temperature of 38.3∼C (101∼F) develops on several occasions in a hospitalized patient who is receiving acute care and in whom infection was not manifest or incubating on admission. Three days of investigation, including at least 2 days' incubation of cultures, is the minimum requirement for this diagnosis. Neutropenic FUO is defined as a temperature of 38.3∼C (101∼F) on several occasions in a patient whose neutrophil count is <500/L or is expected to fall to that level in 1每2 days. The diagnosis of neutropenic FUO is invoked if a specific cause is not identified after 3 days of investigation, including at least 2 days' incubation of cultures. HIV-associated FUO is defined by a temperature of 38.3∼C (101∼F) on several occasions over a period of >4 weeks for outpatients or >3 days for hospitalized patients with HIV infection. This diagnosis is invoked if appropriate investigation over 3 days, including 2 days' incubation of cultures, reveals no source.

Adoption of these categories of FUO in the literature has allowed a more rational compilation of data regarding these disparate groups. In the remainder of this chapter, the discussion will focus on classic FUO in the adult patient unless otherwise specified.

Causes of Classic FUO

Table 18-1 summarizes the findings of several large studies of FUO carried out since the advent of the antibiotic era, including a prospective study of 167 adult patients with FUO encompassing all eight university hospitals in the Netherlands and using a standardized protocol in which the first author reviewed every patient's case. Coincident with the widespread use of antibiotics, increasingly useful diagnostic technologies〞both noninvasive and invasive〞have been developed. Newer studies reflect not only changing patterns of disease but also the impact of diagnostic techniques that make it possible to eliminate many patients with specific illness from the FUO category. The ubiquitous use of potent broad-spectrum antibiotics may have decreased the number of infections causing FUO. The wide availability of ultrasonography, CT, MRI, radionuclide scanning, and positron emission tomography (PET) scanning has enhanced the detection of localized infections and of occult neoplasms and lymphomas in patients previously thought to have FUO. Likewise, the widespread availability of highly specific and sensitive immunologic testing has reduced the number of undetected cases of adult Still's disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and polyarteritis nodosa.

Table 18-1 Classic FUO in Adults

 
 
Authors (Year of Publication) Years of Study No. of Cases Infections (%) Neoplasms (%) Noninfectious Inflammatory Diseases (%) Miscellaneous Causes (%) Undiagnosed Causes (%) 
Petersdorf and Beeson (1961) 1952每1957 100 36 19 19a
  19a
  7 
Larson and Featherstone (1982) 1970每1980 105 30 31 16a
  11a
  12 
Knockaert and Vanneste (1992) 1980每1989 199 22.5 7 23a
  21.5a
  25.5 
de Kleijn et al. (1997, Part I) 1992每1994 167 26 12.5 24 8 30 
Bleeker-Rovers et al. (2007) 2003每2005 73 16 7 22b
  4 51 
 


aAuthors' raw data retabulated to conform to altered diagnostic categories.

bConnective tissue diseases.

Source: Modified from de Kleijn et al., 1997 (Part I).
 

Infections such as extrapulmonary tuberculosis and〞in endemic areas〞typhoid fever and malaria remain a leading diagnosable cause of FUO. Prolonged mononucleosis syndromes caused by Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus (CMV), or HIV are conditions whose consideration as a cause of FUO are sometimes confounded by delayed antibody responses. Intraabdominal abscesses (sometimes poorly localized) and renal, retroperitoneal, and paraspinal abscesses continue to be difficult to diagnose. Renal malacoplakia, with submucosal plaques or nodules involving the urinary tract, may cause fatal FUO if untreated; it is associated with intracellular bacterial infection, is seen in patients with defects of intracellular bacterial killing, and is treated with fluoroquinolones or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Occasionally, other organs may be involved. Osteomyelitis, especially where prosthetic devices have been implanted, must be considered. Although true culture-negative infective endocarditis is rare, one may be misled by cryptic endocarditis caused by indolent, slow-growing microorganisms of the HACEK group (Haemophilus aphrophilus, Aggregatibacter (formerly Actinobacillus) actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae), Bartonella spp. (previously Rochalimaea), Legionella spp., Coxiella burnetii, Chlamydophila psittaci, and fungi. Prostatitis, dental abscesses, sinusitis, and cholangitis continue to be sources of occult fever.

Fungal diseases, most notably histoplasmosis involving the reticuloendothelial system, may cause FUO, particularly outside of the endemic regions where these diseases may be more readily recognized. FUO following travel to neotropical regions and the desert southwest of the United States, even for very limited periods, should prompt evaluation for paracoccidioidomycosis and coccidioidomycosis, respectively. The rising popularity of adventure travel among citizens of Western countries has increased the incidence in these nations of presentation for FUO due to otherwise uncommon endemic vector-borne infections, notably Chikungunya fever and scrub typhus. FUO with headache should prompt examination of spinal fluid for Cryptococcus neoformans, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and travel-acquired trypanosomes. Malaria (which may result from transfusion, failure to take a prescribed prophylactic agent, or infection with a drug-resistant Plasmodium strain) continues to be a cause of FUO, particularly of the asynchronous variety. A related protozoan infection, babesiosis, may cause FUO and is increasing in geographic distribution and in incidence, especially among the elderly and the immunosuppressed.

In most earlier series, neoplasms were the next most common cause of FUO after infections (Table 18-1). In more recent series, a decrease in the percentage of FUO cases due to malignancy was attributed to improvement in diagnostic technologies〞in particular, high-resolution tomography, MRI, PET scanning, and tumor antigen assays. This observation does not diminish the importance of considering neoplasia in the initial diagnostic evaluation of a patient with fever. A number of patients in these series had temporal arteritis, adult Still's disease, drug-related fever, and factitious fever. In recent series, 25每50% of cases of FUO have remained undiagnosed. The general term noninfectious inflammatory diseases applies to systemic rheumatologic or vasculitic diseases such as polymyalgia rheumatica, lupus, and adult Still's disease as well as to granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis, Crohn's disease, and granulomatous hepatitis.

In the elderly, multisystem disease is the most frequent cause of FUO, giant-cell arteritis being the leading etiologic entity in this category. In patients >50 years of age, this disease accounts for 15每20% of FUO cases. Tuberculosis is the most common infection causing FUO in the elderly, and colon cancer is an important cause of FUO with malignancy in this age group.

Many diseases have been grouped in the various studies as "miscellaneous." On this list are drug fever, pulmonary embolism, factitious fever, the hereditary periodic fever syndromes [familial Mediterranean fever, hyper-IgD syndrome, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor每associated periodic syndrome (also known as TRAPS or familial Hibernian fever), familial cold urticaria, and the Muckle-Wells syndrome)], and congenital lysosomal storage diseases such as Gaucher's and Fabry's disease.

A drug-related etiology must be considered in any case of prolonged fever. Any febrile pattern may be elicited by a drug. Virtually all classes of drugs can cause fever, but antimicrobial agents (especially -lactam antibiotics), cardiovascular drugs (e.g., quinidine), antineoplastic drugs, and drugs acting on the central nervous system (e.g., phenytoin) are particularly common causes. The use of TNF inhibitors for treatment of inflammatory diseases has led to atypical presentations of tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and JC virus infection associated with FUO.

It is axiomatic that, as the duration of fever increases, the likelihood of an infectious cause decreases, even for the more indolent infectious etiologies (e.g., brucellosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, malaria due to Plasmodium malariae). In a series of 347 patients referred to the National Institutes of Health from 1961 to 1977, only 6% had an infection (Table 18-2). A significant proportion (9%) had factitious fevers〞i.e., fevers due either to false elevations of temperature or to self-induced disease. A substantial number of these factitious cases were in young women in the health professions. It is worth noting that 8% of the patients with prolonged fevers (some of whom had completely normal liver function studies) had granulomatous hepatitis, and 6% had adult Still's disease. After prolonged investigation, 19% of cases still had no specific diagnosis. A total of 27% of patients had no actual fever during inpatient observation or had an exaggerated circadian temperature rhythm without chills, elevated pulse, or other abnormalities.

Table 18-2 Causes of FUO Lasting >6 Months

 
 
Cause Cases, % 
None identified 19 
Miscellaneous causes 13 
Factitious causes 9 
Granulomatous hepatitis 8 
Neoplasm 7 
Still's disease 6 
Infection 6 
Collagen vascular disease 4 
Familial Mediterranean fever 3 
No fevera  27 
 


aNo actual fever observed during 2每3 weeks of inpatient observation. Includes patients with exaggerated circadian rhythm.

Source: From a study of 347 patients referred to the National Institutes of Health from 1961每1977 with a presumptive diagnosis of FUO of >6 months' duration (Data from R Aduan et al: Prolonged fever of unknown origin. Clin Res 26:558A, 1978).
 

Global Considerations

More than 200 conditions may be considered in the differential diagnosis of classic FUO in adults; the most common of these are listed in Table 18-3. This list applies predominantly to Western nations such as the United States. The workup of FUO must take into careful consideration the patient's country of origin, recent and remote travel (including past service in foreign wars), unusual environmental exposures associated with travel or hobbies (e.g., caving, hunting, and safaris), and pets. The increasing number of returning sojourners with exotic travel itineraries underscores the need for a detailed history of travel and associated activities in the setting of undiagnosed fever, as do the changing demographics of the travelers themselves. For example, increasing numbers of travelers are immunosuppressed, are undergoing disease-modifying interventions such as TNF- suppression, or have recently reconstituted immunity. Immigrants with unexplained fever, including naturalized citizens who have left their countries of origin decades previously, should be carefully interviewed with regard to childhood exposures, including immunization with nonstandard or unidentified live vaccines. In both foreign-born individuals and veterans of foreign wars, subclinical infections may be unmasked decades after exposure by new malignancies or immunosuppressive conditions. The differential diagnosis of FUO must also take into account changes in the range of arthropod vectors or the possibility that local permissive vectors have become infected with previously nonendemic pathogens. Evaluation of FUO in under-resourced medical settings requires increased reliance on history and clinical examination. Patients, family members, and close occupational contacts may need to be interviewed. If specialized laboratory and imaging studies cannot be conducted, diagnosis may be facilitated by maximizing the quality and precision of locally available approaches (e.g., culture of lysed, centrifuged blood cultures, and microscopic examination by an experienced technician). Emerging infectious diseases may include FUO first presenting as clusters of cases in remote regions; insight may be gained from contacting local epidemiologists.

Table 18-3 Causes of FUO in Adults in the United States

 
 
Infections  
Localized pyogenic infections

   Appendicitis

   Cat-scratch disease

   Cholangitis

   Cholecystitis

   Dental abscess

    Diverticulitis/abscess

   Lesser sac abscess

   Liver abscess

   Mesenteric lymphadenitis

   Osteomyelitis

   Pancreatic abscess

   Pelvic inflammatory disease

   Perinephric/intrarenal abscess

   Prostatic abscess

   Renal malacoplakia

   Sinusitis

   Subphrenic abscess

   Suppurative thrombophlebitis

   Tuboovarian abscess

Intravascular infections

   Bacterial aortitis

   Bacterial endocarditis

   Vascular catheter infection

Systemic bacterial infections

   Bartonellosis

   Brucellosis

   Campylobacter infection

   Cat-scratch disease/bacillary angiomatosis (B. henselae)

   Gonococcemia

   Legionnaires' disease

   Leptospirosis

   Listeriosis

   Lyme disease

   Melioidosis

   Meningococcemia

   Rat-bite fever

   Relapsing fever

   Salmonellosis

   Syphilis

   Tularemia

   Typhoid fever

   Vibriosis

   Yersinia infection

Mycobacterial infections

   M. avium/M. intracellulare infections

   Other atypical mycobacterial infections

   Tuberculosis

Other bacterial infections

   Actinomycosis

   Bacillary angiomatosis

   Nocardiosis

   Whipple's disease

Rickettsial infections

   Anaplasmosis

   Ehrlichiosis

   Murine typhus

   Q fever

   Rickettsialpox

   Rocky Mountain spotted fever

   Scrub typhus

Mycoplasmal infections

Chlamydial infections

   Lymphogranuloma venereum

   Psittacosis

   TWAR (C. pneumoniae) infection

Viral infections

   Chikungunya fever

   Colorado tick fever

   Coxsackievirus group B infection

   Cytomegalovirus infection

   Dengue

   Epstein-Barr virus infection

   Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E

   HIV infection

   Human herpesvirus 6 infection

   Lymphocytic choriomeningitis

   Parvovirus B19 infection

   Picornavirus infection

Fungal infections

   Aspergillosis

   Blastomycosis

   Candidiasis

   Coccidioidomycosis

   Cryptococcosis

   Histoplasmosis

   Mucormycosis

Paracoccidioidomycosis

   Pneumocystis infection

   Sporotrichosis

Parasitic infections

   Amebiasis

   Babesiosis

   Chagas' disease

   Leishmaniasis

   Malaria

   Strongyloidiasis

   Toxocariasis

   Toxoplasmosis

   Trichinellosis

Presumed infections, agent undetermined

   Kawasaki's disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome)

   Kikuchi's necrotizing lymphadenitis
 
Neoplasms  
Malignant

   Colon cancer

   Gall bladder carcinoma

   Hepatoma

   Hodgkin's lymphoma

   Immunoblastic T-cell lymphoma

   Leukemia

   Lymphomatoid granulomatosis

   Malignant histiocytosis

   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma

   Pancreatic cancer

   Renal cell carcinoma

   Sarcoma

Benign

   Atrial myxoma

   Castleman's disease

   Renal angiomyolipoma
 
Habitual Hyperthermia  
  (Exaggerated circadian rhythm) 
Collagen Vascular/Hypersensitivity Diseases
 
   Adult Still's disease

   Beh?et's disease

   Erythema multiforme

   Erythema nodosum

   Giant-cell arteritis/polymyalgia rheumatica

   Hypersensitivity pneumonitis

   Hypersensitivity vasculitis

   Mixed connective-tissue disease

   Polyarteritis nodosa

   Relapsing polychondritis

   Rheumatic fever

   Rheumatoid arthritis

   Schnitzler's syndrome

   Systemic lupus erythematosus

   Takayasu's aortitis

   Weber-Christian disease

   Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)
 
Granulomatous Diseases
 
   Crohn's disease

   Granulomatous hepatitis

   Midline granuloma

   Sarcoidosis
 
Miscellaneous Conditions
 
   Aortic dissection

   Drug fever

   Gout

   Hematomas

   Hemoglobinopathies

   Laennec's cirrhosis

   PFPA syndrome: periodic fever, adenitis, pharyngitis, aphthae

   Postmyocardial infarction syndrome

   Recurrent pulmonary emboli

   Subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain's)

   Tissue infarction/necrosis
 
Inherited and Metabolic Diseases
 
   Adrenal insufficiency

   Cyclic neutropenia

   Deafness, urticaria, and amyloidosis

   Fabry disease

   Familial cold urticaria

   Familial Mediterranean fever

   Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever

   Muckle-Wells syndrome

   Tumor necrosis factor receptor每associated periodic syndrome (familial Hibernian fever)

   Type V hypertriglyceridemia
 
Thermoregulatory Disorders  
Central

   Brain tumor

   Cerebrovascular accident

   Encephalitis

   Hypothalamic dysfunction

Peripheral

   Hyperthyroidism

   Pheochromocytoma

Factitious Fevers

"Afebrile" FUO [<38.3∼C (100.94∼F)]
 
 


Source: Modified from RK Root, RG Petersdorf, in JD Wilson et al (eds): Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 12th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1991.
 

The possibility of international and domestic terrorist activity involving the intentional release of infectious agents, many of which cause illnesses presenting with prolonged fever, underscores the need for obtaining an insightful environmental, occupational, and professional history, with early notification of public health authorities in cases of suspicious etiology (Chap. 221). Moreover, the global spread of genetic engineering technologies raises the possibility that traditional agents〞including Centers for Disease Control Categories A, B, and C agents; see Table 221-2)〞that circumvent vaccine-acquired immunity could be developed or that novel recombinant organisms could be engineered to produce clinical or laboratory responses that defy current diagnostic approaches.

Specialized Diagnostic Studies

Classic FUO

A stepwise flow chart depicting the diagnostic workup and therapeutic management of FUO is provided in Fig. 18-1. In this flow chart, reference is made to "potentially diagnostic clues," as outlined by de Kleijn and colleagues; these clues may be key findings in the history (e.g., travel), localizing signs, or key symptoms. Certain specific diagnostic maneuvers become critical in dealing with prolonged fevers. If factitious fever is suspected, temperature-taking should be supervised, and simultaneous urine and body temperatures should be measured. Thick blood smears should be examined for Plasmodium; thin blood smears, prepared with proper technique and quality stains and subjected to expert microscopy, should be used to speciate Plasmodium and to identify Babesia, Trypanosoma, Leishmania, Leptospira, Rickettsia, and Borrelia. Specialized staining of mononuclear cells and granulocytes can help to identify intracellular bacteria, protozoal amastigotes, and the inclusion bodies of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis. Any tissue removed during prior relevant surgery should be reexamined; slides should be requested, and, if necessary, paraffin blocks of fixed pathologic material should be reexamined and additional special studies performed. Relevant x-rays should be reexamined; review of prior radiologic reports may be insufficient. Serum should be set aside in the laboratory as soon as possible and retained for future examination for rising antibody titers.

Figure 18-1

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with classic FUO.a "Potentially diagnostic clues," as outlined by de Kleijn and colleagues (1997, Part II), may be key findings in the history, localizing signs, or key symptoms. bNeedle biopsy of liver as well as any other tissue indicated by "potentially diagnostic clues." cInvasive testing could involve laparoscopy. dEmpirical therapy is a last resort, given the good prognosis of most patients with FUO persisting without a diagnosis. Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibody; CBC, complete blood count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CRP, C-reactive protein; CT, computed tomography; Diff, differential; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose F18; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PET, positron emission tomography; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocyte; PPD, purified protein derivative; RF, rheumatoid factor; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis; TB, tuberculosis; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test.
 
 

Febrile agglutinins is a vague term that, in most laboratories, refers to serologic studies for salmonellosis, brucellosis, and rickettsial diseases. These studies are seldom useful, having low sensitivity and variable specificity. Multiple blood samples (no fewer than three and rarely more than six, including samples for anaerobic culture) should be cultured in the laboratory〞with and without increased CO2〞for 2 to 3 weeks to ensure ample growth time for any HACEK organisms (Chap. 146). It is critical to inform the laboratory of the intent to test for unusual organisms. Specialized media should be used if an exposure or travel history suggests uncommon causes of endocarditis, such as Histoplasma, Chlamydophila, Mycoplasma, Bartonella, Coxiella, or Tropheryma whipplei. Blood culture media should be supplemented with l-cysteine or pyridoxal to assist in the isolation of nutritionally variant streptococci. Lysis-centrifugation blood culture techniques should be employed when prior antimicrobial therapy or fungal or atypical mycobacterial infection is suspected. It should be noted that sequential cultures positive for multiple organisms may reflect self-injection of contaminated substances. Cultures of sinus fluid and pulmonary secretions on multiple permissive cell lines may prove helpful in identifying new respiratory viruses implicated in FUO. Urine cultures, including cultures for mycobacteria, fungi, and CMV, are indicated. In the setting of recurrent fevers with lymphocytic meningitis (Mollaret's meningitis), cerebrospinal fluid can be tested for herpesvirus, with use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify and detect viral nucleic acid (Chap. 179). A highly multiplexed oligonucleotide microarray using PCR amplification and containing probes for all recognized virus species hosted by vertebrates and up to 135 bacterial, 73 fungal, and 63 parasitic genera and species has been developed but has not yet been approved for clinical use. The continued clinical validation of such microarrays will further diminish rates of undiagnosed FUO of infectious etiology.

In any FUO workup, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) should be determined. Striking elevation of the ESR and anemia of chronic disease are frequently seen in association with giant cell arteritis or polymyalgia rheumatica〞common causes of FUO in patients >50 years of age. Still's disease is suggested by elevations of ESR, leukocytosis, and anemia and is often accompanied by arthralgias, polyserositis (pleuritis, pericarditis), lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and rash. The C-reactive protein level may be a useful cross-reference for the ESR and is a more sensitive and specific indicator of an "acute-phase" inflammatory metabolic response. Antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, rheumatoid factor, and serum cryoglobulins should be measured to rule out other collagen vascular diseases and vasculitis. Elevated levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme in serum may point to sarcoidosis. With rare exceptions, the intermediate-strength purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test should be used to screen patients with classic FUO for tuberculosis. Concurrent control tests, such as the mumps skin test antigen (Aventis-Pasteur, Swiftwater, PA), should be employed. It should be kept in mind that both the PPD tuberculin skin test (TST) and control tests may yield false-negative results in patients with miliary tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Hodgkin's disease, malnutrition, or AIDS. Two interferon 每release assays have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the diagnosis of tuberculosis. These tests〞the QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-Tube (QFT-GIT) assay and the T-SPOT TB assay〞measure the production of interferon  by T lymphocytes upon exposure to antigens of M. tuberculosis. In direct comparisons, the sensitivity of the QFT-GIT test was statistically similar to that of the TST for detecting infection in persons with untreated, culture-confirmed tuberculosis. The QFT-GIT test is more specific, is less influenced by previous infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria, and is not affected by prior vaccination with bacille Calmette-Gu谷rin (BCG); TSTs are variably affected by these factors. Repeating the QFT-GIT test does not boost the in vitro response, while injection of PPD for the TST can boost subsequent TST responses, primarily in persons who have been infected with nontuberculous mycobacteria or vaccinated with BCG. Negative results in the QFT-GIT test〞as in the TST〞do not definitively exclude a diagnosis of tuberculosis.

Noninvasive procedures should include an upper gastrointestinal contrast study with small-bowel follow-through and colonoscopy to examine the terminal ileum and cecum for early evidence of lymphoma or subclinical Crohn's disease. Colonoscopy is especially strongly indicated in the elderly. Chest x-rays should be repeated if new symptoms arise. Sputum should be induced with an ultrasonic nebulizer for cultures, cytology, and molecular diagnostic testing. If there are pulmonary signs or symptoms, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage for cultures, PCR, and cytology should be considered. High-resolution spiral CT of the chest and abdomen should be performed with both IV and oral contrast. If a spinal or paraspinal lesion is suspected, however, MRI is preferred. MRI may be superior to CT in demonstrating intraabdominal abscesses and aortic dissection, but the comparative utility of MRI and CT in the diagnosis of FUO is unknown. At present, abdominal CT with contrast should be used unless MRI is specifically indicated. Arteriography may be useful for patients in whom systemic necrotizing vasculitis is suspected. Saccular aneurysms may be seen, most commonly in renal or hepatic vessels, and may permit diagnosis of arteritis when biopsy is difficult. Ultrasonography of the abdomen is useful for investigation of the hepatobiliary tract, kidneys, spleen, and pelvis. Echocardiography may be helpful in an evaluation for bacterial endocarditis, pericarditis, nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis, and atrial myxomas. Transesophageal echocardiography is preferred for these lesions.

Radionuclide scanning procedures using technetium (Tc) 99m sulfur colloid, gallium (Ga) 67 citrate, or indium (In) 111每labeled leukocytes may be useful in identifying and/or localizing inflammatory processes such as aortitis or abscess. In one study, Ga scintigraphy yielded useful diagnostic information in almost one-third of cases, and it was suggested that this procedure might actually be used before other imaging techniques if no specific organ is suspected of being abnormal. It is likely that PET scanning, which provides quicker results (hours vs days), will prove even more sensitive and specific than 67Ga scanning in FUO. 99mTc bone scan should be undertaken to look for osteomyelitis or bony metastases; 67Ga scan may be used to identify sarcoidosis (Chap. 329) or Pneumocystis infection (Chap. 207) in the lungs or Crohn's disease (Chap. 295) in the abdomen. 111In-labeled white blood cell (WBC) scan may be used to locate abscesses. With these scans, false-positive and false-negative findings are common. Fluorodeoxyglucose F18 (FDG) PET scanning appears to be superior to other forms of nuclear imaging. The FDG used in PET scans accumulates in tumors and at sites of inflammation and has even been shown to accumulate reliably at sites of vasculitis. Where available, FDG PET scanning should therefore be chosen over 67Ga scanning in the diagnosis of FUO.

Biopsy of the liver and bone marrow should be considered in the workup of FUO if the studies mentioned above are unrevealing and if fever is prolonged. Granulomatous hepatitis has been diagnosed by liver biopsy, even when liver enzymes are normal and no other diagnostic clues point to liver disease. All biopsy specimens should be cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi. Likewise, in the absence of clues pointing to the bone marrow, bone marrow biopsy (not simple aspiration) for histology and culture has yielded diagnoses late in the workup. When possible, a section of the tissue block should be retained for further sections or stains. At some research centers, PCR technology makes it possible in some cases to identify and speciate mycobacterial DNA in paraffin-embedded, fixed tissues. Thus, a retrospective diagnosis can sometimes be made on the basis of studies of long-fixed pathologic tissues. In a patient over age 50 (or occasionally in a younger patient) with the appropriate symptoms and laboratory findings, "blind biopsy" of one or both temporal arteries may yield a diagnosis of arteritis. Tenderness or decreased pulsation, if noted, should guide the selection of a site for biopsy. Lymph node biopsy may be helpful if nodes are enlarged, but inguinal nodes are often palpable and are seldom diagnostically useful.

Exploratory laparotomy has been performed when all other diagnostic procedures fail but has largely been replaced by imaging and guided-biopsy techniques. Peritoneal lavage may be used as a minimally invasive approach to peritoneal cytology studies. Laparoscopic biopsy may provide more adequate guided sampling of lymph nodes or liver, with less invasive morbidity.

Nosocomial FUO

(See also Chap. 131) The primary considerations in diagnosing nosocomial FUO are the underlying susceptibility of the patient coupled with the potential complications of hospitalization. The original surgical or procedural field is the place to begin a directed physical and laboratory examination for abscesses, hematomas, or infected foreign bodies. More than 50% of patients with nosocomial FUO are infected. Intravascular lines, septic phlebitis, and prostheses are all suspect. In this setting, the best approach is to focus on sites where occult infections may be sequestered, such as the sinuses of intubated patients or a prostatic abscess in a man with a urinary catheter. Clostridium difficile colitis may be associated with fever and leukocytosis before the onset of diarrhea. In 25% of patients with nosocomial FUO, the fever has a noninfectious cause. Among these causes are acalculous cholecystitis, deep-vein thrombophlebitis, and pulmonary embolism. Drug fever, transfusion reactions, alcohol/drug withdrawal, adrenal insufficiency, thyroiditis, pancreatitis, gout, and pseudogout are among the many possible causes to consider. As in classic FUO, repeated meticulous physical examinations, coupled with focused diagnostic techniques, are imperative. Multiple blood, wound, and fluid cultures are mandatory. The pace of diagnostic tests is accelerated, and the threshold for procedures〞CT scans, ultrasonography, 111In WBC scans, noninvasive venous studies〞is low. Even so, 20% of cases of nosocomial FUO may go undiagnosed.

Like diagnostic measures, therapeutic maneuvers must be swift and decisive, as many patients are already critically ill. IV lines must be changed (and cultured), drugs stopped for 72 hours, and empirical therapy started if bacteremia, fungemia, or persistently high virus loads are a threat. In many hospital settings, empirical antibiotic therapy for nosocomial FUO now includes vancomycin for coverage of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus as well as broad-spectrum gram-negative coverage with piperacillin/tazobactam, ticarcillin/clavulanate, imipenem, or meropenem. Practice guidelines covering many of these issues have been published jointly by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the American College of Critical Care Medicine and can be accessed on the IDSA website (www.journals.uchicago.edu/IDSA/guidelines).

Neutropenic FUO

(See also Chap. 86) Neutropenic patients are susceptible to focal bacterial and fungal infections, to bacteremic infections, to infections involving catheters (including septic thrombophlebitis), and to perianal infections. Candida and Aspergillus infections are common. Infections due to herpes simplex virus or CMV are sometimes causes of FUO in this group. While the duration of illness may be short in these patients, the consequences of untreated infection may be catastrophic; 50每60% of febrile neutropenic patients are infected, and 20% are bacteremic. The IDSA has published extensive practice guidelines covering these critically ill neutropenic patients (www.journals.uchicago.edu/IDSA/guidelines). In these patients, severe mucositis, quinolone prophylaxis, colonization with methicillin-resistant S. aureus, obvious catheter-related infection, or hypotension dictates the use of vancomycin plus ceftazidime, cefepime, or a carbapenem with or without an aminoglycoside to provide empirical coverage for bacterial sepsis.

HIV-Associated FUO

HIV infection alone may be a cause of fever. The infectious etiology varies with the extent of immunosuppression and the geographic region. Infection due to Mycobacterium avium or M. intracellulare, tuberculosis, toxoplasmosis, CMV infection, Pneumocystis infection, salmonellosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, strongyloidiasis, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and (of particular importance) drug fever are all possible causes of FUO. Mycobacterial infection can be diagnosed by blood cultures and by liver, bone marrow, and lymph node biopsies. Chest CT should be performed to identify enlarged mediastinal nodes. Serologic studies may reveal cryptococcal antigen, and 67Ga scan may help identify Pneumocystis pulmonary infection. FUO has an infectious etiology in >80% of HIV-infected patients, but drug fever and lymphoma remain important considerations. Treatment of HIV-associated FUO depends on many factors and is discussed in Chap. 189.

Treatment: Fever of Unknown Origin

The focus here is on classic FUO. Other modifiers of FUO〞neutropenia, HIV infection, a nosocomial setting〞all vastly affect the risk equation and dictate therapy based on the probability of various causes of fever and on the calculated risks and benefits of a guided empirical approach. The age and physical state of the patient are factors as well: the frail, elderly patient may merit a trial of empirical therapy earlier than the robust young adult.

The emphasis in patients with classic FUO is on continued observation and examination, with the avoidance of "shotgun" empirical therapy. Antibiotic therapy (even that for tuberculosis) may irrevocably alter the ability to culture fastidious bacteria or mycobacteria and delineate ultimate cause. However, vital-sign instability or neutropenia is an indication for empirical therapy with a fluoroquinolone plus piperacillin or the regimen mentioned above (see "Nosocomial FUO"), for example. Cirrhosis, asplenia, disease-modifying biologic therapy, intercurrent immunosuppressive drug use, or exotic travel or environmental exposures (e.g., cave interiors) may all tip the balance toward earlier empirical anti-infective therapy. If the TST is positive or if granulomatous hepatitis or other granulomatous disease is present with anergy (and sarcoid seems unlikely), then a therapeutic trial for tuberculosis should be undertaken, with treatment usually continued for up to 6 weeks. A failure of the fever to respond over this period suggests an alternative diagnosis.

The response of rheumatic fever and Still's disease to aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be dramatic. The effects of glucocorticoids on temporal arteritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, and granulomatous hepatitis are equally dramatic. Colchicine is highly effective in preventing attacks of familial Mediterranean fever but is of little use once an attack is well under way. The ability of glucocorticoids and NSAIDs to mask fever while permitting the spread of infection dictates that their use be avoided unless infection has been largely ruled out and unless inflammatory disease is both probable and debilitating or threatening.

When no underlying source of FUO is identified after prolonged observation (>6 months), the prognosis is generally good, however vexing the fever may be to the patient. Under such circumstances, debilitating symptoms are treated with NSAIDs, and glucocorticoids are the last resort. The initiation of empirical therapy does not mark the end of the diagnostic workup; rather, it commits the physician to continued thoughtful reexamination and evaluation. Patience, compassion, equanimity, vigilance, and intellectual flexibility are indispensable attributes for the clinician in dealing successfully with FUO.
 
Acknowledgments

Sheldon M. Wolff, MD, now deceased, was an author of a previous version of this chapter. It is to his memory that the chapter is dedicated. The substantial contributions of Charles A. Dinarello, MD, to this chapter in previous editions are gratefully acknowledged.
 
Further Readings

Bleeker-Rovers CP et al: A prospective multicenter study on fever of unknown origin: The yield of a structured diagnostic protocol. Medicine 86:26, 2007 [PMID: 17220753] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Fever of unknown origin. Semin Nucl Med 39:81, 2009 

 
De Kleijn EM et al: Fever of unknown origin (FUO): I. A prospective multicenter study of 167 patients with FUO, using fixed epidemiologic entry criteria. Medicine 76:392, 1997 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Fever of unknown origin (FUO): II. Diagnostic procedures in a prospective multicenter study of 167 patients. Medicine 76:401, 1997 

 
Goto M et al: A retrospective review of 226 hospitalized patients with fever. Intern Med 46:17, 2007 [PMID: 17202728] 

 
High KP et al: IDSA guidelines: Clinical practice guideline for the evaluation of fever and infection in older adult residents of long-term care facilities: 2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 48:149, 2009 [PMID: 19072244] 

 
Hot A et al: Yield of bone marrow examination in diagnosing the source of fever of unknown origin. Arch Intern Med 169:2018, 2009 [PMID: 19933965] 

 
Knockaert DC et al: Fever of unknown origin in adults: 40 years on. J Intern Med 253:263, 2003 [PMID: 12603493] 

 
Mourad O et al: A comprehensive evidence-based approach to fever of unknown origin. Arch Intern Med 163:545, 2003 [PMID: 12622601] 

 
O'Grady NP et al: Guidelines for evaluation of new fever in critically ill adult patients: 2008 update from the American College of Critical Care Medicine and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Crit Care Med 36:1330, 2008 [PMID: 21598908] 

 
Simons KS et al: F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with CT in critically ill patients with suspected infection. Intensive Care Med 36:504, 2010 [PMID: 19847397] 

 
Zenone T: Fever of unknown origin in adults: Evaluation of 144 cases in a non-university hospital. Scand J Infect Dis 38:632, 2006 [PMID: 16857607] 
 
 


^^
Hypothermia

Accidental hypothermia occurs when there is an unintentional drop in the body's core temperature below 35∼C (95∼F). At this temperature, many of the compensatory physiologic mechanisms that conserve heat begin to fail. Primary accidental hypothermia is a result of the direct exposure of a previously healthy individual to the cold. The mortality rate is much higher for patients who develop secondary hypothermia as a complication of a serious systemic disorder.

Causes

Primary accidental hypothermia is geographically and seasonally pervasive. Although most cases occur in the winter months and in colder climates, it is surprisingly common in warmer regions as well. Multiple variables make individuals at the extremes of age, the elderly and neonates, particularly vulnerable to hypothermia (Table 19-1). The elderly have diminished thermal perception and are more susceptible to immobility, malnutrition, and systemic illnesses that interfere with heat generation or conservation. Dementia, psychiatric illness, and socioeconomic factors often compound these problems by impeding adequate measures to prevent hypothermia. Neonates have high rates of heat loss because of their increased surface-to-mass ratio and their lack of effective shivering and adaptive behavioral responses. At all ages, malnutrition can contribute to heat loss because of diminished subcutaneous fat and as a result of depleted energy stores used for thermogenesis.

Table 19-1 Risk Factors for Hypothermia

 
 
Age extremes Endocrine-related 
  Elderly   Diabetes mellitus 
  Neonates   Hypoglycemia 
Environmental exposure   Hypothyroidism 
  Occupational   Adrenal insufficiency 
  Sports-related   Hypopituitarism 
  Inadequate clothing Neurologic-related 
  Immersion   Cerebrovascular accident 
Toxicologic and pharmacologic   Hypothalamic disorders 
  Ethanol   Parkinson's disease 
  Phenothiazines   Spinal cord injury 
  Barbiturates Multisystem 
  Carcinomatosis   Trauma 
  Anesthetics   Sepsis 
  Neuromuscular blockers   Shock 
  Antidepressants   Hepatic or renal failure 
Insufficient fuel Burns and exfoliative dermatologic disorders 
  Malnutrition Immobility or debilitation 
  Marasmus   
  Kwashiorkor   
 

 

Individuals whose occupations or hobbies entail extensive exposure to cold weather are at increased risk for hypothermia. Military history is replete with hypothermic tragedies. Hunters, sailors, skiers, and climbers also are at great risk of exposure, whether it involves injury, changes in weather, or lack of preparedness.

Ethanol causes vasodilation (which increases heat loss), reduces thermogenesis and gluconeogenesis, and may impair judgment or lead to obtundation. Phenothiazines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cyclic antidepressants, and many other medications reduce centrally mediated vasoconstriction. Up to 25% of patients admitted to an intensive care unit because of drug overdose are hypothermic. Anesthetics can block the shivering responses; their effects are compounded when patients are not insulated adequately in the operating or recovery rooms.

Several types of endocrine dysfunction can lead to hypothermia. Hypothyroidism〞particularly when extreme, as in myxedema coma〞reduces the metabolic rate and impairs thermogenesis and behavioral responses. Adrenal insufficiency and hypopituitarism also increase susceptibility to hypothermia. Hypoglycemia, most commonly caused by insulin or oral hypoglycemic drugs, is associated with hypothermia, in part a result of neuroglycopenic effects on hypothalamic function. Increased osmolality and metabolic derangements associated with uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, and lactic acidosis can lead to altered hypothalamic thermoregulation.

Neurologic injury from trauma, cerebrovascular accident, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and hypothalamic lesion increases susceptibility to hypothermia. Agenesis of the corpus callosum, or Shapiro syndrome, is one cause of episodic hypothermia, characterized by profuse perspiration followed by a rapid fall in temperature. Acute spinal cord injury disrupts the autonomic pathways that lead to shivering and prevents cold-induced reflex vasoconstrictive responses.

Hypothermia associated with sepsis is a poor prognostic sign. Hepatic failure causes decreased glycogen stores and gluconeogenesis, as well as a diminished shivering response. In acute myocardial infarction associated with low cardiac output, hypothermia may be reversed after adequate resuscitation. With extensive burns, psoriasis, erythrodermas, and other skin diseases, increased peripheral blood flow leads to excessive heat loss.

Thermoregulation

Heat loss occurs through five mechanisms: radiation (55每65% of heat loss), conduction (10每15% of heat loss but much greater in cold water), convection (increased in the wind), respiration, and evaporation (which are affected by the ambient temperature and the relative humidity).

The preoptic anterior hypothalamus normally orchestrates thermoregulation (Chap. 16). The immediate defense of thermoneutrality is via the autonomic nervous system, whereas delayed control is mediated by the endocrine system. Autonomic nervous system responses include the release of norepinephrine, increased muscle tone, and shivering, leading to thermogenesis and an increase in the basal metabolic rate. Cutaneous cold thermoreception causes direct reflex vasoconstriction to conserve heat. Prolonged exposure to cold also stimulates the thyroid axis, leading to an increased metabolic rate.

Clinical Presentation

In most cases of hypothermia, the history of exposure to environmental factors, such as prolonged exposure to the outdoors without adequate clothing, makes the diagnosis straightforward. In urban settings, however, the presentation is often more subtle and other disease processes, toxin exposures, or psychiatric diagnoses should be considered.

After initial stimulation by hypothermia, there is progressive depression of all organ systems. The timing of the appearance of these clinical manifestations varies widely (Table 19-2). Without knowing the core temperature, it can be difficult to interpret other vital signs. For example, a tachycardia disproportionate to the core temperature suggests secondary hypothermia resulting from hypoglycemia, hypovolemia, or a toxin overdose. Because carbon dioxide production declines progressively, the respiratory rate should be low; persistent hyperventilation suggests a central nervous system (CNS) lesion or one of the organic acidoses. A markedly depressed level of consciousness in a patient with mild hypothermia should raise suspicion of an overdose or CNS dysfunction due to infection or trauma.

Table 19-2 Physiologic Changes Associated with Accidental Hypothermia

 
 
Severity Body Temperature Central Nervous System Cardiovascular Respiratory Renal and Endocrine Neuromuscular 
Mild 35∼C (95∼F)每32.2∼C (90∼F) Linear depression of cerebral metabolism; amnesia; apathy; dysarthria; impaired judgment; maladaptive behavior Tachycardia, then progressive bradycardia; cardiac cycle prolongation; vasoconstriction; increase in cardiac output and blood pressure Tachypnea, then progressive decrease in respiratory minute volume; declining oxygen consumption; bronchorrhea; bronchospasm Diuresis; increase in catecholamines, adrenal steroids, triiodothyronine and thyroxine; increase in metabolism with shivering Increased preshivering muscle tone, then fatiguing 
Moderate <32.2∼C (90∼F)每28∼C (82.4∼F) EEG abnormalities; progressive depression of level of consciousness; pupillary dilation; paradoxical undressing; hallucinations Progressive decrease in pulse and cardiac output; increased atrial and ventricular arrhythmias; suggestive (J- wave) ECG changes Hypoventilation; 50% decrease in carbon dioxide production per 8∼C (46∼F)drop in temperature; absence of protective airway reflexes 50% increase in renal blood flow; renal autoregulation intact; impaired insulin action Hyporeflexia; diminishing shivering-induced thermogenesis; rigidity 
Severe <28∼C (82.4∼F) Loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation; decline in cerebral blood flow; coma; loss of ocular reflexes; progressive decrease in EEG Progressive decrease in blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac output; re-entrant dysrhythmias; maximum risk of ventricular fibrillation; asystole Pulmonic congestion and edema; 75% decrease in oxygen consumption; apnea Decrease in renal blood flow parallels decrease in cardiac output; extreme oliguria; poikilothermia; 80% decrease in basal metabolism No motion; decreased nerve- conduction velocity; peripheral areflexia; no corneal or oculocephalic reflexes 
 


Source: Modified from DF Danzl, RS Pozos: N Engl J Med 331:1756, 1994.
 

Physical examination findings can also be altered by hypothermia. For instance, the assumption that areflexia is solely attributable to hypothermia can obscure and delay the diagnosis of a spinal cord lesion. Patients with hypothermia may be confused or combative; these symptoms abate more rapidly with rewarming than with chemical or physical restraint. A classic example of maladaptive behavior in patients with hypothermia is paradoxical undressing, which involves the inappropriate removal of clothing in response to a cold stress. The cold-induced ileus and abdominal rectus spasm can mimic, or mask, the presentation of an acute abdomen (Chap. 13).

When a patient in hypothermic cardiac arrest is first discovered, cardiopulmonary resuscitation is indicated unless (1) a do-not-resuscitate status is verified, (2) obviously lethal injuries are identified, or (3) the depression of a frozen chest wall is not possible. As the resuscitation proceeds, the prognosis is grave if there is evidence of widespread cell lysis, as reflected by potassium levels >10 mmol/L (10 meq/L). Other findings that may preclude continuing resuscitation include a core temperature <10每12∼C (50每54∼F), a pH <6.5, and evidence of intravascular thrombosis with a fibrinogen value <0.5 g/L (<50 mg/dL). The decision to terminate resuscitation before rewarming the patient past 33∼C (91∼F) should be predicated on the type and severity of the precipitants of hypothermia. There are no validated prognostic indicators for recovery from hypothermia. A history of asphyxia with secondary cooling is the most important negative predictor of survival.

Diagnosis and Stabilization

Hypothermia is confirmed by measuring the core temperature, preferably at two sites. Rectal probes should be placed to a depth of 15 cm and not adjacent to cold feces. A simultaneous esophageal probe should be placed 24 cm below the larynx; it may read falsely high during heated inhalation therapy. Relying solely on infrared tympanic thermography is not advisable.

After a diagnosis of hypothermia is established, cardiac monitoring should be instituted, along with attempts to limit further heat loss. If the patient is in ventricular fibrillation, one defibrillation attempt (2 J/kg) should be administered. If the rhythm does not convert, the patient should be rewarmed to 30∼C (86∼F) before defibrillation attempts are repeated. Supplemental oxygenation is always warranted, since tissue oxygenation is affected adversely by the leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. Pulse oximetry may be unreliable in patients with vasoconstriction. If protective airway reflexes are absent, gentle endotracheal intubation should be performed. Adequate preoxygenation will prevent ventricular arrhythmias. Although cardiac pacing for hypothermic bradydysrhythmias is rarely indicated, the transthoracic technique is preferable.

Insertion of a gastric tube prevents dilation secondary to decreased bowel motility. Indwelling bladder catheters facilitate monitoring of cold-induced diuresis. Dehydration is encountered commonly with chronic hypothermia, and most patients benefit from a bolus of crystalloid. Normal saline is preferable to lactated Ringer's solution, as the liver in hypothermic patients inefficiently metabolizes lactate. The placement of a pulmonary artery catheter can cause perforation of the less compliant pulmonary artery. Insertion of a central venous catheter into the cold right atrium should be avoided, since this can precipitate arrhythmias.

Arterial blood gases should not be corrected for temperature (Chap. 47). An uncorrected pH of 7.42 and a PCO2 of 40 mmHg reflect appropriate alveolar ventilation and acid-base balance at any core temperature. Acid-base imbalances should be corrected gradually, since the bicarbonate buffering system is inefficient. A common error is overzealous hyperventilation in the setting of depressed CO2 production. When the PCO2 decreases 10 mmHg at 28∼C (82∼F), it doubles the pH increase of 0.08 that occurs at 37∼C (99∼F).

The severity of anemia may be underestimated because the hematocrit increases 2% for each 1∼C drop in temperature. White blood cell sequestration and bone marrow suppression are common, potentially masking an infection. Although hypokalemia is more common in chronic hypothermia, hyperkalemia also occurs; the expected electrocardiographic changes can be obscured by hypothermia. Patients with renal insufficiency, metabolic acidoses, or rhabdomyolysis are at greatest risk for electrolyte disturbances.

Coagulopathies are common because cold inhibits the enzymatic reactions required for activation of the intrinsic cascade. In addition, thromboxane B2 production by platelets is temperature-dependent, and platelet function is impaired. The administration of platelets and fresh frozen plasma is therefore not effective. The prothrombin or partial thromboplastin times or INR (international normalized ratio) can be deceptively normal and contrast with the observed in vivo coagulopathy. This contradiction occurs because all coagulation tests are routinely performed at 37∼C (99∼F), and the enzymes are thus rewarmed.

Rewarming Strategies

The key initial decision is whether to rewarm the patient passively or actively. Passive external rewarming simply involves covering and insulating the patient in a warm environment. With the head also covered, the rate of rewarming is usually 0.5∼ to 2∼C (33∼ to 36∼F) per hour. This technique is ideal for previously healthy patients who develop acute, mild primary accidental hypothermia. The patient must have sufficient glycogen to support endogenous thermogenesis.

The application of heat directly to the extremities of patients with chronic severe hypothermia should be avoided because it can induce peripheral vasodilation and precipitate core temperature "afterdrop," a response characterized by a continual decline in the core temperature after removal of the patient from the cold. Truncal heat application reduces the risk of afterdrop.

Active rewarming is necessary under the following circumstances: core temperature <32∼C (90∼F) (poikilothermia), cardiovascular instability, age extremes, CNS dysfunction, hormone insufficiency, and suspicion of secondary hypothermia. Active external rewarming is best accomplished with forced-air heating blankets. Other options include devices that circulate water through external heat exchange pads, radiant heat sources, and hot packs. Monitoring a patient with hypothermia in a heated tub is extremely difficult. Electric blankets should be avoided because vasoconstricted skin is easily burned.

There are numerous widely available options for active core rewarming. Airway rewarming with heated humidified oxygen [40∼每45∼C (104∼每113∼F)] is a convenient option via mask or endotracheal tube. Although airway rewarming provides less heat than do some other forms of active core rewarming, it eliminates respiratory heat loss and adds 1∼每2∼C (34∼每36∼F) to the overall rewarming rate. Crystalloids should be heated to 40∼每42∼C (104∼每108∼F), but the quantity of heat provided is significant only during massive volume resuscitation. The most efficient method for heating and delivering fluid or blood is with a countercurrent in-line heat exchanger. Heated irrigation of the gastrointestinal tract or bladder transfers minimal heat because of the limited available surface area. These methods should be reserved for patients in cardiac arrest and then used in combination with all available active rewarming techniques. Closed thoracic lavage is far more efficient in severely hypothermic patients with cardiac arrest. The hemithoraxes are irrigated through two large-bore thoracostomy tubes that are inserted into the hemithoraxes. Thoracostomy tubes should not be placed in the left chest of a spontaneously perfusing patient for purposes of rewarming. Peritoneal lavage with the dialysate at 40∼每45∼C (104∼每113∼F) efficiently transfers heat when delivered through two catheters with outflow suction. Like peritoneal dialysis, standard hemodialysis is especially useful for patients with electrolyte abnormalities, rhabdomyolysis, or toxin ingestions. Another option involves the central venous insertion of a rapid endovascular warming device.

Extracorporeal blood rewarming options (Table 19-3) should be considered in severely hypothermic patients, especially those with primary accidental hypothermia. Cardiopulmonary bypass should be considered in nonperfusing patients without documented contraindications to resuscitation. Circulatory support may be the only effective option in patients with completely frozen extremities or those with significant tissue destruction coupled with rhabdomyolysis. There is no evidence that extremely rapid rewarming improves survival in perfusing patients. The best strategy is usually a combination of passive, truncal active, and active core rewarming techniques.

Table 19-3 Options for Extracorporeal Blood Rewarming

 
 
Extracorporeal Rewarming (ECR) Technique Considerations 
Continuous venovenous (CVV) Circuit〞CV catheter to CV or dual lumen CV or peripheral catheter 
  No oxygenator/circulatory support 
  Flow rates 150每400 mL/min 
  ROR 2∼每3∼C (36∼每37∼F)/h 
Hemodialysis (HD) Circuit〞single- or dual-vessel cannulation 
  Stabilizes electrolyte or toxicologic abnormalities 
  Exchange cycle volumes 200每500 mL/min 
  ROR 2∼每3∼C (36∼每37∼F)/h 
Continuous arteriovenous rewarming (CAVR) Circuit〞percutaneous 8.5 Fr femoral catheters 
  Requires BP 60 mmHg systolic 
  No perfusionist/pump/anticoagulation 
  Flow rates 225每375 mL/min 
  ROR 3∼每4∼C (37∼每39∼F)/h 
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) Circuit〞full circulatory support with pump and oxygenator 
  Perfusate-temperature gradient [5∼每10∼C (41∼每50∼F)] 
  Flow rates 2每7 L/min (ave. 3每4) 
  ROR up to 9.5∼C (49∼F)/h 
 


Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CV, central venous; ROR, rate of rewarming.
 

Treatment: Hypothermia

When a patient is hypothermic, target organs and the cardiovascular system respond minimally to most medications. Generally, IV medications are withheld below 30∼C (86∼F). If they are given, an increased interval between doses can prevent cumulative toxicity during rewarming because of increased binding of drugs to proteins as well as impaired metabolism and excretion. As an example, the administration of repeated doses of digoxin or insulin would be ineffective while the patient is hypothermic, and the residual drugs are potentially toxic during rewarming.

Achieving a mean arterial pressure of at least 60 mmHg should be an early objective. If the hypotension does not respond to crystalloid/colloid infusion and rewarming, low-dose dopamine (2每5 g/kg per min) support should be considered. Perfusion of the vasoconstricted cardiovascular system also may be improved with low-dose IV nitroglycerin.

Atrial arrhythmias should be monitored initially without intervention, as the ventricular response will be slow, and unless preexistent, most will convert spontaneously during rewarming. The role of prophylaxis and treatment of ventricular arrhythmias is problematic. Preexisting ventricular ectopy may be suppressed by hypothermia and reappear during rewarming. None of the class I agents has proved to be safe and efficacious. There is also no evidence that the class III ventricular antiarrhythmic amiodarone is safe. Initiating empirical therapy for adrenal insufficiency usually is not warranted unless there is a history suggesting steroid dependence or hypoadrenalism or a failure to rewarm with standard therapy. The administration of parenteral levothyroxine to euthyroid patients with hypothermia, however, is potentially hazardous. Because laboratory results can be delayed and confounded by the presence of the sick euthyroid syndrome (Chap. 341), historic clues or physical findings suggestive of hypothyroidism should be sought. When myxedema is the cause of hypothermia, the relaxation phase of the Achilles reflex is prolonged more than is the contraction phase.

Hypothermia obscures most of the symptoms and signs of infection, notably fever and leukocytosis. Shaking rigors from infection may be mistaken for shivering. Except in mild cases, extensive cultures and repeated physical examinations are essential. Unless an infectious source is identified, empirical antibiotic prophylaxis is most warranted in the elderly, neonates, and immunocompromised patients.

Preventive measures should be discussed with high-risk individuals, such as the elderly and people whose work frequently exposes them to extreme cold. The importance of layered clothing and headgear, adequate shelter, increased caloric intake, and the avoidance of ethanol should be emphasized, along with access to rescue services.
 
Frostbite

Peripheral cold injuries include both freezing and nonfreezing injuries to tissue. Tissue freezes quickly when in contact with thermal conductors such as metal and volatile solutions. Other predisposing factors include constrictive clothing or boots, immobility, and vasoconstrictive medications. Frostbite occurs when the tissue temperature drops below 0∼C (32∼F). Ice crystal formation subsequently distorts and destroys the cellular architecture. Once the vascular endothelium is damaged, stasis progresses rapidly to microvascular thrombosis. After the tissue thaws, there is progressive dermal ischemia. The microvasculature begins to collapse, arteriovenous shunting increases tissue pressures, and edema forms. Finally, thrombosis, ischemia, and superficial necrosis appear. The development of mummification and demarcation may take weeks to months.

Clinical Presentation

The initial presentation of frostbite can be deceptively benign. The symptoms always include a sensory deficiency affecting light touch, pain, and temperature perception. The acral areas and distal extremities are the most common insensate areas. Some patients complain of a clumsy or "chunk of wood" sensation in the extremity.

Deep frostbitten tissue can appear waxy, mottled, yellow, or violaceous-white. Favorable presenting signs include some warmth or sensation with normal color. The injury is often superficial if the subcutaneous tissue is pliable or if the dermis can be rolled over bony prominences.

Clinically, it is most practical to classify frostbite as superficial or deep. Superficial does not entail tissue loss. Superficial frostbite causes only anesthesia and erythema. The appearance of vesiculation surrounded by edema and erythema implies deeper involvement (Fig. 19-1). Hemorrhagic vesicles reflect a serious injury to the microvasculature and indicate severe frostbite. Damages in subcuticular, muscular, or osseous tissues may result in amputation.

Figure 19-1

 
 
 
Frostbite with vesiculation, surrounded by edema and erythema.
 
 

The two most common nonfreezing peripheral cold injuries are chilblain (pernio) and immersion (trench) foot. Chilblain results from neuronal and endothelial damage induced by repetitive exposure to dry cold. Young females, particularly those with a history of Raynaud's phenomenon, are at greatest risk. Persistent vasospasticity and vasculitis can cause erythema, mild edema, and pruritus. Eventually plaques, blue nodules, and ulcerations develop. These lesions typically involve the dorsa of the hands and feet. In contrast, immersion (trench) foot results from repetitive exposure to wet cold above the freezing point. The feet initially appear cyanotic, cold, and edematous. The subsequent development of bullae is often indistinguishable from frostbite. This vesiculation rapidly progresses to ulceration and liquefaction gangrene. Patients with milder cases complain of hyperhidrosis, cold sensitivity, and painful ambulation for many years.

Treatment: Frostbite

Frozen tissue should be thawed rapidly and completely by immersion in circulating water at 37∼每40∼C (99∼每104∼F). Rapid rewarming often produces an initial hyperemia. The early formation of large clear distal blebs is more favorable than that of smaller proximal dark hemorrhagic blebs. A common error is the premature termination of thawing, since the reestablishment of perfusion is intensely painful. Parenteral narcotics will be necessary with deep frostbite. If cyanosis persists after rewarming, the tissue compartment pressures should be monitored carefully.

Numerous experimental antithrombotic and vasodilatory treatment regimens have been evaluated. There is no conclusive evidence that dextran, heparin, steroids, calcium channel blockers, hyperbaric oxygen, or prostaglandin inhibitors salvage tissue. Intraarterial thrombolysis may reduce the need for digital and more proximal amputations when administered within 24 h of severe injuries. A treatment protocol for frostbite is summarized in Table 19-4.

Table 19-4 Treatment for Frostbite

 
 
Before Thawing During Thawing After Thawing 
Remove from environment Consider parenteral analgesia and ketorolac Gently dry and protect part; elevate; pledgets between toes, if macerated 
Prevent partial thawing and refreezing Administer ibuprofen, 400 mg PO If clear vesicles are intact, aspirate sterilely; if broken, debride and dress with antibiotic or sterile aloe vera ointment 
Stabilize core temperature and treat hypothermia Immerse part in 37∼每40∼C (99∼每104∼F) (thermometer-monitored) circulating water containing an antiseptic soap until distal flush (10每45 min) Leave hemorrhagic vesicles intact to prevent dessication and infection 
Protect frozen part〞no friction or massage Encourage patient to gently move part Continue ibuprofen 400 mg PO (12 mg/kg per day) q8每12h 
Address medical or surgical conditions If pain is refractory, reduce water temperature to 35∼每37∼C (95∼每99∼F) and administer parenteral narcotics Consider tetanus and streptococcal prophylaxis; elevate part 
    Hydrotherapy at 37∼C (99∼F) 
    Consider phenoxybenzamine or thrombolysis in severe cases 
 

 

Unless infection develops, any decision regarding debridement or amputation should be deferred until there is clear evidence of demarcation, mummification, and sloughing. Magnetic resonance angiography may demonstrate the line of demarcation earlier than does clinical demarcation. The most common symptomatic sequelae reflect neuronal injury and the persistently abnormal sympathetic tone, including paresthesias, thermal misperception, and hyperhidrosis. Delayed findings include nail deformities, cutaneous carcinomas, and epiphyseal damage in children.

Management of the chilblain syndrome is usually supportive. With refractory perniosis, alternatives include nifedipine, steroids, and limaprost, a prostaglandin E1 analogue.
 
Further Readings

Alfonzo A et al: Survival after 5-h resuscitation attempt for hypothermic cardiac arrest using CVVG for extracorporeal rewarming. Nephrol Dial Transplant 24:1054, 2009 [PMID: 19059934] 

 
Bruen KJ et al: Reduction of the incidence of amputation in frostbite injury with thrombolytic therapy. Arch Surg 142:546, 2007 [PMID: 17576891] 

 
Danzl DF: Accidental hypothermia, in Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice, 7th ed, J Marx et al (eds). Philadelphia, Mosby, 2010, p. 1861 

 
Jurkovich GJ: Environmental cold-induced injury. Surg Clin North Am 87:247, 2007 [PMID: 17127131] 

 
Kempainen RR, Brunette DD: The evaluation and management of accidental hypothermia. Respir Care 49:192, 2004 [PMID: 14744270] 

 
Mulcahy AR, Watts MR: Accidental hypothermia: An evidence-based approach. Emerg Med Pract 11:1, 2009 

 
 

^^
Syncope: Introduction

Syncope is a transient, self-limited loss of consciousness due to acute global impairment of cerebral blood flow. The onset is rapid, duration brief, and recovery spontaneous and complete. Other causes of transient loss of consciousness need to be distinguished from syncope; these include seizures, vertebrobasilar ischemia, hypoxemia, and hypoglycemia. A syncopal prodrome (presyncope) is common, although loss of consciousness may occur without any warning symptoms. Typical presyncopal symptoms include dizziness, lightheadedness or faintness, weakness, fatigue, and visual and auditory disturbances. The causes of syncope can be divided into three general categories: (1) neurally mediated syncope (also called reflex syncope), (2) orthostatic hypotension, and (3) cardiac syncope.

Neurally mediated syncope comprises a heterogeneous group of functional disorders that are characterized by a transient change in the reflexes responsible for maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis. Episodic vasodilation and bradycardia occur in varying combinations, resulting in temporary failure of blood pressure control. In contrast, in patients with orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic failure, these cardiovascular homeostatic reflexes are chronically impaired. Cardiac syncope may be due to arrhythmias or structural cardiac diseases that cause a decrease in cardiac output. The clinical features, underlying pathophysiologic mechanisms, therapeutic interventions, and prognoses differ markedly among these three causes.
 
Epidemiology and Natural History

Syncope is a common presenting problem, accounting for approximately 3% of all emergency room visits and 1% of all hospital admissions. The annual cost for syncope-related hospitalization in the United States is ~ $2 billion. Syncope has a lifetime cumulative incidence of up to 35% in the general population. The peak incidence in the young occurs between ages 10 and 30 years, with a median peak around 15 years. Neurally mediated syncope is the etiology in the vast majority of these cases. In elderly adults, there is a sharp rise in the incidence of syncope after 70 years.

In population-based studies, neurally mediated syncope is the most common cause of syncope. The incidence is slightly higher in females than males. In young subjects there is often a family history in first-degree relatives. Cardiovascular disease due to structural disease or arrhythmias is the next most common cause in most series, particularly in emergency room settings and in older patients. Orthostatic hypotension also increases in prevalence with age because of the reduced baroreflex responsiveness, decreased cardiac compliance, and attenuation of the vestibulosympathetic reflex associated with aging. In the elderly, orthostatic hypotension is substantially more common in institutionalized (54每68%) than community dwelling (6%) individuals, an observation most likely explained by the greater prevalence of predisposing neurologic disorders, physiologic impairment, and vasoactive medication use among institutionalized patients.

The prognosis after a single syncopal event for all age groups is generally benign. In particular, syncope of noncardiac and unexplained origin in younger individuals has an excellent prognosis; life expectancy is unaffected. By contrast, syncope due to a cardiac cause, either structural heart disease or primary arrhythmic disease, is associated with an increased risk of sudden cardiac death and mortality from other causes. Similarly, mortality rate is increased in individuals with syncope due to orthostatic hypotension related to age and the associated comorbid conditions (Table 20-1).

Table 20-1 High-Risk Features Indicating Hospitalization or Intensive Evaluation of Syncope

 
 
Chest pain suggesting coronary ischemia 
Features of congestive heart failure 
Moderate or severe valvular disease 
Moderate or severe structural cardiac disease 
Electrocardiographic features of ischemia 
History of ventricular arrhythmias 
Prolonged QT interval (>500 msec) 
Repetitive sinoatrial block or sinus pauses 
Persistent sinus bradycardia 
Trifascicular block 
Atrial fibrillation 
Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia 
Family history of sudden death 
Preexcitation syndromes 
Brugada pattern on ECG 
 

 
 
Pathophysiology

The upright posture imposes a unique physiologic stress upon humans; most, although not all, syncopal episodes occur from a standing position. Standing results in pooling of 500每1000 mL of blood in the lower extremities and splanchnic circulation. There is a decrease in venous return to the heart and reduced ventricular filling that result in diminished cardiac output and blood pressure. These hemodynamic changes provoke a compensatory reflex response, initiated by the baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch, resulting in increased sympathetic outflow and decreased vagal nerve activity (Fig. 20-1). The reflex increases peripheral resistance, venous return to the heart, and cardiac output and thus limits the fall in blood pressure. If this response fails, as is the case chronically in orthostatic hypotension and transiently in neurally mediated syncope, cerebral hypoperfusion occurs.

Figure 20-1

 
 
 
The Baroreflex. A decrease in arterial pressure unloads the baroreceptors〞the terminals of afferent fibers of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves〞that are situated in the carotid sinus and aortic arch. This leads to a reduction in the afferent impulses that are relayed from these mechanoreceptors through the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves to the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS) in the dorsomedial medulla. The reduced baroreceptor afferent activity produces a decrease in vagal nerve input to the sinus node that is mediated by the neuroanatomical connections of the NTS to the nucleus ambiguus (NA). There is an increase in sympathetic efferent activity that is mediated by the NTS projections to the caudal ventrolateral medulla (CVLM) (an excitatory pathway) and from there to the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) (an inhibitory pathway). The activation of RVLM presympathetic neurons in response to hypotension is thus predominantly due to disinhibition. In response to a sustained fall in blood pressure, vasopressin release is mediated by projections from the A1 noradrenergic cell group in the ventrolateral medulla. This projection activates vasopressin-synthesizing neurons in the magnocellular portion of the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and the supraoptic nucleus (SON) of the hypothalamus. Blue denotes sympathetic neurons and green parasympathetic neurons.) (From R Freeman: N Engl J Med 358:615, 2008.)
 
 

Syncope is a consequence of global cerebral hypoperfusion and thus represents a failure of cerebral blood flow autoregulatory mechanisms. Myogenic factors, local metabolites, and to a lesser extent autonomic neurovascular control are responsible for the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow (Chap. 275). Typically cerebral blood flow ranges from 50 to 60 mL/min per 100 g brain tissue and remains relatively constant over perfusion pressures ranging from 50 to 150 mmHg. Cessation of blood flow for 6每8 seconds will result in loss of consciousness, while impairment of consciousness ensues when blood flow decreases to 25 mL/min per 100 g brain tissue.

From the clinical standpoint, a fall in systemic systolic blood pressure to ~ 50 mmHg or lower will result in syncope. A decrease in cardiac output and/or systemic vascular resistance〞the determinants of blood pressure〞thus underlies the pathophysiology of syncope. Common causes of impaired cardiac output include decreased effective circulating blood volume; increased thoracic pressure; massive pulmonary embolus; cardiac brady- and tachyarrhythmias; valvular heart disease; and myocardial dysfunction. Systemic vascular resistance may be decreased by central and peripheral autonomic nervous system diseases, sympatholytic medications, and transiently during neurally mediated syncope. Increased cerebral vascular resistance, most frequently due to hypocarbia induced by hyperventilation, may also contribute to the pathophysiology of syncope.

The sequence of changes on the electroencephalogram of syncopal subjects during syncope comprises background slowing (often of high amplitude), followed by attenuation or cessation of cortical activity prior to return of slow waves, and then normal activity. Despite the presence of myoclonic movements and other motor activity, electroencephalographic seizure discharges are not present in syncopal subjects.
 
Classification

Neurally Mediated Syncope

Neurally mediated syncope is the final pathway of a complex central and peripheral nervous system reflex arc. There is a sudden, transient change in autonomic efferent activity characterized by increased parasympathetic outflow causing bradycardia and sympathoinhibition causing vasodilation. The change in autonomic efferent activity leads to a decrease in blood pressure and a subsequent fall in cerebral blood flow to below the limits of autoregulation (Fig. 20-2). In order to elicit this reflex, a normal or functioning autonomic nervous system is necessary; this is in contrast to the situation in autonomic failure. The triggers of the afferent limb of the reflex arc vary and may be clearly defined, e.g., the carotid sinus, the gastrointestinal tract, or the bladder. In many cases, however, the afferent arc is less easily recognized and, under many circumstances, the cause is multifactorial. Under these circumstances it is likely that multiple afferent pathways converge on the central autonomic network within the medulla that integrates the neural impulses and mediates the vasodepressor-bradycardic response.

Figure 20-2

 
 
 
 
A. The paroxysmal hypotensive-bradycardic response that is characteristic of neurally mediated syncope. Noninvasive beat-to-beat blood pressure and heart rate are shown over 5 minutes (from 60 to 360 seconds) of an upright tilt on a tilt table. B. The same tracing expanded to show 80 seconds of the episode (from 80 to 200 seconds). BP, blood pressure; bpm, beats per minute; HR, heart rate.
 
 

Classification of Neurally Mediated Syncope

Neurally mediated syncope may be subdivided based on the afferent pathway and provocative trigger. Vasovagal syncope (the common faint) is provoked by intense emotion, pain, and/or orthostatic stress, whereas the situational reflex syncopes have specific localized stimuli that provoke the reflex vasodilation and bradycardia that leads to syncope. The underlying mechanisms have been identified and pathophysiology delineated for most of these situational reflex syncopes. The afferent trigger may originate in the pulmonary system, gastrointestinal system, urogenital system, heart, and carotid artery (Table 20-2). Hyperventilation leading to hypocarbia and cerebral vasoconstriction, and raised intrathoracic pressure that impairs venous return to the heart, play a central role in many of the situational reflex syncopes. The afferent pathway of the reflex arc differs among these disorders but the efferent response via the vagus and sympathetic pathways is similar.

Table 20-2 Causes of Syncope

 
 
A. NEURALLY MEDIATED SYNCOPE  
  Vasovagal syncope 
    Provoked fear, pain, anxiety, intense emotion, sight of blood, unpleasant sights and odors, orthostatic stress 
  Situational reflex syncope 
    Pulmonary 
       Cough syncope, wind instrument player's syncope, weightlifter's syncope, "mess trick"a and "fainting lark,"b sneeze syncope, airway instrumentation
  
    Urogenital 
       Postmicturition syncope, urogenital tract instrumentation, prostatic massage 
    Gastrointestinal 
       Swallow syncope, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, esophageal stimulation, gastrointestinal tract instrumentation, rectal examination, defecation syncope 
    Cardiac 
       Swallow syncope, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, esophageal stimulation, gastrointestinal tract instrumentation, rectal examination, defecation syncope 
    Carotid sinus 
       Carotid sinus sensitivity, carotid sinus massage 
    Ocular 
       Ocular pressure, ocular examination, ocular surgery 
B. ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION  
  Primary autonomic failure due to idiopathic central and peripheral neurodegenerative diseases〞the "synucleinopathies" 
    Lewy body diseases 
       Parkinson's disease 
       Lewy body dementia 
       Pure autonomic failure 
    Multiple system atrophy (the Shy-Drager syndrome) 
  Secondary autonomic failure due to autonomic peripheral neuropathies 
    Diabetes 
    Hereditary amyloidosis (familial amyloid polyneuropathy) 
    Primary amyloidosis (AL amyloidosis; immunoglobulin light chain associated) 
    Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN) (especially type III〞familial dysautonomia) 
    Idiopathic immune-mediated autonomic neuropathy 
    Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy 
    Sj?gren's syndrome 
    Paraneoplastic autonomic neuropathy 
    HIV neuropathy 
  Postprandial hypotension 
  Iatrogenic (drug-induced) 
  Volume depletion 
C. CARDIAC SYNCOPE  
  Arrhythmias 
    Sinus node dysfunction 
    Atrioventricular dysfunction 
    Supraventricular tachycardias 
    Ventricular tachycardias 
    Inherited channelopathies 
  Cardiac structural disease 
    Valvular disease 
    Myocardial ischemia 
    Obstructive and other cardiomyopathies 
    Atrial myxoma 
    Pericardial effusions and tamponade 
 


aHyperventilation for 1 minute, followed by sudden chest compression.

bHyperventilation (20 breaths) in a squatting position, rapid rise to standing, then Valsalva.
 

Alternately, neurally mediated syncope may be subdivided based on the predominant efferent pathway. Vasodepressor syncope describes syncope predominantly due to efferent, sympathetic, vasoconstrictor failure; cardioinhibitory syncope describes syncope predominantly associated with bradycardia or asystole due to increased vagal outflow; while mixed syncope describes syncope in which there are both vagal and sympathetic reflex changes.

Features of Neurally Mediated Syncope

In addition to symptoms of orthostatic intolerance such as dizziness, lightheadedness, and fatigue, premonitory features of autonomic activation may be present in patients with neurally mediated syncope. These include diaphoresis, pallor, palpitations, nausea, hyperventilation, and yawning. During the syncopal event proximal and distal myoclonus (typically arrhythmic and multifocal) may occur, raising the possibility of epilepsy. The eyes typically remain open and usually deviate upward. Urinary but not fecal incontinence may occur. Postictal confusion is rare, although visual and auditory hallucinations are sometimes reported.

While some predisposing factors and provocative stimuli are well established (for example, motionless upright posture, warm ambient temperature, intravascular volume depletion, alcohol ingestion, hypoxemia, anemia, pain, the sight of blood, venipuncture, and intense emotion), the underlying basis for the widely different thresholds for syncope among individuals exposed to the same provocative stimulus is not known. A genetic basis for neurally mediated syncope may exist; several studies have reported an increased incidence of syncope in first-degree relatives of fainters, but no gene or genetic marker has been identified, and environmental, social, and cultural factors have not been excluded by these studies.

Treatment: Neurally Mediated Syncope

Reassurance, avoidance of provocative stimuli, and plasma volume expansion with fluid and salt are the cornerstones of the management of neurally mediated syncope. Isometric counterpressure maneuvers of the limbs (leg crossing or handgrip and arm tensing) may raise blood pressure and, by maintaining pressure in the autoregulatory zone, avoid or delay the onset of syncope. Randomized controlled trials support this intervention.

Fludrocortisone, vasoconstricting agents, and beta-adrenoreceptor antagonists are widely used by experts to treat refractory patients, although there is no consistent evidence from randomized, controlled trials for any pharmacotherapy to treat neurally mediated syncope. Because vasodilation is the dominant pathophysiologic syncopal mechanism in most patients, use of a cardiac pacemaker is rarely beneficial. Possible exceptions are older patients in whom syncope is associated with asystole or severe bradycardia, and patients with prominent cardioinhibition due to carotid sinus syndrome. In these patients, dual-chamber pacing may be helpful.

Orthostatic Hypotension

Orthostatic hypotension, defined as a reduction in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 3 minutes of standing or head-up tilt on a tilt table, is a manifestation of sympathetic vasoconstrictor (autonomic) failure (Fig. 20-3). In many (but not all) cases, there is no compensatory increase in heart rate despite hypotension; with partial autonomic failure, heart rate may increase to some degree but is insufficient to maintain cardiac output. A variant of orthostatic hypotension is "delayed" orthostatic hypotension which occurs beyond 3 minutes of standing; this may reflect a mild or early form of sympathetic adrenergic dysfunction. In some cases, orthostatic hypotension occurs within 15 seconds of standing (so-called "initial" orthostatic hypotension), a finding that may represent a transient mismatch between cardiac output and peripheral vascular resistance and does not represent autonomic failure.

Figure 20-3

 
 
 
 
A. The gradual fall in blood pressure without a compensatory heart rate increase that is characteristic of orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic failure. Blood pressure and heart rate are shown over 5 minutes (from 60 to 360 seconds) of an upright tilt on a tilt table. B. The same tracing expanded to show 40 seconds of the episode (from 180 to 220 seconds). BP, blood pressure; bpm, beats per minute; HR, heart rate.
 
 

Characteristic symptoms of orthostatic hypotension include light-headedness, dizziness, and presyncope (near-faintness) occurring in response to sudden postural change. However, symptoms may be absent or non-specific, such as generalized weakness, fatigue, cognitive slowing, leg buckling, or headache. Visual blurring may occur, likely due to retinal or occipital lobe ischemia. Neck pain〞typically in the suboccipital, posterior cervical, and shoulder region (the "coat-hanger headache"), most likely due to neck muscle ischemia, may be the only symptom. Patients may report orthostatic dyspnea (thought to reflect ventilation-perfusion mismatch due to inadequate perfusion of ventilated lung apices) or angina (attributed to impaired myocardial perfusion even with normal coronary arteries). Symptoms may be exacerbated by exertion, prolonged standing, increased ambient temperature, or meals. Syncope is usually preceded by warning symptoms, but may occur suddenly, suggesting the possibility of a seizure or cardiac cause.

Supine hypertension is common in patients with orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic failure, affecting over 50% of patients in some series. Orthostatic hypotension may present after initiation of therapy for hypertension, and supine hypertension may follow treatment of orthostatic hypotension. However, in other cases, the association of the two conditions is unrelated to therapy; it may in part be explained by baroreflex dysfunction in the presence of residual sympathetic outflow, particularly in patients with central autonomic degeneration.

Causes of Neurogenic Orthostatic Hypotension

Causes of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension include central and peripheral autonomic nervous system dysfunction (Chap. 375). Autonomic dysfunction of other organ systems (including the bladder, bowels, sexual organs, and sudomotor system) of varying severity frequently accompanies orthostatic hypotension in these disorders (Table 20-2).

The primary autonomic degenerative disorders are multiple system atrophy (the Shy-Drager syndrome; Chap. 375), Parkinson's disease (Chap. 372), dementia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 371), and pure autonomic failure (Chap. 375). These are often grouped together as "synucleinopathies" due to the presence of alpha-synuclein, a small protein that precipitates predominantly in the cytoplasm of neurons in the Lewy body disorders (Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and pure autonomic failure) and in the glia in multiple system atrophy.

Peripheral autonomic dysfunction may also accompany small fiber peripheral neuropathies such as those seen in diabetes, amyloid, immune-mediated neuropathies, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN; particularly HSAN type III; familial dysautonomia), and inflammatory neuropathies (Chaps. 385 and 386). Less frequently, orthostatic hypotension is associated with the peripheral neuropathies that accompany vitamin B12 deficiency, neurotoxic exposure, HIV and other infections, and porphyria.

Patients with autonomic failure and the elderly are susceptible to falls in blood pressure associated with meals. The magnitude of the blood pressure fall is exacerbated by large meals, meals high in carbohydrate, and alcohol intake. The mechanism of postprandial syncope is not fully elucidated.

Orthostatic hypotension is often iatrogenic. Drugs from several classes may lower peripheral resistance (e.g., alpha-adrenoreceptor antagonists used to treat hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy; antihypertensive agents of several classes; nitrates and other vasodilators; tricyclic agents and phenothiazines). Iatrogenic volume depletion due to diuresis and volume depletion due to medical causes (hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, or decreased fluid intake) may also result in decreased effective circulatory volume, orthostatic hypotension, and syncope.

Treatment: Orthostatic Hypotension

The first step is to remove reversible causes〞usually vasoactive medications (Table 375-6). Next, nonpharmacologic interventions should be introduced. These interventions include patient education regarding staged moves from supine to upright; warnings about the hypotensive effects of meal ingestion; instructions about the isometric counterpressure maneuvers that increase intravascular pressure (see above); and raising the head of the bed to reduce supine hypertension. Intravascular volume should be expanded by increasing dietary fluid and salt. If these nonpharmacologic measures fail, pharmacologic intervention with fludrocortisone acetate and vasoconstricting agents such as midodrine and pseudoephedrine should be introduced. Some patients with intractable symptoms require additional therapy with supplementary agents that include pyridostigmine, yohimbine, desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), and erythropoietin (Chap. 375).

Cardiac Syncope

Cardiac (or cardiovascular) syncope is caused by arrhythmias and structural heart disease. These may occur in combination because structural disease renders the heart more vulnerable to abnormal electrical activity.

Arrhythmias

Bradyarrhythmias that cause syncope include those due to severe sinus node dysfunction (e.g., sinus arrest or sinoatrial block) and atrioventricular block (e.g., Mobitz type II, high-grade, and complete AV block). The bradyarrhythmias due to sinus node dysfunction are often associated with an atrial tachyarrhythmia, a disorder known as the tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome. A prolonged pause following the termination of a tachycardic episode is a frequent cause of syncope in patients with the tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome. Medications of several classes may also cause bradyarrhythmias of sufficient severity to cause syncope. Syncope due to bradycardia or asystole is referred to as a Stokes-Adams attack.

Ventricular tachyarrhythmias frequently cause syncope. The likelihood of syncope with ventricular tachycardia is in part dependent on the ventricular rate; rates below 200 beats per minute are less likely to cause syncope. The compromised hemodynamic function during ventricular tachycardia is caused by ineffective ventricular contraction, reduced diastolic filling due to abbreviated filling periods, loss of atrioventricular synchrony, and concurrent myocardial ischemia.

Several disorders associated with cardiac electrophysiologic instability and arrhythmogenesis are due to mutations in ion channel subunit genes. These include the long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. The long QT syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder associated with prolonged cardiac repolarization and a predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias. Syncope and sudden death in patients with long QT syndrome result from a unique polymorphic ventricular tachycardia called torsades des pointes that degenerates into ventricular fibrillation. The long QT syndrome has been linked to genes encoding K+ channel -subunits, K+ channel -subunits, voltage-gated Na+ channel, and a scaffolding protein, ankyrin B (ANK2). Brugada syndrome is characterized by idiopathic ventricular fibrillation in association with right ventricular electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities without structural heart disease. This disorder is also genetically heterogeneous, although it is most frequently linked to mutations in the Na+ channel -subunit, SCN5A. Catecholaminergic polymorphic tachycardia is an inherited, genetically heterogeneous disorder associated with exercise-or stress-induced ventricular arrhythmias, syncope, or sudden death. Acquired QT interval prolongation, most commonly due to drugs, may also result in ventricular arrhythmias and syncope. These disorders are discussed in detail in Chap. 233.

Structural Disease

Structural heart disease, (e.g., valvular disease, myocardial ischemia, hypertrophic and other cardiomyopathies, cardiac masses such as atrial myxoma, and pericardial effusions) may lead to syncope by compromising cardiac output. Structural disease may also contribute to other pathophysiologic mechanisms of syncope. For example, cardiac structural disease may predispose to arrhythmogenesis; aggressive treatment of cardiac failure with diuretics and/or vasodilators may lead to orthostatic hypotension; and inappropriate reflex vasodilation may occur with structural disorders such as aortic stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, possibly provoked by increased ventricular contractility.

Treatment: Cardiac Syncope

Treatment of cardiac disease depends upon the underlying disorder. Therapies for arrhythmias include cardiac pacing for sinus node disease and AV block, and ablation, anti-arrhythmic drugs, and cardioverter-defibrillators for atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias. These disorders are best managed by physicians with specialized skills in this area.

Approach to the Patient

Syncope

Differential Diagnosis

Syncope is easily diagnosed when the characteristic features are present; however, several disorders with transient real or apparent loss of consciousness may create diagnostic confusion.

Generalized and partial seizures may be confused with syncope; however, there are a number of differentiating features. Whereas tonic-clonic movements are the hallmark of a generalized seizure, myoclonic and other movements also may occur in up to 90% of syncopal episodes. Myoclonic jerks associated with syncope may be multifocal or generalized. They are typically arrhythmic and of short duration (<30 s). Mild flexor and extensor posturing also may occur. Partial- or partial-complex seizures with secondary generalization are usually preceded by an aura, commonly an unpleasant smell; fear anxiety; abdominal discomfort or other visceral sensations. These phenomena should be differentiated from the premonitory features of syncope.

Autonomic manifestations of seizures (autonomic epilepsy) may provide a more difficult diagnostic challenge. Autonomic seizures have cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, urogenital, pupillary, and cutaneous manifestations that are similar to the premonitory features of syncope. Furthermore, the cardiovascular manifestations of autonomic epilepsy include clinically significant tachycardias and bradycardias that may be of sufficient magnitude to cause loss of consciousness. The presence of accompanying non-autonomic auras may help differentiate these episodes from syncope.

Loss of consciousness associated with a seizure usually lasts longer than 5 minutes and is associated with prolonged postictal drowsiness and disorientation, whereas reorientation occurs almost immediately after a syncopal event. Muscle aches may occur after both syncope and seizures, although they tend to last longer following a seizure. Seizures, unlike syncope, are rarely provoked by emotions or pain. Incontinence of urine may occur with both seizures and syncope; however, fecal incontinence does not occur with syncope.

Hypoglycemia may cause transient loss of consciousness, typically in individuals with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes treated with insulin. The clinical features associated with impending or actual hypoglycemia include tremor, palpitations, anxiety, diaphoresis, hunger, and paresthesias. These symptoms are due to autonomic activation to counter the falling blood glucose. Hunger, in particular, is not a typical premonitory feature of syncope. Hypoglycemia also impairs neuronal function, leading to fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and cognitive and behavioral symptoms. Diagnostic difficulties may occur in individuals in strict glycemic control; repeated hypoglycemia impairs the counterregulatory response and leads to a loss of the characteristic warning symptoms that are the hallmark of hypoglycemia.

Patients with cataplexy experience an abrupt partial or complete loss of muscular tone triggered by strong emotions, typically anger or laughter. Unlike syncope, consciousness is maintained throughout the attacks, which typically last between 30 seconds and 2 minutes. There are no premonitory symptoms. Cataplexy occurs in 60每75% of patients with narcolepsy.

The clinical interview and interrogation of eyewitnesses usually allows differentiation of syncope from falls due to vestibular dysfunction, cerebellar disease, extrapyramidal system dysfunction, and other gait disorders. If the fall is accompanied by head trauma, a postconcussive syndrome, amnesia for the precipitating events, and/or the presence of loss of consciousness may contribute to diagnostic difficulty.

Apparent loss of consciousness can be a manifestation of psychiatric disorders such as generalized anxiety, panic disorders, major depression, and somatization disorder. These possibilities should be considered in individuals who faint frequently without prodromal symptoms. Such patients are rarely injured despite numerous falls. There are no clinically significant hemodynamic changes concurrent with these episodes. In contrast, transient loss of consciousness due to vasovagal syncope precipitated by fear, stress, anxiety, and emotional distress is accompanied by hypotension, bradycardia, or both.

Initial Evaluation

The goals of the initial evaluation are to determine whether the transient loss of consciousness was due to syncope; to identify the cause; and to assess risk for future episodes and serious harm (Table 20-1). The initial evaluation should include a detailed history, thorough questioning of eyewitnesses, and a complete physical and neurologic examination. Blood pressure and heart rate should be measured in the supine position and after 3 minutes of standing to determine whether orthostatic hypotension is present. An ECG should be performed if there is suspicion of syncope due to an arrhythmia or underlying cardiac disease. Relevant electrocardiographic abnormalities include bradyarrhythmias or tachyarrhythmias, atrioventricular block, ischemia, old myocardial infarction, long QT syndrome, and bundle branch block. This initial assessment will lead to the identification of a cause of syncope in approximately 50% of patients and also allows stratification of patients at risk for cardiac mortality.

Laboratory Tests

Baseline laboratory blood tests are rarely helpful in identifying the cause of syncope. Blood tests should be performed when specific disorders, e.g., myocardial infarction, anemia, and secondary autonomic failure are suspected (Table 20-2).

Autonomic Nervous System Testing (Chap. 375)

Autonomic testing including tilt table testing can be performed in specialized centers. Autonomic testing is helpful to uncover objective evidence of autonomic failure and also to demonstrate a predisposition to neurally mediated syncope. Autonomic testing includes assessments of parasympathetic autonomic nervous system function (e.g., heart rate variability to deep respiration and a Valsalva maneuver), sympathetic cholinergic function (e.g., thermoregulatory sweat response and quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test), and sympathetic adrenergic function (e.g., blood pressure response to a Valsalva maneuver and a tilt table test with beat-to-beat blood pressure measurement). The hemodynamic abnormalities demonstrated on tilt table test (Figs. 20-2 and 20-3) may be useful in distinguishing orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic failure from the hypotensive bradycardic response of neurally mediated syncope. Similarly, the tilt table test may help identify patients with syncope due to delayed or initial orthostatic hypotension.

Carotid sinus massage should be considered in patients with symptoms suggestive of carotid sinus syncope and in patients over age 50 years with recurrent syncope of unknown etiology. This test should only be carried out under continuous ECG and blood pressure monitoring and should be avoided in patients with carotid bruits, plaques, or stenosis.

Cardiac Evaluation

ECG monitoring is indicated for patients with a high pretest probability of arrhythmia causing syncope. Patients should be monitored in hospital if the likelihood of a life-threatening arrhythmia is high, e.g., patients with severe structural or coronary artery disease, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, trifascicular heart block, prolonged QT interval, Brugada's syndrome ECG pattern, and family history of sudden cardiac death. Outpatient Holter monitoring is recommended for patients who experience frequent syncopal episodes (one or more per week), whereas loop recorders, which continually record and erase cardiac rhythm, are indicated for patients with suspected arrhythmias with low risk of sudden cardiac death. Loop recorders may be external (recommended for evaluation of episodes that occur at a frequency of greater than one per month) or implantable (if syncope occurs less frequently).

Echocardiography should be performed in patients with a history of cardiac disease or if abnormalities are found on physical examination or the electrocardiogram. Echocardiographic diagnoses that may be responsible for syncope include aortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac tumors, aortic dissection, and pericardial tamponade. Echocardiography also has a role in risk stratification based on the left ventricular ejection fraction.

Treadmill exercise testing with ECG and blood pressure monitoring should be performed in patients who have experienced syncope during or shortly after exercise. Treadmill testing may help identify exercise-induced arrhythmias (e.g., tachycardia-related AV block) and exercise-induced exaggerated vasodilation.

Electrophysiologic studies are indicated in patients with structural heart disease and ECG abnormalities in whom noninvasive investigations have failed to yield a diagnosis. Electrophysiologic studies have low sensitivity and specificity and should only be performed when a high pretest probability exists. Currently, this test is rarely performed to evaluate patients with syncope.

Psychiatric Evaluation

Screening for psychiatric disorders may be appropriate in patients with recurrent unexplained syncope episodes. Tilt table testing, with demonstration of symptoms in the absence of hemodynamic change, may be useful in reproducing syncope in patients with suspected psychogenic syncope.
 
Further Readings

COLEMAN N et al: Syncope, in Course and Treatment of Neurological Diseases, 2nd ed, T Brandt et al (eds). San Diego Academic Press, 2003 

 
FREEMAN R: Autonomic peripheral neuropathy. Lancet 365:1259, 2005 [PMID: 15811460] 

 
〞〞〞: Clinical practice. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. N Engl J Med 358:615, 2008 

 
GANZEBOOM KS et al: Lifetime cumulative incidence of syncope in the general population: A study of 549 Dutch subjects aged 35每60 years. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 17:1172, 2006 [PMID: 17074006] 

 
KAUFMANN H, BIAGGIONI I: Autonomic failure in neurodegenerative disorders. Semin Neurol 23:351, 2003 [PMID: 15088256] 

 
LEMPERT T: Recognizing syncope: Pitfalls and surprises. J R Soc Med 89:372, 1996 [PMID: 8774533] 

 
MOYA A et al: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (version 2009): The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Syncope of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 30:2631, 2009 [PMID: 19713422] 

 
SHAH M et al: Molecular basis of arrhythmias. Circulation 112:2517, 2005 [PMID: 16230503] 

 
SULE S et al: Etiology of syncope in patients hospitalized with syncope and predictors of mortality and rehospitalization for syncope at 27-month follow-up. Clin Cardiol 34:35, 2011 [PMID: 21259276] 

 
WIELING W et al: Symptoms and signs of syncope: A review of the link between physiology and clinical clues. Brain 132:2630, 2009 [PMID: 19587129] 

 
 


^^
Dizziness and Vertigo: Introduction

Dizziness is a common, vexing symptom, and epidemiologic data indicate that more than 20% of adults experience dizziness within a given year. The diagnosis is frequently challenging, in part because patients use the term to refer to a variety of different sensations, including feelings of faintness, spinning, and other illusions of motion, imbalance, and anxiety. Other descriptive words, such as light-headedness, are equally ambiguous, referring in some cases to a presyncopal sensation due to hypoperfusion of the brain and in others to disequilibrium and imbalance. Patients often have difficulty distinguishing among these various symptoms, and the words they choose do not describe the underlying etiology reliably.

Vascular disorders cause presyncopal dizziness as a result of cardiac dysrhythmia, orthostatic hypotension, medication effects, or another cause. Such presyncopal sensations vary in duration; they may increase in severity until loss of consciousness occurs, or they may resolve before loss of consciousness if the cerebral ischemia is corrected. Faintness and syncope, which are discussed in detail in Chap. 20, should always be considered when one is evaluating patients with brief episodes of dizziness or dizziness that occurs with upright posture.

Vestibular causes of dizziness may be due to peripheral lesions that affect the labyrinths or vestibular nerves or to involvement of the central vestibular pathways. They may be paroxysmal or due to a fixed unilateral or bilateral vestibular deficit. Acute unilateral lesions cause vertigo due to a sudden imbalance in vestibular inputs from the two labyrinths. Bilateral lesions cause imbalance and instability of vision when the head moves (oscillopsia). Other causes of dizziness include nonvestibular imbalance and gait disorders (e.g., loss of proprioception from sensory neuropathy, parkinsonism) and anxiety.

In evaluating patients with dizziness, questions to consider include the following: (1) is it dangerous (e.g., arrhythmia, transient ischemic attack/stroke)? (2) is it vestibular? and (3) if vestibular, is it peripheral or central? A careful history and examination often provide enough information to answer these questions and determine whether additional studies or referral to a specialist is necessary.

Approach to the Patient: Dizziness

History

When a patient presents with dizziness, the first step is to delineate more precisely the nature of the symptom. In the case of vestibular disorders, the physical symptoms depend on whether the lesion is unilateral or bilateral and whether it is acute or chronic and progressive. Vertigo, an illusion of self or environmental motion, implies asymmetry of vestibular inputs from the two labyrinths or in their central pathways and is usually acute. Symmetric bilateral vestibular hypofunction causes imbalance but no vertigo. Because of the ambiguity in patients' descriptions of their symptoms, diagnosis based simply on symptom character is typically unreliable. The history should focus closely on other features, including whether dizziness is paroxysmal or has occurred only once, the duration of each episode, any provoking factors, and the symptoms that accompany the dizziness.

Causes of dizziness can be divided into episodes that last for seconds, minutes, hours, or days. Common causes of brief dizziness (seconds) include benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) and orthostatic hypotension, both of which typically are provoked by changes in position. Attacks of migrainous vertigo and M谷ni豕re's disease often last hours. When episodes are of intermediate duration (minutes), transient ischemic attacks of the posterior circulation should be considered, although these episodes also could be due to migraine or a number of other causes.

Symptoms that accompany vertigo may be helpful in distinguishing peripheral vestibular lesions from central causes. Unilateral hearing loss and other aural symptoms (ear pain, pressure, fullness) typically point to a peripheral cause. Because the auditory pathways quickly become bilateral upon entering the brainstem, central lesions are unlikely to cause unilateral hearing loss (unless the lesion lies near the root entry zone of the auditory nerve). Symptoms such as double vision, numbness, and limb ataxia suggest a brainstem or cerebellar lesion.

Examination

Because dizziness and imbalance can be a manifestation of a variety of neurologic disorders, the neurologic examination is important in the evaluation of these patients. Particular focus should be given to assessment of eye movements, vestibular function, and hearing. The range of eye movements and whether they are equal in each eye should be observed. Peripheral eye movement disorders (e.g., cranial neuropathies, eye muscle weakness) are usually disconjugate (different in the two eyes). One should check pursuit (the ability to follow a smoothly moving target) and saccades (the ability to look back and forth accurately between two targets). Poor pursuit or inaccurate (dysmetric) saccades usually indicates central pathology, often involving the cerebellum. Finally, one should look for spontaneous nystagmus, an involuntary back-and-forth movement of the eyes. Most often nystagmus is of the jerk type, in which a slow drift (slow phase) in one direction alternates with a rapid saccadic movement (quick phase or fast phase) in the opposite direction that resets the position of the eyes in the orbits. Table 21-1 lists features that help distinguish peripheral vestibular nystagmus from central nystagmus. Except in the case of acute vestibulopathy (e.g., vestibular neuritis), if primary position nystagmus is easily seen in the light, it is probably due to a central cause. Two forms of nystagmus that are characteristic of lesions of the cerebellar pathways are vertical nystagmus with downward fast phases (downbeat nystagmus) and horizontal nystagmus that changes direction with gaze (gaze-evoked nystagmus).

Table 21-1 Features of Peripheral and Central Vertigo

 
 
Sign or Symptom Peripheral (Labyrinth or Vestibular Nerve) Central (Brainstem or Cerebellum) 
Direction of associated nystagmus Unidirectional; fast phase opposite lesiona
  Bidirectional (direction-changing) or unidirectional 
Purely horizontal nystagmus without torsional component Uncommon May be present 
Purely vertical or purely torsional nystagmus Never presentb
  May be present 
Visual fixation Inhibits nystagmus No inhibition 
Tinnitus and/or deafness Often present Usually absent 
Associated central nervous system abnormalities None Extremely common (e.g., diplopia, hiccups, cranial neuropathies, dysarthria) 
Common causes Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, infection (labyrinthitis), vestibular neuritis, M谷ni豕re's disease, labyrinthine ischemia, trauma, toxin Vascular, demyelinating, neoplasm 
 


a In M谷ni豕re's disease, the direction of the fast phase is variable.

b Combined vertical-torsional nystagmus suggests BPPV.
 

Specialists find that the most useful bedside test of peripheral vestibular function is the head impulse test, in which the vestibuloocular reflex (VOR) is assessed with small-amplitude (approximately 20 degrees) rapid head rotations; beginning in the primary position, the head is rotated to the left or right while the patient is instructed to fixate on the examiner's face. If the VOR is deficient, a catch-up saccade is seen at the end of the rotation. This test can identify both unilateral (deficient VOR when the head is rotated toward the weak side) and bilateral vestibular hypofunction.

All patients with episodic dizziness, especially if it is provoked by positional change, should be tested with the Dix-Hallpike maneuver. The patient begins in a sitting position with the head turned 45 degrees; holding the back of the head, the examiner then gently lowers the patient into a supine position with the head extended backward by about 20 degrees, and observes for nystagmus; after 30 s the patient is raised to the sitting position and after a 1-min rest the procedure is repeated with the head turned to the other side. Use of Frenzel eyeglasses (self-illuminated goggles with convex lenses that blur the patient's vision but allow the examiner to see the eyes greatly magnified) can improve the sensitivity of the test. If transient upbeating and torsional nystagmus are elicited in the supine position, posterior canal BPPV can be diagnosed confidently and treated with a repositioning maneuver, and additional testing can be avoided.

Dynamic visual acuity is a functional test that can be useful in assessing vestibular function. Visual acuity is measured with the head still and when the head is rotated back and forth by the examiner (about 1每2 Hz). A drop in visual acuity during head motion of more than one line on a near card or Snellen chart is abnormal.

The choice of ancillary tests should be guided by the history and examination findings. Audiometry should be performed whenever a vestibular disorder is suspected. Unilateral sensorineural hearing loss supports a peripheral disorder (e.g., vestibular schwannoma). Predominantly low-frequency hearing loss is characteristic of M谷ni豕re's disease. Electro- or videonystagmography includes recordings of spontaneous nystagmus (if present), pursuit, and saccades; caloric testing to assess the responses of the two horizontal semicircular canals; and measurement of positional nystagmus. Patients with unexplained unilateral hearing loss or vestibular hypofunction should undergo magnetic resonance imaging of the internal auditory canals, including administration of gadolinium, to rule out a schwannoma.

Treatment: Dizziness

Treatment of vestibular symptoms should be driven by the underlying diagnosis. Simply treating dizziness with vestibular suppressant medications is often not helpful and may make the symptoms worse. The diagnostic and specific treatment approaches for the most commonly encountered vestibular disorders are discussed below.

Acute Prolonged Vertigo

An acute unilateral vestibular lesion causes constant vertigo, nausea, vomiting, oscillopsia (motion of the visual scene), and imbalance. These symptoms are due to a sudden asymmetry of inputs from the two labyrinths or in their central connections, simulating a continuous rotation of the head. Unlike BPPV, the vertigo persists even when the head is not moving.

When a patient presents with an acute vestibular syndrome, the most important question is whether the lesion is central (e.g., a cerebellar or brainstem infarct or hemorrhage), which may be life-threatening, or peripheral, affecting the vestibular nerve or labyrinth. Attention should be given to any symptoms or signs that point to central dysfunction (diplopia, weakness or numbness, dysarthria). The pattern of spontaneous nystagmus, if present, may be helpful (Table 21-1). If the head impulse test is normal, an acute peripheral vestibular lesion is unlikely. However, a central lesion cannot always be excluded with certainly on the basis of symptoms and examination alone; thus, older patients with vascular risk factors who present with an acute vestibular syndrome generally should be evaluated for the possibility of stroke even when there are no specific findings that indicate a central lesion.

Most patients with vestibular neuritis recover spontaneously, but glucocorticoids can improve outcome if administered within 3 days of symptom onset. Antiviral medications are of no proven benefit unless there is evidence to suggest herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome). Vestibular suppressant medications may reduce acute symptoms but should be avoided after the first several days as they may impede central compensation and recovery. Patients should be encouraged to resume a normal level of activity as soon as possible, and directed vestibular rehabilitation therapy may accelerate improvement.

Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo

BPPV is a common cause of recurrent vertigo. Episodes are brief (<1 min and typically 15每20 s) and are always provoked by changes in head position relative to gravity, such as lying down, rolling over in bed, rising from a supine position, and extending the head to look upward. The attacks are caused by free-floating otoconia (calcium carbonate crystals) that have been dislodged from the utricular macula and have moved into one of the semicircular canals, usually the posterior canal. When head position changes, gravity causes the otoconia to move within the canal, producing vertigo and nystagmus. With posterior canal BPPV, the nystagmus beats upward and torsionally (the upper poles of the eyes beat toward the affected ear). Less commonly, the otoconia enter the horizontal canal, resulting in a horizontal nystagmus when the patient is lying with either ear down. Superior (also called anterior) canal involvement is rare. BPPV is treated with repositioning maneuvers that utilize gravity to remove the otoconia from the semicircular canal. For posterior canal BPPV, the Epley maneuver is the most commonly used procedure. For more refractory cases of BPPV, patients can be taught a variant of this maneuver that they can perform alone at home.

Vestibular Migraine

Vestibular symptoms occur frequently in migraine, sometimes as a headache aura but often independent of headache. The duration of vertigo may be from minutes to hours, and some patients also experience more prolonged periods of disequilibrium (lasting days to weeks). Motion sensitivity and sensitivity to visual motion (e.g., movies) are common in patients with vestibular migraine. Although data from controlled studies are generally lacking, vestibular migraine typically is treated with medications that are used for prophylaxis of migraine headaches. Antiemetics may be helpful to relieve symptoms at the time of an attack.

M谷ni豕re's Disease

Attacks of M谷ni豕re's disease consist of vertigo, hearing loss, and pain, pressure, or fullness in the affected ear. The hearing loss and aural symptoms are key features that distinguish M谷ni豕re's disease from other peripheral vestibulopathies. Audiometry at the time of an attack shows a characteristic asymmetric low-frequency hearing loss; hearing commonly improves between attacks, although permanent hearing loss may occur eventually. M谷ni豕re's disease is thought to be due to excess fluid (endolymph) in the inner ear, hence the term endolymphatic hydrops. Patients suspected of having M谷ni豕re's disease should be referred to an otolaryngologist for further evaluation. Diuretics and sodium restriction are the initial treatments. If attacks persist, injections of gentamicin into the middle ear are typically the next line of therapy. Full ablative procedures (vestibular nerve section, labyrinthectomy) seldom are required.

Vestibular Schwannoma

Vestibular schwannomas (sometimes less correctly termed acoustic neuromas) and other tumors at the cerebellopontine angle cause slowly progressive unilateral sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular hypofunction. These patients typically do not have vertigo, because the gradual vestibular deficit is compensated centrally as it develops. The diagnosis often is not made until there is sufficient hearing loss to be noticed. The examination will show a deficient Halmagyi-Curthoys head impulse response when the head is rotated toward the affected side. Any patient with unexplained asymmetric vestibular function (e.g., no prior history of vestibular neuritis) or asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss (documented on audiometry) should undergo MRI of the internal auditory canals, including gadolinium administration, to rule out a schwannoma.

Bilateral Vestibular Hypofunction

Patients with bilateral loss of vestibular function also typically do not have vertigo, since vestibular function is lost on both sides simultaneously, thus there is no asymmetry of vestibular input. Symptoms include loss of balance, particularly in the dark, where vestibular input is most critical, and oscillopsia during head movement, such as while walking or riding in a car. Bilateral vestibular hypofunction may be (1) idiopathic and progressive, (2) part of a neurodegenerative disorder, or (3) iatrogenic, due to medication ototoxicity (most commonly gentamicin or other aminoglycoside antibiotics). Other causes include bilateral vestibular schwannomas (neurofibromatosis type 2), autoimmune disease, meningeal-based infection or tumor, and other toxins. It also may occur in patients with peripheral polyneuropathy; in these patients, both vestibular loss and impaired proprioception may contribute to poor balance. Finally, unilateral processes such as vestibular neuritis and M谷ni豕re's disease may involve both ears sequentially, resulting in bilateral vestibulopathy.

Examination findings include diminished dynamic visual acuity (see above) due to loss of stable vision when the head is moving, abnormal head impulse responses in both directions, and a Romberg sign. In the laboratory, responses to caloric testing are reduced. Patients with bilateral vestibular hypofunction should be referred for vestibular rehabilitation therapy. Vestibular suppressant medications should not be used, as they will increase the imbalance. Evaluation by a neurologist is important not only to confirm the diagnosis but also to consider any other associated neurologic abnormalities that may clarify the etiology.

Psychosomatic Dizziness

Psychological factors play an important role in chronic dizziness. First, dizziness may be a somatic manifestation of a psychiatric condition such as major depression, anxiety, or panic disorder. Second, patients may develop anxiety and autonomic symptoms as a consequence or comorbidity of an independent vestibular disorder. One particular form of this has been termed variously phobic postural vertigo, psychophysiologic vertigo, or chronic subjective dizziness. These patients have a chronic feeling (months or longer) of dizziness and disequilibrium, an increased sensitivity to self-motion and visual motion (e.g., movies), and a particular intensification of symptoms when moving through complex visual environments such as supermarkets (visual vertigo). Although there may be a past history of an acute vestibular disorder (e.g., vestibular neuritis), the neurootologic examination and vestibular testing are normal or indicative of a compensated vestibular deficit, indicating that the ongoing subjective dizziness cannot be explained by a primary vestibular disorder. Anxiety disorders are common in patients with chronic dizziness and contribute substantially to the morbidity. Thus, treatment with antianxiety medications [selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)] and cognitive/behavioral therapy may be helpful. Vestibular rehabilitation therapy is also sometimes beneficial. Vestibular suppressant medications generally should be avoided. This condition should be suspected when the patient states, "My dizziness is so bad, I'm afraid to leave my house" (agoraphobia). General treatment of vertigo consists of vestibular suppressant medications and vestibular rehabilitation therapy.

Treatment: Vertigo

Table 21-2 provides a list of commonly used medications for suppression of vertigo. As noted, these medications should be reserved for short-term control of active vertigo, such as during the first few days of acute vestibular neuritis, or for acute attacks of M谷ni豕re's disease. They are less helpful for chronic dizziness and, as previously stated, may hinder central compensation. An exception is that benzodiazepines may attenuate psychosomatic dizziness and the associated anxiety, although SSRIs are generally preferable in such patients.

Table 21-2 Treatment of Vertigo

 
 
Agenta
  Doseb
  
Antihistamines   
  Meclizine 

  Dimenhydrinate 

  Promethazine
 25每50 mg 3 times daily 

50 mg 1每2 times daily

25 mg 2每3 times daily (also can be given rectally and IM)
 
Benzodiazepines   
  Diazepam 

  Clonazepam
 2.5 mg 1每3 times daily

0.25 mg 1每3 times daily
 
Anticholinergic   
  Scopolamine transdermalc
  Patch 
Physical therapy   
  Repositioning maneuversd
    
  Vestibular rehabilitation   
Other   
  Diuretics and/or low-sodium (1 g/d) diete
    
  Antimigrainous drugsf
    
  Methylprednisoloneg
  100 mg daily days 1每3; 80 mg daily days 4每6; 60 mg daily days 7每9; 40 mg daily days 10每12; 20 mg daily days 13每15; 10 mg daily days 16每18, 20, 22 
  Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitorsh
    
 


a All listed drugs are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, but most are not approved for the treatment of vertigo.

b Usual oral (unless otherwise stated) starting dose in adults; a higher maintenance dose can be reached by a gradual increase.

c For motion sickness only.

d For benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.

e For M谷ni豕re's disease.

f For vestibular migraine.

g For acute vestibular neuritis (started within three days of onset).

h For psychosomatic vertigo.
 

Vestibular rehabilitation therapy promotes central adaptation processes that compensate for vestibular loss and also may help habituate motion sensitivity and other symptoms of psychosomatic dizziness. The general approach is to use a graded series of exercises that progressively challenge gaze stabilization and balance.
 
Further Readings

BRONSTEIN AM et al: Chronic dizziness: A practical approach. Pract Neurol 10:129, 2010 [PMID: 20498184] 

 
HALMAGYI GM: Diagnosis and management of vertigo. Clin Med 5:159, 2005 [PMID: 15847010] 

 
JEN JC: Bilateral vestibulopathy: Clinical, diagnostic, and genetic considerations. Semin Neurol 29:528, 2009 [PMID: 19834864] 

 
LEMPERT T et al: Vertigo as a symptom of migraine. Ann NY Acad Sci 1164:242, 2009 [PMID: 19645907] 

 
RUCKENSTEIN MJ, STAAB JP: Chronic subjective dizziness. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 42:71, 2009 [PMID: 19134491] 

 
STRUPP M, BRANDT T: Vestibular neuritis. Semin Neurol 29:509, 2009 [PMID: 19834862] 

 
WALKER MF, ZEE DS: Bedside vestibular examination. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 33: 495, 2000 [PMID: 10815033] 

 
ZINGLER VC et al: Causative factors and epidemiology of bilateral vestibulopathy in 255 patients. Ann Neurol 61:524, 2007 [PMID: 17393465] 

 
 

^^
Weakness and Paralysis: Introduction

Normal motor function involves integrated muscle activity that is modulated by the activity of the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and spinal cord. Motor system dysfunction leads to weakness or paralysis, which is discussed in this chapter, or to ataxia (Chap. 373) or abnormal movements (Chap. 372). The mode of onset, distribution, and accompaniments of weakness help suggest its cause.

Weakness is a reduction in the power that can be exerted by one or more muscles. Increased fatigability or limitation in function due to pain or articular stiffness often is confused with weakness by patients. Increased fatigability is the inability to sustain the performance of an activity that should be normal for a person of the same age, sex, and size. Increased time is required sometimes for full power to be exerted, and this bradykinesia may be misinterpreted as weakness. Severe proprioceptive sensory loss also may lead to complaints of weakness because adequate feedback information about the direction and power of movements is lacking. Finally, apraxia, a disorder of planning and initiating a skilled or learned movement unrelated to a significant motor or sensory deficit (Chap. 26), sometimes is mistaken for weakness.

Paralysis indicates weakness that is so severe that a muscle cannot be contracted at all, whereas paresis refers to weakness that is mild or moderate. The prefix "hemi-" refers to one-half of the body, "para-" to both legs, and "quadri-" to all four limbs. The suffix "-plegia" signifies severe weakness or paralysis.

The distribution of weakness helps to indicate the site of the underlying lesion. Weakness from involvement of upper motor neurons occurs particularly in the extensors and abductors of the upper limb and the flexors of the lower limb. Lower motor neuron weakness does not have this selectivity but depends on whether involvement is at the level of the anterior horn cells, nerve root, limb plexus, or peripheral nerve〞only muscles supplied by the affected structure are weak. Myopathic weakness is generally most marked in proximal muscles, whereas weakness from impaired neuromuscular transmission has no specific pattern of involvement. Weakness often is accompanied by other neurologic abnormalities that help indicate the site of the responsible lesion. These abnormalities include changes in tone, muscle bulk, muscle stretch reflexes, and cutaneous reflexes (Table 22-1).

Table 22-1 Signs that Distinguish the Origin of Weakness

 
 
Sign Upper Motor Neuron Lower Motor Neuron Myopathic 
Atrophy None Severe Mild 
Fasciculations None Common None 
Tone Spastic Decreased Normal/decreased 
Distribution of weakness Pyramidal/regional Distal/segmental Proximal 
Tendon reflexes Hyperactive Hypoactive/absent Normal/hypoactive 
Babinski sign Present Absent Absent 
 

 

Tone is the resistance of a muscle to passive stretch. Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities that cause weakness generally produce spasticity, an increase in tone associated with disease of upper motor neurons. Spasticity is velocity-dependent, has a sudden release after reaching a maximum (the "clasp-knife" phenomenon), and predominantly affects the antigravity muscles (i.e., upper-limb flexors and lower-limb extensors). Spasticity is distinct from rigidity and paratonia, two other types of hypertonia. Rigidity is increased tone that is present throughout the range of motion (a "lead pipe" or "plastic" stiffness) and affects flexors and extensors equally; it sometimes has a cogwheel quality that is enhanced by voluntary movement of the contralateral limb (reinforcement). Rigidity occurs with certain extrapyramidal disorders, such as Parkinson's disease. Paratonia (or gegenhalten) is increased tone that varies irregularly in a manner that may seem related to the degree of relaxation, is present throughout the range of motion, and affects flexors and extensors equally; it usually results from disease of the frontal lobes. Weakness with decreased tone (flaccidity) or normal tone occurs with disorders of motor units. A motor unit consists of a single lower motor neuron and all the muscle fibers that it innervates.

Muscle bulk generally is not affected in patients with upper motor neuron lesions, although mild disuse atrophy eventually may occur. By contrast, atrophy is often conspicuous when a lower motor neuron lesion is responsible for weakness and also may occur with advanced muscle disease.

Muscle stretch (tendon) reflexes are usually increased with upper motor neuron lesions, although they may be decreased or absent for a variable period immediately after onset of an acute lesion. This is usually〞but not invariably〞accompanied by abnormalities of cutaneous reflexes (such as superficial abdominals; Chap. 367) and, in particular, by an extensor plantar (Babinski) response. The muscle stretch reflexes are depressed in patients with lower motor neuron lesions when there is direct involvement of specific reflex arcs. The stretch reflexes generally are preserved in patients with myopathic weakness except in advanced stages, when they sometimes are attenuated. In disorders of the neuromuscular junction, the intensity of the reflex responses may be affected by preceding voluntary activity of affected muscles; that activity may lead to enhancement of initially depressed reflexes in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome and, conversely, to depression of initially normal reflexes in myasthenia gravis (Chap. 386).

The distinction of neuropathic (lower motor neuron) from myopathic weakness is sometimes difficult clinically, although distal weakness is likely to be neuropathic, and symmetric proximal weakness myopathic. Fasciculations (visible or palpable twitch within a muscle due to the spontaneous discharge of a motor unit) and early atrophy indicate that weakness is neuropathic.

Pathogenesis

Upper Motor Neuron Weakness

This pattern of weakness results from disorders that affect the upper motor neurons or their axons in the cerebral cortex, subcortical white matter, internal capsule, brainstem, or spinal cord (Fig. 22-1). These lesions produce weakness through decreased activation of the lower motor neurons. In general, distal muscle groups are affected more severely than are proximal ones, and axial movements are spared unless the lesion is severe and bilateral. With corticobulbar involvement, weakness usually is observed only in the lower face and tongue; extraocular, upper facial, pharyngeal, and jaw muscles almost always are spared. With bilateral corticobulbar lesions, pseudobulbar palsy often develops: dysarthria, dysphagia, dysphonia, and emotional lability accompany bilateral facial weakness and a brisk jaw jerk. Spasticity accompanies upper motor neuron weakness but may not be present in the acute phase. Upper motor neuron lesions also affect the ability to perform rapid repetitive movements. Such movements are slow and coarse, but normal rhythmicity is maintained. Finger-nose-finger and heel-knee-shin maneuvers are performed slowly but adequately.

Figure 22-1

 
 
 
The corticospinal and bulbospinal upper motor neuron pathways. Upper motor neurons have their cell bodies in layer V of the primary motor cortex (the precentral gyrus, or Brodmann's area 4) and in the premotor and supplemental motor cortex (area 6). The upper motor neurons in the primary motor cortex are somatotopically organized, as illustrated on the right side of the figure.

Axons of the upper motor neurons descend through the subcortical white matter and the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Axons of the pyramidal or corticospinal system descend through the brainstem in the cerebral peduncle of the midbrain, the basis pontis, and the medullary pyramids. At the cervicomedullary junction, most pyramidal axons decussate into the contralateral corticospinal tract of the lateral spinal cord, but 10每30% remain ipsilateral in the anterior spinal cord. Pyramidal neurons make direct monosynaptic connections with lower motor neurons. They innervate most densely the lower motor neurons of hand muscles and are involved in the execution of learned, fine movements. Corticobulbar neurons are similar to corticospinal neurons but innervate brainstem motor nuclei.

Bulbospinal upper motor neurons influence strength and tone but are not part of the pyramidal system. The descending ventromedial bulbospinal pathways originate in the tectum of the midbrain (tectospinal pathway), the vestibular nuclei (vestibulospinal pathway), and the reticular formation (reticulospinal pathway). These pathways influence axial and proximal muscles and are involved in the maintenance of posture and integrated movements of the limbs and trunk. The descending ventrolateral bulbospinal pathways, which originate predominantly in the red nucleus (rubrospinal pathway), facilitate distal limb muscles. The bulbospinal system sometimes is referred to as the extrapyramidal upper motor neuron system. In all figures, nerve cell bodies and axon terminals are shown, respectively, as closed circles and forks.
 
 

Lower Motor Neuron Weakness

This pattern results from disorders of cell bodies of lower motor neurons in the brainstem motor nuclei and the anterior horn of the spinal cord or from dysfunction of the axons of these neurons as they pass to skeletal muscle (Fig. 22-2). Weakness is due to a decrease in the number of muscle fibers that can be activated through a loss of  motor neurons or disruption of their connections to muscle. Loss of  motor neurons does not cause weakness but decreases tension on the muscle spindles, which decreases muscle tone and attenuates the stretch reflexes elicited on examination. An absent stretch reflex suggests involvement of spindle afferent fibers.

Figure 22-2

 
 
 
Lower motor neurons are divided into  and  types. The larger  motor neurons are more numerous and innervate the extrafusal muscle fibers of the motor unit. Loss of  motor neurons or disruption of their axons produces lower motor neuron weakness. The smaller, less numerous  motor neurons innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers of the muscle spindle and contribute to normal tone and stretch reflexes. The  motor neuron receives direct excitatory input from corticomotoneurons and primary muscle spindle afferents. The  and  motor neurons also receive excitatory input from other descending upper motor neuron pathways, segmental sensory inputs, and interneurons. The  motor neurons receive direct inhibition from Renshaw cell interneurons, and other interneurons indirectly inhibit the  and  motor neurons.

A tendon reflex requires the function of all the illustrated structures. A tap on a tendon stretches muscle spindles (which are tonically activated by  motor neurons) and activates the primary spindle afferent neurons. These neurons stimulate the  motor neurons in the spinal cord, producing a brief muscle contraction, which is the familiar tendon reflex.
 
 

When a motor unit becomes diseased, especially in anterior horn cell diseases, it may discharge spontaneously, producing fasciculations that may be seen or felt clinically or recorded by electromyography (EMG). When  motor neurons or their axons degenerate, the denervated muscle fibers also may discharge spontaneously. These single muscle fiber discharges, or fibrillation potentials, cannot be seen or felt but can be recorded with EMG. If lower motor neuron weakness is present, recruitment of motor units is delayed or reduced, with fewer than normal activated at a particular discharge frequency. This contrasts with weakness of the upper motor neuron type, in which a normal number of motor units is activated at a given frequency but with a diminished maximal discharge frequency.

Myopathic Weakness

Myopathic weakness is produced by disorders of the muscle fibers. Disorders of the neuromuscular junctions also produce weakness, but this is variable in degree and distribution and is influenced by preceding activity of the affected muscle. At a muscle fiber, if the nerve terminal releases a normal number of acetylcholine molecules presynaptically and a sufficient number of postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors are opened, the end plate reaches threshold and thereby generates an action potential that spreads across the muscle fiber membrane and into the transverse tubular system. This electrical excitation activates intracellular events that produce an energy-dependent contraction of the muscle fiber (excitation-contraction coupling).

Myopathic weakness is produced by a decrease in the number or contractile force of muscle fibers activated within motor units. With muscular dystrophies, inflammatory myopathies, or myopathies with muscle fiber necrosis, the number of muscle fibers is reduced within many motor units. On EMG, the size of each motor unit action potential is decreased, and motor units must be recruited more rapidly than normal to produce the desired power. Some myopathies produce weakness through loss of contractile force of muscle fibers or through relatively selective involvement of type II (fast) fibers. These myopathies may not affect the size of individual motor unit action potentials and are detected by a discrepancy between the electrical activity and force of a muscle.

Diseases of the neuromuscular junction, such as myasthenia gravis, produce weakness in a similar manner, but the loss of muscle fibers is functional (due to inability to activate them) rather than related to muscle fiber loss. The number of muscle fibers that are activated varies over time, depending on the state of rest of the neuromuscular junctions. Thus, fatigable weakness is suggestive of myasthenia gravis or other disorders of the neuromuscular junction.

Hemiparesis

Hemiparesis results from an upper motor neuron lesion above the midcervical spinal cord; most such lesions are above the foramen magnum. The presence of other neurologic deficits helps localize the lesion. Thus, language disorders, cortical sensory disturbances, cognitive abnormalities, disorders of visual-spatial integration, apraxia, or seizures point to a cortical lesion. Homonymous visual field defects reflect either a cortical or a subcortical hemispheric lesion. A "pure motor" hemiparesis of the face, arm, and leg often is due to a small, discrete lesion in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle, or upper pons. Some brainstem lesions produce "crossed paralyses," consisting of ipsilateral cranial nerve signs and contralateral hemiparesis (Chap. 370). The absence of cranial nerve signs or facial weakness suggests that a hemiparesis is due to a lesion in the high cervical spinal cord, especially if it is associated with ipsilateral loss of proprioception and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sense (the Brown-S谷quard syndrome).

Acute or episodic hemiparesis usually results from ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke but also may relate to hemorrhage occurring into brain tumors or may be a result of trauma; other causes include a focal structural lesion or an inflammatory process as in multiple sclerosis, abscess, or sarcoidosis. Evaluation (Fig. 22-3) begins immediately with a CT scan of the brain and laboratory studies. If the CT is normal and an ischemic stroke is unlikely, MRI of the brain or cervical spine is performed.

Figure 22-3

 
 
 
An algorithm for the initial workup of a patient with weakness. CT, computed tomography; EMG, electromyography; LMN, lower motor neuron; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NCS, nerve conduction studies; UMN, upper motor neuron.
 
 

Subacute hemiparesis that evolves over days or weeks has an extensive differential diagnosis. A common cause is subdural hematoma, especially in elderly or anticoagulated patients, even when there is no history of trauma. Infectious possibilities include cerebral abscess, fungal granuloma or meningitis, and parasitic infection. Weakness from primary and metastatic neoplasms may evolve over days to weeks. AIDS may present with subacute hemiparesis due to toxoplasmosis or primary CNS lymphoma. Noninfectious inflammatory processes such as multiple sclerosis or, less commonly, sarcoidosis merit consideration. If the brain MRI is normal and there are no cortical and hemispheric signs, MRI of the cervical spine should be undertaken.

Chronic hemiparesis that evolves over months usually is due to a neoplasm or vascular malformation, a chronic subdural hematoma, or a degenerative disease. If an MRI of the brain is normal, the possibility of a foramen magnum or high cervical spinal cord lesion should be considered.

Paraparesis

An intraspinal lesion at or below the upper thoracic spinal cord level is most commonly responsible, but a paraparesis also may result from lesions at other locations that disturb upper motor neurons (especially parasagittal intracranial lesions) and lower motor neurons [anterior horn cell disorders, cauda equina syndromes due to involvement of nerve roots derived from the lower spinal cord (Chap. 377), and peripheral neuropathies].

Acute paraparesis may not be recognized as due to spinal cord disease at an early stage if the legs are flaccid and areflexic. Usually, however, there is sensory loss in the legs with an upper level on the trunk, a dissociated sensory loss suggestive of a central cord syndrome, or exaggerated stretch reflexes in the legs with normal reflexes in the arms. It is important to image the spinal cord (Fig. 22-3). Compressive lesions (particularly epidural tumor, abscess, and hematoma but also a prolapsed intervertebral disk and vertebral involvement by malignancy or infection), spinal cord infarction (proprioception usually is spared), an arteriovenous fistula or other vascular anomaly, and transverse myelitis are among the possible causes (Chap. 377).

Diseases of the cerebral hemispheres that produce acute paraparesis include anterior cerebral artery ischemia (shoulder shrug also is affected), superior sagittal sinus or cortical venous thrombosis, and acute hydrocephalus. If upper motor neuron signs are associated with drowsiness, confusion, seizures, or other hemispheric signs, MRI of the brain should be undertaken.

Paraparesis may result from a cauda equina syndrome, for example, after trauma to the low back, a midline disk herniation, or an intraspinal tumor; although sphincters are affected, hip flexion often is spared, as is sensation over the anterolateral thighs. Rarely, paraparesis is caused by a rapidly evolving anterior horn cell disease (such as poliovirus or West Nile virus infection), peripheral neuropathy (such as Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome; Chap. 385), or myopathy (Chap. 387). In such cases, electrophysiologic studies are diagnostically helpful and refocus the subsequent evaluation.

Subacute or chronic paraparesis with spasticity is caused by upper motor neuron disease. When there is associated lower-limb sensory loss and sphincter involvement, a chronic spinal cord disorder is likely (Chap. 377). If an MRI of the spinal cord is normal, MRI of the brain may be indicated. If hemispheric signs are present, a parasagittal meningioma or chronic hydrocephalus is likely and MRI of the brain is the initial test. In the rare situation in which a long-standing paraparesis has a lower motor neuron or myopathic etiology, the localization usually is suspected on clinical grounds by the absence of spasticity and confirmed by EMG and nerve conduction tests.

Quadriparesis or Generalized Weakness

Generalized weakness may be due to disorders of the CNS or the motor unit. Although the terms quadriparesis and generalized weakness often are used interchangeably, quadriparesis is commonly used when an upper motor neuron cause is suspected, and generalized weakness when a disease of the motor unit is likely. Weakness from CNS disorders usually is associated with changes in consciousness or cognition, with spasticity and brisk stretch reflexes, and with alterations of sensation. Most neuromuscular causes of generalized weakness are associated with normal mental function, hypotonia, and hypoactive muscle stretch reflexes. The major causes of intermittent weakness are listed in Table 22-2. A patient with generalized fatigability without objective weakness may have the chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 389).

Table 22-2 Causes of Episodic Generalized Weakness

 
 
1. Electrolyte disturbances, e.g., hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, hypernatremia, hyponatremia, hypophosphatemia, hypermagnesemia 
2. Muscle disorders 
  a. Channelopathies (periodic paralyses) 
  b. Metabolic defects of muscle (impaired carbohydrate or fatty acid utilization; abnormal mitochondrial function) 
3. Neuromuscular junction disorders 
  a. Myasthenia gravis 
  b. Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
4. Central nervous system disorders 
  a. Transient ischemic attacks of the brainstem 
  b. Transient global cerebral ischemia 
  c. Multiple sclerosis 
 

 

Acute Quadriparesis

Acute quadriparesis with onset over minutes may result from disorders of upper motor neurons (e.g., anoxia, hypotension, brainstem or cervical cord ischemia, trauma, and systemic metabolic abnormalities) or muscle (electrolyte disturbances, certain inborn errors of muscle energy metabolism, toxins, and periodic paralyses). Onset over hours to weeks may, in addition to these disorders, be due to lower motor neuron disorders. Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome (Chap. 385) is the most common lower motor neuron weakness that progresses over days to 4 weeks; the finding of an elevated protein level in the cerebrospinal fluid is helpful but may be absent early in the course.

In obtunded patients, evaluation begins with a CT scan of the brain. If upper motor neuron signs are present but the patient is alert, the initial test is usually an MRI of the cervical cord. If weakness is lower motor neuron, myopathic, or uncertain in origin, the clinical approach begins with blood studies to determine the level of muscle enzymes and electrolytes and an EMG and nerve conduction study.

Subacute or Chronic Quadriparesis

When quadriparesis due to upper motor neuron disease develops over weeks, months, or years, the distinction between disorders of the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem, and cervical spinal cord is usually possible clinically. An MRI is obtained of the clinically suspected site of pathology. EMG and nerve conduction studies help distinguish lower motor neuron disease (which usually presents with weakness that is most profound distally) from myopathic weakness, which is typically proximal.

Monoparesis

Monoparesis usually is due to lower motor neuron disease, with or without associated sensory involvement. Upper motor neuron weakness occasionally presents as a monoparesis of distal and nonantigravity muscles. Myopathic weakness rarely is limited to one limb.

Acute Monoparesis

If the weakness is predominantly in distal and nonantigravity muscles and is not associated with sensory impairment or pain, focal cortical ischemia is likely (Chap. 370); diagnostic possibilities are similar to those for acute hemiparesis. Sensory loss and pain usually accompany acute lower motor neuron weakness; the weakness commonly is localized to a single nerve root or peripheral nerve within the limb but occasionally reflects plexus involvement. If lower motor neuron weakness is suspected or the pattern of weakness is uncertain, the clinical approach begins with an EMG and a nerve conduction study.

Subacute or Chronic Monoparesis

Weakness and atrophy that develop over weeks or months are usually of lower motor neuron origin. If they are associated with sensory symptoms, a peripheral cause (nerve, root, or plexus) is likely; in the absence of such symptoms, anterior horn cell disease should be considered. In either case, an electrodiagnostic study is indicated. If weakness is of the upper motor neuron type, a discrete cortical (precentral gyrus) or cord lesion may be responsible, and an imaging study of the appropriate site is performed.

Distal Weakness

Involvement of two or more limbs distally suggests lower motor neuron or peripheral nerve disease. Acute distal lower limb weakness results occasionally from an acute toxic polyneuropathy or cauda equina syndrome. Distal symmetric weakness usually develops over weeks, months, or years and, when associated with numbness, is due to diseases of peripheral nerves (Chap. 384). Anterior horn cell disease may begin distally but is typically asymmetric and without accompanying numbness (Chap. 374). Rarely, myopathies present with distal weakness (Chap. 387). Electrodiagnostic studies help localize the disorder (Fig. 22-3).

Proximal Weakness

Myopathy often produces symmetric weakness of the pelvic or shoulder girdle muscles (Chap. 387). Diseases of the neuromuscular junction [such as myasthenia gravis (Chap. 386)], may present with symmetric proximal weakness often associated with ptosis, diplopia, or bulbar weakness and fluctuating in severity during the day. The extreme fatigability present in some cases of myasthenia gravis may even suggest episodic weakness, but strength rarely returns fully to normal. In anterior horn cell disease, proximal weakness is usually asymmetric, but it may be symmetric if familial. Numbness does not occur with any of these diseases. The evaluation usually begins with determination of the serum creatine kinase level and electrophysiologic studies.

Weakness in a Restricted Distribution

Weakness may not fit any of these patterns, being limited, for example, to the extraocular, hemifacial, bulbar, or respiratory muscles. If it is unilateral, restricted weakness usually is due to lower motor neuron or peripheral nerve disease, such as in a facial palsy or an isolated superior oblique muscle paresis. Weakness of part of a limb usually is due to a peripheral nerve lesion such as carpal tunnel syndrome or another entrapment neuropathy. Relatively symmetric weakness of extraocular or bulbar muscles usually is due to a myopathy (Chap. 387) or neuromuscular junction disorder (Chap. 386). Bilateral facial palsy with areflexia suggests Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome (Chap. 385). Worsening of relatively symmetric weakness with fatigue is characteristic of neuromuscular junction disorders. Asymmetric bulbar weakness usually is due to motor neuron disease. Weakness limited to respiratory muscles is uncommon and usually is due to motor neuron disease, myasthenia gravis, or polymyositis/dermatomyositis (Chap. 388).

^^
Numbness, Tingling, and Sensory Loss: Introduction

Normal somatic sensation reflects a continuous monitoring process, little of which reaches consciousness under ordinary conditions. By contrast, disordered sensation, particularly when experienced as painful, is alarming and dominates the patient's attention. Physicians should be able to recognize abnormal sensations by how they are described, know their type and likely site of origin, and understand their implications. Pain is considered separately in Chap. 11.

Positive and Negative Symptoms

Abnormal sensory symptoms can be divided into two categories: positive and negative. The prototypical positive symptom is tingling (pins and needles); other positive sensory phenomena include altered sensations that are described as pricking, bandlike, lightning-like shooting feelings (lancinations), aching, knifelike, twisting, drawing, pulling, tightening, burning, searing, electrical, or raw feelings. Such symptoms are often painful.

Positive phenomena usually result from trains of impulses generated at sites of lowered threshold or heightened excitability along a peripheral or central sensory pathway. The nature and severity of the abnormal sensation depend on the number, rate, timing, and distribution of ectopic impulses and the type and function of nervous tissue in which they arise. Because positive phenomena represent excessive activity in sensory pathways, they are not necessarily associated with a sensory deficit (loss) on examination.

Negative phenomena represent loss of sensory function and are characterized by diminished or absent feeling that often is experienced as numbness and by abnormal findings on sensory examination. In disorders affecting peripheral sensation, it is estimated that at least one-half the afferent axons innervating a particular site are lost or functionless before a sensory deficit can be demonstrated by clinical examination. This threshold varies in accordance with how rapidly function is lost in sensory nerve fibers. If the rate of loss is slow, lack of cutaneous feeling may be unnoticed by the patient and difficult to demonstrate on examination, even though few sensory fibers are functioning; if it is rapid, both positive and negative phenomena are usually conspicuous. Subclinical degrees of sensory dysfunction may be revealed by sensory nerve conduction studies or somatosensory evoked potentials (Chap. e45).

Whereas sensory symptoms may be either positive or negative, sensory signs on examination are always a measure of negative phenomena.

Terminology

Words used to characterize sensory disturbance are descriptive and based on convention. Paresthesias and dysesthesias are general terms used to denote positive sensory symptoms. The term paresthesias typically refers to tingling or pins-and-needles sensations but may include a wide variety of other abnormal sensations, except pain; it sometimes implies that the abnormal sensations are perceived spontaneously. The more general term dysesthesias denotes all types of abnormal sensations, including painful ones, regardless of whether a stimulus is evident.

Another set of terms refers to sensory abnormalities found on examination. Hypesthesia or hypoesthesia refers to a reduction of cutaneous sensation to a specific type of testing such as pressure, light touch, and warm or cold stimuli; anesthesia, to a complete absence of skin sensation to the same stimuli plus pinprick; and hypalgesia or analgesia, to reduced or absent pain perception (nociception), such as perception of the pricking quality elicited by a pin. Hyperesthesia means pain or increased sensitivity in response to touch. Similarly, allodynia describes the situation in which a nonpainful stimulus, once perceived, is experienced as painful, even excruciating. An example is elicitation of a painful sensation by application of a vibrating tuning fork. Hyperalgesia denotes severe pain in response to a mildly noxious stimulus, and hyperpathia, a broad term, encompasses all the phenomena described by hyperesthesia, allodynia, and hyperalgesia. With hyperpathia, the threshold for a sensory stimulus is increased and perception is delayed, but once felt, it is unduly painful.

Disorders of deep sensation arising from muscle spindles, tendons, and joints affect proprioception (position sense). Manifestations include imbalance (particularly with eyes closed or in the dark), clumsiness of precision movements, and unsteadiness of gait, which are referred to collectively as sensory ataxia. Other findings on examination usually, but not invariably, include reduced or absent joint position and vibratory sensibility and absent deep tendon reflexes in the affected limbs. The Romberg sign is positive, which means that the patient sways markedly or topples when asked to stand with feet close together and eyes closed. In severe states of deafferentation involving deep sensation, the patient cannot walk or stand unaided or even sit unsupported. Continuous involuntary movements (pseudoathetosis) of the outstretched hands and fingers occur, particularly with eyes closed.

Anatomy of Sensation

Cutaneous afferent innervation is conveyed by a rich variety of receptors, both naked nerve endings (nociceptors and thermoreceptors) and encapsulated terminals (mechanoreceptors). Each type of receptor has its own set of sensitivities to specific stimuli, size and distinctness of receptive fields, and adaptational qualities. Much of the knowledge about these receptors has come from the development of techniques to study single intact nerve fibers intraneurally in awake, unanesthetized human subjects. It is possible not only to record from but also to stimulate single fibers in isolation. A single impulse, whether elicited by a natural stimulus or evoked by electrical microstimulation in a large myelinated afferent fiber, may be both perceived and localized.

Afferent fibers of all sizes in peripheral nerve trunks traverse the dorsal roots and enter the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Fig. 23-1). From there the smaller fibers take a route to the parietal cortex different from that of the larger fibers. The polysynaptic projections of the smaller fibers (unmyelinated and small myelinated), which subserve mainly nociception, temperature sensibility, and touch, cross and ascend in the opposite anterior and lateral columns of the spinal cord, through the brainstem, to the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus and ultimately project to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal cortex (Chap. 11). This is the spinothalamic pathway or anterolateral system. The larger fibers, which subserve tactile and position sense and kinesthesia, project rostrally in the posterior column on the same side of the spinal cord and make their first synapse in the gracile or cuneate nucleus of the lower medulla. Axons of second-order neurons decussate and ascend in the medial lemniscus located medially in the medulla and in the tegmentum of the pons and midbrain and synapse in the VPL nucleus; third-order neurons project to parietal cortex. This large-fiber system is referred to as the posterior column每medial lemniscal pathway (lemniscal, for short). Note that although the lemniscal and the anterolateral pathways both project up the spinal cord to the thalamus, it is the (crossed) anterolateral pathway that is referred to as the spinothalamic tract by convention.

Figure 23-1

 
 
 
The main somatosensory pathways. The spinothalamic tract (pain, thermal sense) and the posterior column每lemniscal system (touch, pressure, joint position) are shown. Offshoots from the ascending anterolateral fasciculus (spinothalamic tract) to nuclei in the medulla, pons, and mesencephalon and nuclear terminations of the tract are indicated. (From AH Ropper, RH Brown, in Adams and Victor's Principles of Neurology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009.)
 
 

Although the fiber types and functions that make up the spinothalamic and lemniscal systems are relatively well known, many other fibers, particularly those associated with touch, pressure, and position sense, ascend in a diffusely distributed pattern both ipsilaterally and contralaterally in the anterolateral quadrants of the spinal cord. This explains why a complete lesion of the posterior columns of the spinal cord may be associated with little sensory deficit on examination.
 
Examination of Sensation

The main components of the sensory examination are tests of primary sensation (pain, touch, vibration, joint position, and thermal sensation; (Table 23-1).

Table 23-1 Testing Primary Sensation

 
 
Sense Test Device Endings Activated Fiber Size Mediating Central Pathway 
Pain Pinprick Cutaneous nociceptors Small SpTh, also D 
Temperature, heat Warm metal object Cutaneous thermoreceptors for hot Small SpTh 
Temperature, cold Cold metal object Cutaneous thermoreceptors for cold Small SpTh 
Touch Cotton wisp, fine brush Cutaneous mechanoreceptors, also naked endings Large and small Lem, also D and SpTh 
Vibration Tuning fork, 128 Hz Mechanoreceptors, especially pacinian corpuscles Large Lem, also D 
Joint position Passive movement of specific joints Joint capsule and tendon endings, muscle spindles Large Lem, also D 
 


Abbreviations: D, diffuse ascending projections in ipsilateral and contralateral anterolateral columns; SpTh, spinothalamic projection, contralateral; Lem, posterior column and lemniscal projection, ipsilateral.
 

Some general principles pertain. The examiner must depend on patient responses, particularly when testing cutaneous sensation (pin, touch, warm, or cold), and this complicates interpretation. Further, examination may be limited in some patients. In a stuporous patient, for example, sensory examination is reduced to observing the briskness of withdrawal in response to a pinch or another noxious stimulus. Comparison of response on one side of the body to that on the other is essential. In an alert but uncooperative patient, it may not be possible to examine cutaneous sensation, but some idea of proprioceptive function may be gained by noting the patient's best performance of movements requiring balance and precision. Frequently, patients present with sensory symptoms that do not fit an anatomic localization and that are accompanied by either no abnormalities or gross inconsistencies on examination. The examiner should consider whether the sensory symptoms are a disguised request for help with psychological or situational problems. Discretion must be used in pursuing this possibility. Finally, sensory examination of a patient who has no neurologic complaints can be brief and consist of pinprick, touch, and vibration testing in the hands and feet plus evaluation of stance and gait, including the Romberg maneuver. Evaluation of stance and gait also tests the integrity of motor and cerebellar systems.

Primary Sensation

(See Table 23-1) The sense of pain usually is tested with a clean pin, with the patient asked to focus on the pricking or unpleasant quality of the stimulus, not just the pressure or touch sensation elicited. Areas of hypalgesia should be mapped by proceeding radially from the most hypalgesic site (Figs. 23-2, 23-3 and 23-4).

Figure 23-2

 
 
 
The cutaneous fields of peripheral nerves.(Reproduced by permission from W Haymaker, B Woodhall: Peripheral Nerve Injuries, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1953.)
 
 

Figure 23-3

 
 
 
Distribution of the sensory spinal roots on the surface of the body (dermatomes). (From D Sinclair: Mechanisms of Cutaneous Sensation. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 1981; with permission from Dr. David Sinclair.)
 
 

Figure 23-4

 
 
 
Dermatomes of the upper and lower extremities, outlined by the pattern of sensory loss following lesions of single nerve roots. (From JJ Keegan, FD Garrett: Anat Rec 102:409, 1948.)
 
 

Temperature sensation to both hot and cold is best tested with small containers filled with water of the desired temperature. This is impractical in most settings. An alternative way to test cold sensation is to touch a metal object, such as a tuning fork at room temperature, to the skin. For testing warm temperatures, the tuning fork or another metal object may be held under warm water of the desired temperature and then used. The appreciation of both cold and warmth should be tested because different receptors respond to each.

Touch usually is tested with a wisp of cotton or a fine camel hair brush. In general, it is better to avoid testing touch on hairy skin because of the profusion of the sensory endings that surround each hair follicle.

Joint position testing is a measure of proprioception, one of the most important functions of the sensory system. With the patient's eyes closed, joint position is tested in the distal interphalangeal joint of the great toe and fingers. If errors are made in recognizing the direction of passive movements, more proximal joints are tested. A test of proximal joint position sense, primarily at the shoulder, is performed by asking the patient to bring the two index fingers together with arms extended and eyes closed. Normal individuals can do this accurately, with errors of 1 cm or less.

The sense of vibration is tested with a tuning fork that vibrates at 128 Hz. Vibration usually is tested over bony points, beginning distally; in the feet it is tested over the dorsal surface of the distal phalanx of the big toes and at the malleoli of the ankles, and in the hands dorsally at the distal phalanx of the fingers. If abnormalities are found, more proximal sites can be examined. Vibratory thresholds at the same site in the patient and the examiner may be compared for control purposes.

Quantitative Sensory Testing

Effective sensory testing devices are now available commercially. Quantitative sensory testing is particularly useful for serial evaluation of cutaneous sensation in clinical trials. Threshold testing for touch and vibratory and thermal sensation is the most widely used application.

Cortical Sensation

The most commonly used tests of cortical function are two-point discrimination, touch localization, and bilateral simultaneous stimulation and tests for graphesthesia and stereognosis. Abnormalities of these sensory tests, in the presence of normal primary sensation in an alert cooperative patient, signify a lesion of the parietal cortex or thalamocortical projections to the parietal lobe. If primary sensation is altered, these cortical discriminative functions usually will be abnormal also. Comparisons should always be made between analogous sites on the two sides of the body because the deficit with a specific parietal lesion is likely to be unilateral. Interside comparisons are important for all cortical sensory testing.

Two-point discrimination is tested with special calipers, the points of which may be set from 2 mm to several centimeters apart and then applied simultaneously to the site to be tested. The pulp of the fingertips is a common site to test; a normal individual can distinguish about 3-mm separation of points there.

Touch localization is performed by light pressure for an instant with the examiner's fingertip or a wisp of cotton wool; the patient, whose eyes are closed, is required to identify the site of touch with the fingertip. Bilateral simultaneous stimulation at analogous sites (e.g., the dorsum of both hands) can be carried out to determine whether the perception of touch is extinguished consistently on one side or the other. The phenomenon is referred to as extinction or neglect. Graphesthesia refers to the capacity to recognize with eyes closed letters or numbers drawn by the examiner's fingertip on the palm of the hand. Once again, interside comparison is of prime importance. Inability to recognize numbers or letters is termed agraphesthesia.

Stereognosis refers to the ability to identify common objects by palpation, recognizing their shape, texture, and size. Common standard objects such as keys, paper clips, and coins are best used. Patients with normal stereognosis should be able to distinguish a dime from a penny and a nickel from a quarter without looking. Patients should be allowed to feel the object with only one hand at a time. If they are unable to identify it in one hand, it should be placed in the other for comparison. Individuals who are unable to identify common objects and coins in one hand but can do so in the other are said to have astereognosis of the abnormal hand.
 
Localization of Sensory Abnormalities

Sensory symptoms and signs can result from lesions at almost any level of the nervous system from the parietal cortex to the peripheral sensory receptor. Noting the distribution and nature of sensory symptoms and signs is the most important way to localize their source. Their extent, configuration, symmetry, quality, and severity are the key observations.

Dysesthesias without sensory findings by examination may be difficult to interpret. To illustrate, tingling dysesthesias in an acral distribution (hands and feet) can be systemic in origin, e.g., secondary to hyperventilation, or induced by a medication such as acetazolamide. Distal dysesthesias also can be an early event in an evolving polyneuropathy or may herald a myelopathy, such as from vitamin B12 deficiency. Sometimes distal dysesthesias have no definable basis. In contrast, dysesthesias that correspond in distribution to a particular peripheral nerve territory denote a lesion of that nerve trunk. For instance, dysesthesias restricted to the fifth digit and the adjacent one-half of the fourth finger on one hand reliably point to disorder of the ulnar nerve, most commonly at the elbow.

Nerve and Root

In focal nerve trunk lesions severe enough to cause a deficit, sensory abnormalities are readily mapped and generally have discrete boundaries (Figs. 23-2, 23-3 and 23-4). Root ("radicular") lesions frequently are accompanied by deep, aching pain along the course of the related nerve trunk. With compression of a fifth lumbar (L5) or first sacral (S1) root, as from a ruptured intervertebral disk, sciatica (radicular pain relating to the sciatic nerve trunk) is a common manifestation (Chap. 15). With a lesion affecting a single root, sensory deficits may be minimal or absent because adjacent root territories overlap extensively.

Isolated mononeuropathies may cause symptoms beyond the territory supplied by the affected nerve, but abnormalities on examination typically are confined to appropriate anatomic boundaries. In multiple mononeuropathies, symptoms and signs occur in discrete territories supplied by different individual nerves and〞as more nerves are affected〞may simulate a polyneuropathy if deficits become confluent. With polyneuropathies, sensory deficits are generally graded, distal, and symmetric in distribution (Chap. 384). Dysesthesias, followed by numbness, begin in the toes and ascend symmetrically. When dysesthesias reach the knees, they usually also have appeared in the fingertips. The process appears to be nerve length每dependent, and the deficit is often described as "stocking-glove" in type. Involvement of both hands and feet also occurs with lesions of the upper cervical cord or the brainstem, but an upper level of the sensory disturbance may then be found on the trunk and other evidence of a central lesion may be present, such as sphincter involvement or signs of an upper motor neuron lesion (Chap. 22). Although most polyneuropathies are pansensory and affect all modalities of sensation, selective sensory dysfunction according to nerve fiber size may occur. Small-fiber polyneuropathies are characterized by burning, painful dysesthesias with reduced pinprick and thermal sensation but with sparing of proprioception, motor function, and deep tendon reflexes. Touch is involved variably; when it is spared, the sensory pattern is referred to as exhibiting sensory dissociation. Sensory dissociation may occur with spinal cord lesions as well as small-fiber neuropathies. Large-fiber polyneuropathies are characterized by vibration and position sense deficits, imbalance, absent tendon reflexes, and variable motor dysfunction but preservation of most cutaneous sensation. Dysesthesias, if present at all, tend to be tingling or bandlike in quality.

Sensory neuronopathy is characterized by widespread but asymmetric sensory loss occurring in a non-length-dependent manner so that it may occur proximally or distally and in the arms, legs, or both. Pain and numbness progress to sensory ataxia and impairment of all sensory modalities with time. This condition is usually paraneoplastic or idiopathic in origin (Chaps. 101 and 384).

Spinal Cord

(See also Chap. 377) If the spinal cord is transected, all sensation is lost below the level of transection. Bladder and bowel function also are lost, as is motor function. Hemisection of the spinal cord produces the Brown-S谷quard syndrome, with absent pain and temperature sensation contralaterally and loss of proprioceptive sensation and power ipsilaterally below the lesion (see Figs. 23-1 and 377-1).

Numbness or paresthesias in both feet may arise from a spinal cord lesion; this is especially likely when the upper level of the sensory loss extends to the trunk. When all extremities are affected, the lesion is probably in the cervical region or brainstem unless a peripheral neuropathy is responsible. The presence of upper motor neuron signs (Chap. 22) supports a central lesion; a hyperesthetic band on the trunk may suggest the level of involvement.

A dissociated sensory loss can reflect spinothalamic tract involvement in the spinal cord, especially if the deficit is unilateral and has an upper level on the torso. Bilateral spinothalamic tract involvement occurs with lesions affecting the center of the spinal cord, such as in syringomyelia. There is a dissociated sensory loss with impairment of pinprick and temperature appreciation but relative preservation of light touch, position sense, and vibration appreciation.

Dysfunction of the posterior columns in the spinal cord or of the posterior root entry zone may lead to a bandlike sensation around the trunk or a feeling of tight pressure in one or more limbs. Flexion of the neck sometimes leads to an electric shock每like sensation that radiates down the back and into the legs (Lhermitte's sign) in patients with a cervical lesion affecting the posterior columns, such as from multiple sclerosis, cervical spondylosis, or recent irradiation to the cervical region.

Brainstem

Crossed patterns of sensory disturbance, in which one side of the face and the opposite side of the body are affected, localize to the lateral medulla. Here a small lesion may damage both the ipsilateral descending trigeminal tract and the ascending spinothalamic fibers subserving the opposite arm, leg, and hemitorso (see "Lateral medullary syndrome" in Fig. 370-10). A lesion in the tegmentum of the pons and midbrain, where the lemniscal and spinothalamic tracts merge, causes pansensory loss contralaterally.

Thalamus

Hemisensory disturbance with tingling numbness from head to foot is often thalamic in origin but also can arise from the anterior parietal region. If abrupt in onset, the lesion is likely to be due to a small stroke (lacunar infarction), particularly if localized to the thalamus. Occasionally, with lesions affecting the VPL nucleus or adjacent white matter, a syndrome of thalamic pain, also called D谷jerine-Roussy syndrome, may ensue. The persistent, unrelenting unilateral pain often is described in dramatic terms.

Cortex

With lesions of the parietal lobe involving either the cortex or the subjacent white matter, the most prominent symptoms are contralateral hemineglect, hemi-inattention, and a tendency not to use the affected hand and arm. On cortical sensory testing (e.g., two-point discrimination, graphesthesia), abnormalities are often found but primary sensation is usually intact. Anterior parietal infarction may present as a pseudothalamic syndrome with contralateral loss of primary sensation from head to toe. Dysesthesias or a sense of numbness may also occur and, rarely, a painful state.

Focal Sensory Seizures

These seizures generally are due to lesions in the area of the postcentral or precentral gyrus. The principal symptom of focal sensory seizures is tingling, but additional, more complex sensations may occur, such as a rushing feeling, a sense of warmth, or a sense of movement without detectable motion. Symptoms typically are unilateral; commonly begin in the arm or hand, face, or foot; and often spread in a manner that reflects the cortical representation of different bodily parts, as in a Jacksonian march. Duration of seizures is variable; seizures may be transient, lasting only for seconds, or persist for an hour or more. Focal motor features may supervene, often becoming generalized with loss of consciousness and tonic-clonic jerking.
 

^^
Gait and Balance Disorders: Introduction

Prevalence, Morbidity, and Mortality

Gait and balance problems are common in the elderly and contribute to the risk of falls and injury. Gait disorders have been described in 15% of individuals older than age 65 years. By age 80 years, one person in four will use a mechanical aid to assist ambulation. Among those 85 and older, the prevalence of gait abnormality approaches 40%. In epidemiologic studies, gait disorders are consistently identified as a major risk factor for falls and injury.

A substantial number of older persons report insecure balance and experience falls and fear of falling. Prospective studies indicate that 30% of those age >65 years fall each year; the proportion is even higher in frail elderly and nursing home patients. Each year, 8% of individuals age >75 years suffer a serious fall-related injury. Hip fractures often result in hospitalization and nursing home admission. For each person who is physically disabled, there are others whose functional independence is constrained by anxiety and fear of falling. Nearly one in five elderly individuals voluntarily limits activity because of fear of falling. With loss of ambulation, there is a diminished quality of life and increased morbidity and mortality rates.

Anatomy and Physiology

Upright bipedal gait depends on the successful integration of postural control and locomotion. These functions are widely distributed in the central nervous system. The biomechanics of bipedal walking are complex, and the performance is easily compromised by neurologic deficit at any level. Command and control centers in the brainstem, cerebellum, and forebrain modify the action of spinal pattern generators to promote stepping. While a form of "fictive locomotion" can be elicited from quadrupedal animals after spinal transection, this capacity is limited in primates. Step generation in primates is dependent on locomotor centers in the pontine tegmentum, midbrain, and subthalamic region. Locomotor synergies are executed through the reticular formation and descending pathways in the ventromedial spinal cord. Cerebral control provides a goal and purpose for walking and is involved in avoidance of obstacles and adaptation of locomotor programs to context and terrain.

Postural control requires the maintenance of the center of mass over the base of support through the gait cycle. Unconscious postural adjustments maintain standing balance: long latency responses are measurable in the leg muscles, beginning 110 milliseconds after a perturbation. Forward motion of the center of mass provides propulsive force for stepping, but failure to maintain the center of mass within stability limits results in falls. The anatomic substrate for dynamic balance has not been well defined, but the vestibular nucleus and midline cerebellum contribute to balance control in animals. Human patients with damage to these structures have impaired balance with standing and walking.

Standing balance depends on good-quality sensory information about the position of the body center with respect to the environment, support surface, and gravitational forces. Sensory information for postural control is primarily generated by the visual system, the vestibular system, and by proprioceptive receptors in the muscle spindles and joints. A healthy redundancy of sensory afferent information is generally available, but loss of two of the three pathways is sufficient to compromise standing balance. Balance disorders in older individuals sometimes result from multiple insults in the peripheral sensory systems (e.g., visual loss, vestibular deficit, peripheral neuropathy), critically degrading the quality of afferent information needed for balance stability.

Older patients with cognitive impairment from neurodegenerative diseases appear to be particularly prone to falls and injury. Frailty, muscle weakness, and deconditioning also contribute to the risk. It has been shown that older people who continue walking while talking are at increased risk for falls. There is a growing literature on the use of attentional resources to manage gait and balance. Walking is generally considered to be unconscious and automatic, but the ability to walk while attending a cognitive task (dual-task walking) may be compromised in frail elderly with a history of falls. Older patients with deficits in executive function may have particular difficulty in managing the attentional resources needed for dynamic balance when distracted.

Disorders of Gait

The heterogeneity of gait disorders observed in clinical practice reflects the large network of neural systems involved in the task. Walking is vulnerable to neurologic disease at every level. Gait disorders have been classified descriptively, based on the abnormal physiology and biomechanics. One problem with this approach is that many failing gaits look fundamentally similar. This overlap reflects common patterns of adaptation to threatened balance stability and declining performance. The gait disorder observed clinically must be viewed as the product of a neurologic deficit and a functional adaptation. Unique features of the failing gait are often overwhelmed by the adaptive response. Some of the common patterns of abnormal gait are summarized below. Gait disorders can also be classified by etiology, as listed in Table 24-1.

Table 24-1 Etiology of Gait Disorders

 
 
  Cases Percent 
Sensory deficits 22 18.3 
Myelopathy 20 16.7 
Multiple infarcts 18 15.0 
Parkinsonism 14 11.7 
Cerebellar degeneration 8 6.7 
Hydrocephalus 8 6.7 
Toxic/metabolic 3 2.5 
Psychogenic 4 3.3 
Other 6 5.0 
Unknown cause 17 14.2 
Total 120 100% 
 


Source: Reproduced with permission from J Masdeu et al: Gait Disorders of Aging: With Special Reference to Falls. Boston, Little Brown, 1995.
 

Cautious Gait

The term cautious gait is used to describe the patient who walks with an abbreviated stride and lowered center of mass, as if walking on a slippery surface. This disorder is both common and nonspecific. It is, in essence, an adaptation to a perceived postural threat. There may be an associated fear of falling. In one study, this disorder was observed in more than one-third of older patients with a higher level gait disturbance. Physical therapy often improves walking to the degree that follow-up observation may reveal a more specific underlying disorder.

Stiff-Legged Gait

Spastic gait is characterized by stiffness in the legs, an imbalance of muscle tone, and a tendency to circumduct and scuff the feet. The disorder reflects compromise of corticospinal command and overactivity of spinal reflexes. The patient may walk on his or her toes. In extreme instances, the legs cross due to increased tone in the adductors. Upper motor neuron signs are present on physical examination. Shoes often reflect an uneven pattern of wear across the outside. The disorder may be cerebral or spinal in origin.

Myelopathy from cervical spondylosis is a common cause of spastic or spastic-ataxic gait. Demyelinating disease and trauma are the leading causes of myelopathy in younger patients. In a chronic progressive myelopathy of unknown cause, workup with laboratory and imaging tests may establish a diagnosis. A family history should suggest hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP; Chap. 374). Genetic testing is now available for some of the common HSP mutations. Tropical spastic paraparesis related to the retrovirus HTLV-I is endemic in parts of the Caribbean and South America. A structural lesion, such as tumor or spinal vascular malformation, should be excluded with appropriate testing. Spinal cord disorders are discussed in detail in Chap. 377.

With cerebral spasticity, asymmetry is common, involvement of the upper extremities is usually observed, and dysarthria is often an associated feature. Common causes include vascular disease (stroke), multiple sclerosis, and perinatal injury to the nervous system (cerebral palsy).

Other stiff-legged gaits include dystonia (Chap. 387) and stiff-person syndrome. Dystonia is a disorder characterized by sustained muscle contractions, resulting in repetitive twisting movements and abnormal posture. It often has a genetic basis. Dystonic spasms produce plantar flexion and inversion of the feet, sometimes with torsion of the trunk. In autoimmune stiff-person syndrome (Chap. 101), there is exaggerated lordosis of the lumbar spine and overactivation of antagonist muscles, which restricts trunk and lower limb movement and results in a wooden or fixed posture.

Parkinsonism and Freezing Gait

Parkinson's disease (Chap. 372) is common, affecting 1% of the population age >55 years. The stooped posture and shuffling gait are characteristic and distinctive features. Patients sometimes accelerate (festinate) with walking or display retropulsion. There may be difficulty with gait initiation (freezing) and a tendency to turn en bloc. Imbalance and falls may develop as the disease progresses over years. Gait freezing is described in 7% of Parkinson's patients within 2 years of onset, 26% by the end of 5 years. Freezing of gait is even more common in some of the Parkinson's-related neurodegenerative disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple-system atrophy, and corticobasal degeneration. These patients frequently present with axial stiffness, postural instability, and a shuffling gait while lacking the characteristic pill-rolling tremor of Parkinson's disease. Falls within the first year suggest the possibility of progressive supranuclear palsy.

Hyperkinetic movement disorders also produce characteristic and recognizable disturbances in gait. In Huntington's disease (Chap. 371), the unpredictable occurrence of choreic movements gives the gait a dancing quality. Tardivedyskinesia is the cause of many odd, stereotypic gait disorders seen in patients chronically exposed to antipsychotics and other drugs that block the D2 dopamine receptor.

Frontal Gait Disorder

Frontal gait disorder, sometimes known as "gait apraxia," is common in the elderly and has a variety of causes. The term is used to describe a shuffling, freezing gait with imbalance and other signs of higher cerebral dysfunction. Typical features include a wide base of support, short stride, shuffling along the floor, and difficulty with starts and turns. Many patients exhibit difficulty with gait initiation, descriptively characterized as the "slipping clutch" syndrome. The term lower body parkinsonism is also used to describe such patients. Strength is generally preserved, and patients are able to make stepping movements when not standing and maintaining balance at the same time. This disorder is best considered a higher level motor control disorder, as opposed to an apraxia (Chap. 26).

The most common cause of frontal gait disorder is vascular disease, particularly subcortical small-vessel disease. Lesions are frequently found in the deep frontal white matter and centrum ovale. Gait disorder may be the salient feature in hypertensive patients with ischemic lesions of the deep hemisphere white matter (Binswanger's disease). The clinical syndrome includes mental change (variable in degree), dysarthria, pseudobulbar affect (emotional disinhibition), increased tone, and hyperreflexia in the lower limbs.

Communicating hydrocephalus in adults also presents with a gait disorder of this type. Other features of the diagnostic triad (mental change, incontinence) may be absent in the initial stages. MRI demonstrates ventricular enlargement, an enlarged flow void about the aqueduct, and a variable degree of periventricular white matter change. A lumbar puncture or dynamic test is necessary to confirm the presence of hydrocephalus.

Cerebellar Gait Ataxia

Disorders of the cerebellum have a dramatic impact on gait and balance. Cerebellar gait ataxia is characterized by a wide base of support, lateral instability of the trunk, erratic foot placement, and decompensation of balance when attempting to walk tandem. Difficulty maintaining balance when turning is often an early feature. Patients are unable to walk tandem heel to toe, and display truncal sway in narrow-based or tandem stance. They show considerable variation in their tendency to fall in daily life.

Causes of cerebellar ataxia in older patients include stroke, trauma, tumor, and neurodegenerative disease, including multiple-system atrophy (Chaps. 372 and 375) and various forms of hereditary cerebellar degeneration (Chap. 373). A short expansion at the site of the fragile X mutation (fragile X pre-mutation) has been associated with gait ataxia in older men. Alcoholic cerebellar degeneration can be screened by history and often confirmed by MRI. In patients with ataxia, MRI demonstrates the extent and topography of cerebellar atrophy.

Sensory Ataxia

As reviewed above, balance depends on high-quality afferent information from the visual and the vestibular systems and proprioception. When this information is lost or degraded, balance during locomotion is impaired and instability results. The sensory ataxia of tabetic neurosyphilis is a classic example. The contemporary equivalent is the patient with neuropathy affecting large fibers. Vitamin B12 deficiency is a treatable cause of large-fiber sensory loss in the spinal cord and peripheral nervous system. Joint position and vibration sense are diminished in the lower limbs. The stance in such patients is destabilized by eye closure; they often look down at their feet when walking and do poorly in the dark. Patients have been described with imbalance from bilateral vestibular loss, caused by disease or by exposure to ototoxic drugs. Table 24-2 compares sensory ataxia with cerebellar ataxia and frontal gait disorder. Some frail older patients exhibit a syndrome of imbalance from the combined effect of multiple sensory deficits. Such patients have disturbances in proprioception, vision, and vestibular sense that impair postural support.

Table 24-2 Features of Cerebellar Ataxia, Sensory Ataxia, and Frontal Gait Disorders

 
 
  Cerebellar Ataxia Sensory Ataxia Frontal Gait 
Base of support Wide-based Narrow base, looks down Wide-based 
Velocity Variable Slow Very slow 
Stride Irregular, lurching Regular with path deviation Short, shuffling 
Romberg +/每 Unsteady, falls +/每 
Heel  shin Abnormal +/每 Normal 
Initiation Normal Normal Hesitant 
Turns Unsteady +/每 Hesitant, multistep 
Postural instability + +++ ++++ 
      Poor postural synergies getting up from a chair 
Falls Late event Frequent Frequent 
 

 

Neuromuscular Disease

Patients with neuromuscular disease often have an abnormal gait, occasionally as a presenting feature. With distal weakness (peripheral neuropathy) the step height is increased to compensate for footdrop, and the sole of the foot may slap on the floor during weight acceptance. Neuropathy may be associated with a degree of sensory imbalance, as described above. Patients with myopathy or muscular dystrophy more typically exhibit proximal weakness. Weakness of the hip girdle may result in a degree of excess pelvic sway during locomotion.

Toxic and Metabolic Disorders

Alcohol intoxication is the most common cause of acute walking difficulty. Chronic toxicity from medications and metabolic disturbances can impair motor function and gait. Mental status changes may be present, and examination may reveal asterixis or myoclonus. Static equilibrium is disturbed, and such patients are easily thrown off balance. Disequilibrium is particularly evident in patients with chronic renal disease and those with hepatic failure, in whom asterixis may impair postural support. Sedative drugs, especially neuroleptics and long-acting benzodiazepines, affect postural control and increase the risk for falls. These disorders are important to recognize because they are often treatable.

Psychogenic Gait Disorder

Psychogenic disorders are common in neurologic practice, and the presentation often involves gait. Some patients with extreme anxiety or phobia walk with exaggerated caution with abduction of the arms, as if walking on ice. This inappropriately overcautious gait differs in degree from the gait of the patient who is insecure and making adjustments for imbalance. Depressed patients exhibit primarily slowness, a manifestation of psychomotor retardation, and lack of purpose in their stride. Hysterical gait disorders are among the most spectacular encountered. Odd gyrations of posture with wastage of muscular energy (astasia-abasia), extreme slow motion, and dramatic fluctuations over time may be observed in patients with somatoform disorders and conversion reaction.

Approach to the Patient: Slowly Progressive Disorder of Gait

When reviewing the history, it is helpful to inquire about the onset and progression of disability. Initial awareness of an unsteady gait often follows a fall. Stepwise evolution or sudden progression suggests vascular disease. Gait disorder may be associated with urinary urgency and incontinence, particularly in patients with cervical spine disease or hydrocephalus. It is always important to review the use of alcohol and medications that affect gait and balance. Information on localization derived from the neurologic examination can be helpful to narrow the list of possible diagnoses.

Gait observation provides an immediate sense of the patient's degree of disability. Characteristic patterns of abnormality are sometimes observed, though failing gaits often look fundamentally similar. Cadence (steps/min), velocity, and stride length can be recorded by timing a patient over a fixed distance. Watching the patient get out of a chair provides a good functional assessment of balance.

Brain imaging studies may be informative in patients with an undiagnosed disorder of gait. MRI is sensitive for cerebral lesions of vascular or demyelinating disease and is a good screening test for occult hydrocephalus. Patients with recurrent falls are at risk for subdural hematoma. Many elderly patients with gait and balance difficulty have white matter abnormalities in the periventricular region and centrum semiovale. While these lesions may be an incidental finding, a substantial burden of white matter disease will ultimately impact cerebral control of locomotion.

Disorders of Balance

Balance is the ability to maintain equilibrium: a state in which opposing physical forces cancel. In physiology, this is taken to mean the ability to control the center of mass with respect to gravity and the support surface. In reality, we are not consciously aware of what or where our center of mass is, but everyone, including gymnasts, figure skaters, and platform divers, moves so as to manage it. Imbalance implies a disturbance of equilibrium. Disorders of balance present with difficulty maintaining posture standing and walking and with a subjective sense of disequilibrium, a form of dizziness.

The cerebellum and vestibular system organize antigravity responses needed to maintain the upright posture. As reviewed above, these responses are physiologically complex, and the anatomic representation is not well understood. Failure, resulting in disequilibrium, can occur at several levels: cerebellar, vestibular, somatosensory, and higher level disequilibrium. Patients with hereditary ataxia or alcoholic cerebellar degeneration do not generally complain of dizziness, but balance is visibly impaired. Neurologic examination will reveal a variety of cerebellar signs. Postural compensation may prevent falls early on, but falls inevitably occur with disease progression. The progression of a neurodegenerative ataxia is often measured by the number of years to loss of stable ambulation. Vestibular disorders (Chap. 21) have symptoms and signs in three categories: (1) vertigo, the subjective appreciation or illusion of movement; (2) nystagmus, a vestibulo-oculomotor sign; and (3) poor standing balance, an impairment of vestibulospinal function. Not every patient has all manifestations. Patients with vestibular deficits related to ototoxic drugs may lack vertigo or obvious nystagmus, but balance is impaired on standing and walking, and the patient cannot navigate in the dark. Laboratory testing is available to explore vestibulo-oculomotor and vestibulospinal deficits.

Somatosensory deficits also produce imbalance and falls. There is often a subjective sense of insecure balance and fear of falling. Postural control is compromised by eye closure (Romberg's sign); these patients also have difficulty navigating in the dark. A dramatic example is the patient with autoimmune subacute sensory neuropathy, sometimes a paraneoplastic disorder (Chap. 101). Compensatory strategies enable such patients to walk in the virtual absence of proprioception, but the task requires active visual monitoring. Patients with higher level disorders of equilibrium have difficulty maintaining balance in daily life and may present with falls. There may be reduced awareness of balance impairment. Classic examples include patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and normal pressure hydrocephalus. Patients on sedating medications are also in this category. In prospective studies, cognitive impairment and the use of sedative medications substantially increase the risk for falls.

Falls

Falls are common in the elderly; 30% of people older than age 65 years living in the community fall each year. Modest changes in balance function have been described in fit older subjects as a result of normal aging. Subtle deficits in sensory systems, attention, and motor reaction time contribute to the risk, and environmental hazards abound. Epidemiologic studies have identified a number of risk factors for falls, summarized in Table 24-3. A fall is not a neurologic problem, nor reason for referral to a specialist, but there are circumstances in which neurologic evaluation is appropriate. In a classic study, 90% of fall events occurred among 10% of individuals, a group known as recurrent fallers. Some of these are frail older persons with chronic diseases. Recurrent falls sometimes indicate the presence of serious balance impairment. Syncope, seizure, or falls related to loss of consciousness require appropriate evaluation and treatment (Chaps. 20 and 369).

Table 24-3 Risk Factors for Falls, a Meta-Analysis: Summary of Sixteen Controlled Studies

 
 
Risk Factor Mean RR (OR) Range 
Weakness 4.9 1.9每10.3 
Balance deficit 3.2 1.6每5.4 
Gait disorder 3.0 1.7每4.8 
Visual deficit 2.8 1.1每7.4 
Mobility limitation 2.5 1.0每5.3 
Cognitive impairment 2.4 2.0每4.7 
Impaired functional status 2.0 1.0每3.1 
Postural hypotension 1.9 1.0每3.4 
 


Abbreviations: OR, odds ratios from retrospective studies; RR, relative risks from prospective studies.

Source: Reproduced with permission from J Masdeu et al: Gait Disorders of Aging: With Special Reference to Falls. Boston, Little Brown, 1995.
 

The descriptive classification of falls is as difficult as the classification of gait disorders, for many of the same reasons. Postural control systems are widely distributed, and a number of disease-related abnormalities occur. Unlike gait problems that are apparent on observation, falls are rarely observed in the office. The patient and family may have limited information about what triggered the fall. Injuries can complicate the physical examination. While there is no standard nosology of falls, common patterns can be identified.

Slipping, Tripping, and "Mechanical Falls"

Slipping on icy pavement, tripping on obstacles, and falls related to obvious environmental factors are often termed mechanical falls. They occasionally occur in healthy individuals with good balance compensation. Frequent tripping falls raise suspicion about an underlying neurologic deficit. Patients with spasticity, leg weakness, or footdrop experience tripping falls.

Weakness and Frailty

Patients who lack strength in antigravity muscles have difficulty rising from a chair, fatigue easily when walking, and have difficulty maintaining their balance after a perturbation. These patients are often unable to get up after a fall and may be on the floor for an hour or more before help arrives. Deconditioning of this sort is often treatable. Resistance strength training can increase muscle mass and leg strength in people in their eighties and nineties.

Drop Attacks and Collapsing Falls

Drop attacks are sudden collapsing falls without loss of consciousness. Patients who collapse from lack of postural tone present a diagnostic challenge. The patient may report that his or her legs just gave out underneath; the family may describe the patient as "collapsing in a heap." Orthostatic hypotension may be a factor in some such falls. Asterixis or epilepsy may impair postural support. A colloid cyst of the third ventricle can present with intermittent obstruction of the foramen of Monroe, resulting in a drop attack. While collapsing falls are more common in older patients with vascular risk factors, they should not be confused with vertebrobasilar ischemic attacks.

Toppling Falls

Some patients maintain tone in antigravity muscles but fall over like a tree trunk, as if postural defenses had disengaged. There may be a consistent direction to such falls. The patient with cerebellar pathology may lean and topple over toward the side of the lesion. Patients with lesions of the vestibular system or its central pathways may experience lateral pulsion and toppling falls. Patients with progressive supranuclear palsy often fall over backward. Falls of this nature occur in patients with advanced Parkinson's disease once postural instability has developed.

Gait Freezing

Another fall pattern in Parkinson's disease and related disorders is the fall due to freezing of gait. The feet stick to the floor and the center of mass keeps moving, resulting in a disequilibrium from which the patient has difficulty recovering. This sequence of events can result in a forward fall. Gait freezing can also occur as the patient attempts to turn and change direction. Similarly, the patient with Parkinson's disease and festinating gait may find his feet unable to keep up, resulting in a forward fall.

Falls Related to Sensory Deficit

Patients with somatosensory, visual, or vestibular deficits are prone to falls. These patients have particular difficulty dealing with poor illumination or walking on uneven ground. These patients often express subjective imbalance, apprehension, and fear of falling. Deficits in joint position and vibration sense are apparent on physical examination.

Treatment: Interventions to Reduce the Risk of Falls and Injury

Efforts should be made to define the etiology of the gait disorder and mechanism of the falls. Standing blood pressure should be recorded. Specific treatment may be possible, once a diagnosis is established. Therapeutic intervention is often recommended for older patients at substantial risk for falls, even if no neurologic disease is identified. A home visit to look for environmental hazards can be helpful. A variety of modifications may be recommended to improve safety, including improved lighting and the installation of grab bars and nonslip surfaces.

Rehabilitation interventions attempt to improve muscle strength and balance stability and to make the patient more resistant to injury. High-intensity resistance strength training with weights and machines is useful to improve muscle mass, even in frail older patients. Improvements are realized in posture and gait, which should translate to reduced risk of falls and injury. Sensory balance training is another approach to improve balance stability. Measurable gains can be achieved in a few weeks of training, and benefits can be maintained over 6 months by a 10- to 20-min home exercise program. This strategy is particularly successful in patients with vestibular and somatosensory balance disorders. The Yale Health and Aging study used a strategy of targeted, multiple risk factor abatement to reduce falls in the elderly. Prescription medications were adjusted, and home-based exercise programs were tailored to the patients' needs, based on an initial geriatric assessment. The program realized a 44% reduction in falls, compared with a control group of patients who had periodic social visits.
 
Further Readings

BEAUCHET O et al: Stops walking when talking: A predictor of falls in older adults? Eur J Neurol 16:786, 2009 [PMID: 19473368] 

 
BRONSTEIN A et al: Clinical Disorders of Balance, Posture and Gait. London, Arnold Press, 2003 

 
DE LAAT KF et al: Loss of white matter integrity is associated with gait disorders in cerebral small vessel disease. Brain 134:73, 2011 

 
GILLESPIE LD et al: Interventions for preventing falls in older people living in the community. Cochrane Rev CD007146, 2009 

 
NUTT JG et al: Human walking and higher-level gait disorders. Neurol 43:268, 1993 [PMID: 8437689] 

 
SNIJDERS AH et al: Neurological gait disorders in elderly people: Clinical approach and classification. Lancet Neurol 6:63, 2007 [PMID: 17166803] 

 
SPRINGER S et al: Dual-tasking effects on gait variability: The role of aging, falls, and executive function. Mov Disord 21:950, 2006 [PMID: 16541455] 

 
SUDARSKY L: Gait disorders in the elderly. N Engl J Med 322:1441, 1990 [PMID: 2184358] 

 
〞〞〞: Psychogenic gait disorders. Semin Neurol 26:351, 2006 

 
TINETTI ME, KUMAR C: The patient who falls: "It's always a trade-off." JAMA 20:258, 2010 
 
 

^^
Confusion and Delirium: Introduction

Confusion, a mental and behavioral state of reduced comprehension, coherence, and capacity to reason, is one of the most common problems encountered in medicine, accounting for a large number of emergency department visits, hospital admissions, and inpatient consultations. Delirium, a term used to describe an acute confusional state, remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality rates, costing billions of dollars yearly in health care costs in the United States alone. Delirium often goes unrecognized despite clear evidence that it is usually the cognitive manifestation of serious underlying medical or neurologic illness.

Clinical Features of Delirium

A multitude of terms are used to describe delirium, including encephalopathy, acute brain failure, acute confusional state, and postoperative or intensive care unit (ICU) psychosis. Delirium has many clinical manifestations, but essentially it is defined as a relatively acute decline in cognition that fluctuates over hours or days. The hallmark of delirium is a deficit of attention, although all cognitive domains〞including memory, executive function, visuospatial tasks, and language〞are variably involved. Associated symptoms may include altered sleep-wake cycles, perceptual disturbances such as hallucinations or delusions, affect changes, and autonomic findings that include heart rate and blood pressure instability.

Delirium is a clinical diagnosis that can be made only at the bedside. Two broad clinical categories have been described〞the hyperactive and hypoactive subtypes〞that are based on differential psychomotor features. The cognitive syndrome associated with severe alcohol withdrawal remains the classic example of the hyperactive subtype, featuring prominent hallucinations, agitation, and hyperarousal, often accompanied by life-threatening autonomic instability. In striking contrast is the hypoactive subtype, exemplified by opiate intoxication, in which patients are withdrawn and quiet, with prominent apathy and psychomotor slowing.

This dichotomy between subtypes of delirium is a useful construct, but patients often fall somewhere along a spectrum between the hyperactive and hypoactive extremes, sometimes fluctuating from one to the other within minutes. Therefore, clinicians must recognize the broad range of presentations of delirium to identify all patients with this potentially reversible cognitive disturbance. Hyperactive patients, such as those with delirium tremens, are easily recognized by their characteristic severe agitation, tremor, hallucinations, and autonomic instability. Patients who are quietly disturbed are overlooked more often on the medical wards and in the ICU, yet multiple studies suggest that this underrecognized hypoactive subtype is associated with worse outcomes.

The reversibility of delirium is emphasized because many etiologies, such as systemic infection and medication effects, can be treated easily. However, the long-term cognitive effects of delirium remain largely unknown and understudied. Some episodes of delirium continue for weeks, months, or even years. The persistence of delirium in some patients and its high recurrence rate may be due to inadequate treatment of the underlying etiology of the syndrome. In some instances, delirium does not disappear because there is underlying permanent neuronal damage. Even after an episode of delirium resolves, there may be lingering effects of the disorder. A patient's recall of events after delirium varies widely, ranging from complete amnesia to repeated reexperiencing of the frightening period of confusion in a disturbing manner, similar to what is seen in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder.

Risk Factors

An effective primary prevention strategy for delirium begins with identification of patients at highest risk, including those preparing for elective surgery or being admitted to the hospital. Although no single validated scoring system has been widely accepted as a screen for asymptomatic patients, there are multiple well-established risk factors for delirium.

The two most consistently identified risks are older age and baseline cognitive dysfunction. Individuals who are over age 65 or exhibit low scores on standardized tests of cognition develop delirium upon hospitalization at a rate approaching 50%. Whether age and baseline cognitive dysfunction are truly independent risk factors is uncertain. Other predisposing factors include sensory deprivation, such as preexisting hearing and visual impairment, as well as indices for poor overall health, including baseline immobility, malnutrition, and underlying medical or neurologic illness.

In-hospital risks for delirium include the use of bladder catheterization, physical restraints, sleep and sensory deprivation, and the addition of three or more new medications. Avoiding such risks remains a key component of delirium prevention as well as treatment. Surgical and anesthetic risk factors for the development of postoperative delirium include specific procedures such as those involving cardiopulmonary bypass and inadequate or excessive treatment of pain in the immediate postoperative period.

The relationship between delirium and dementia (Chap. 371) is complicated by significant overlap between the two conditions, and it is not always simple to distinguish between them. Dementia and preexisting cognitive dysfunction serve as major risk factors for delirium, and at least two-thirds of cases of delirium occur in patients with coexisting underlying dementia. A form of dementia with parkinsonism, termed dementia with Lewy bodies, is characterized by a fluctuating course, prominent visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, and an attentional deficit that clinically resembles hyperactive delirium. Delirium in the elderly often reflects an insult to the brain that is vulnerable due to an underlying neurodegenerative condition. Therefore, the development of delirium sometimes heralds the onset of a previously unrecognized brain disorder.

Epidemiology

Delirium is a common disease, but its reported incidence has varied widely with the criteria used to define the disorder. Estimates of delirium in hospitalized patients range from 14 to 56%, with higher rates reported for elderly patients and patients undergoing hip surgery. Older patients in the ICU have especially high rates of delirium that range from 70 to 87%. The condition is not recognized in up to one-third of delirious inpatients, and the diagnosis is especially problematic in the ICU environment, where cognitive dysfunction is often difficult to appreciate in the setting of serious systemic illness and sedation. Delirium in the ICU should be viewed as an important manifestation of organ dysfunction not unlike liver, kidney, or heart failure. Outside the acute hospital setting, delirium occurs in nearly two-thirds of patients in nursing homes and in over 80% of those at the end of life. These estimates emphasize the remarkably high frequency of this cognitive syndrome in older patients, a population expected to grow in the upcoming decade with the aging of the "baby boom" generation.

In previous decades an episode of delirium was viewed as a transient condition that carried a benign prognosis. Delirium now has been clearly associated with substantial morbidity rate and increased mortality rate and increasingly is recognized as a sign of serious underlying illness. Recent estimates of in-hospital mortality rates among delirious patients have ranged from 25 to 33%, a rate similar to that of patients with sepsis. Patients with an in-hospital episode of delirium have a higher mortality rate in the months and years after their illness compared with age-matched nondelirious hospitalized patients. Delirious hospitalized patients have a longer length of stay, are more likely to be discharged to a nursing home, and are more likely to experience subsequent episodes of delirium; as a result, this condition has enormous economic implications.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis and anatomy of delirium are incompletely understood. The attentional deficit that serves as the neuropsychological hallmark of delirium appears to have a diffuse localization with the brainstem, thalamus, prefrontal cortex, and parietal lobes. Rarely, focal lesions such as ischemic strokes have led to delirium in otherwise healthy persons; right parietal and medial dorsal thalamic lesions have been reported most commonly, pointing to the relevance of these areas to delirium pathogenesis. In most cases, delirium results from widespread disturbances in cortical and subcortical regions rather than a focal neuroanatomic cause. Electroencephalogram (EEG) data in persons with delirium usually show symmetric slowing, a nonspecific finding that supports diffuse cerebral dysfunction.

Deficiency of acetylcholine often plays a key role in delirium pathogenesis. Medications with anticholinergic properties can precipitate delirium in susceptible individuals, and therapies designed to boost cholinergic tone such as cholinesterase inhibitors have, in small trials, been shown to relieve symptoms of delirium. Dementia patients are susceptible to episodes of delirium, and those with Alzheimer's pathology are known to have a chronic cholinergic deficiency state due to degeneration of acetylcholine-producing neurons in the basal forebrain. Another common dementia associated with decreased acetylcholine levels, dementia with Lewy bodies, clinically mimics delirium in some patients. Other neurotransmitters are also likely to be involved in this diffuse cerebral disorder. For example, increases in dopamine can also lead to delirium. Patients with Parkinson's disease treated with dopaminergic medications can develop a delirium-like state that features visual hallucinations, fluctuations, and confusion. In contrast, reducing dopaminergic tone with dopamine antagonists such as typical and atypical antipsychotic medications has long been recognized as effective symptomatic treatment in patients with delirium.

Not all individuals exposed to the same insult will develop signs of delirium. A low dose of an anticholinergic medication may have no cognitive effects on a healthy young adult but may produce a florid delirium in an elderly person with known underlying dementia. However, an extremely high dose of the same anticholinergic medication may lead to delirium even in healthy young persons. This concept of delirium developing as the result of an insult in predisposed individuals is currently the most widely accepted pathogenic construct. Therefore, if a previously healthy individual with no known history of cognitive illness develops delirium in the setting of a relatively minor insult such as elective surgery or hospitalization, an unrecognized underlying neurologic illness such as a neurodegenerative disease, multiple previous strokes, or another diffuse cerebral cause should be considered. In this context, delirium can be viewed as the symptom resulting from a "stress test for the brain" induced by the insult. Exposure to known inciting factors such as systemic infection and offending drugs can unmask a decreased cerebral reserve and herald a serious underlying and potentially treatable illness.

Approach to the Patient: Delirium

As the diagnosis of delirium is clinical and is made at the bedside, a careful history and physical examination is necessary in evaluating patients with possible confusional states. Screening tools can aid physicians and nurses in identifying patients with delirium, including the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM); the Organic Brain Syndrome Scale; the Delirium Rating Scale; and, in the ICU, the Delirium Detection Score and the ICU version of the CAM. Using the CAM, a diagnosis of delirium is made if there is (1) an acute onset and fluctuating course and (2) inattention accompanied by either (3) disorganized thinking or (4) an altered level of consciousness. These scales are based on criteria from the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) or the World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases (ICD). Unfortunately, these scales do not identify the full spectrum of patients with delirium. All patients who are acutely confused should be presumed delirious regardless of their presentation due to the wide variety of possible clinical features. A course that fluctuates over hours or days and may worsen at night (termed sundowning) is typical but not essential for the diagnosis. Observation of the patient usually will reveal an altered level of consciousness or a deficit of attention. Other hallmark features that may be present in a delirious patient include alteration of sleep-wake cycles, thought disturbances such as hallucinations or delusions, autonomic instability, and changes in affect.

History

It may be difficult to elicit an accurate history in delirious patients who have altered levels of consciousness or impaired attention. Information from a collateral source such as a spouse or another family member is therefore invaluable. The three most important pieces of history are the patient's baseline cognitive function, the time course of the present illness, and current medications.

Premorbid cognitive function can be assessed through the collateral source or, if needed, via a review of outpatient records. Delirium by definition represents a change that is relatively acute, usually over hours to days, from a cognitive baseline. As a result, an acute confusional state is nearly impossible to diagnose without some knowledge of baseline cognitive function. Without this information, many patients with dementia or depression may be mistaken as delirious during a single initial evaluation. Patients with a more hypoactive, apathetic presentation with psychomotor slowing may be identified as being different from baseline only through conversations with family members. A number of validated instruments have been shown to diagnose cognitive dysfunction accurately by using a collateral source, including the modified Blessed Dementia Rating Scale and the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR). Baseline cognitive impairment is common in patients with delirium. Even when no such history of cognitive impairment is elicited, there should still be a high suspicion for a previously unrecognized underlying neurologic disorder.

Establishing the time course of cognitive change is important not only to make a diagnosis of delirium but also to correlate the onset of the illness with potentially treatable etiologies such as recent medication changes or symptoms of systemic infection.

Medications remain a common cause of delirium, especially compounds with anticholinergic or sedative properties. It is estimated that nearly one-third of all cases of delirium are secondary to medications, especially in the elderly. Medication histories should include all prescription as well as over-the-counter and herbal substances taken by the patient and any recent changes in dosing or formulation, including substitution of generics for brand-name medications.

Other important elements of the history include screening for symptoms of organ failure or systemic infection, which often contributes to delirium in the elderly. A history of illicit drug use, alcoholism, or toxin exposure is common in younger delirious patients. Finally, asking the patient and collateral source about other symptoms that may accompany delirium, such as depression and hallucinations, may help identify potential therapeutic targets.

Physical Examination

The general physical examination in a delirious patient should include a careful screening for signs of infection such as fever, tachypnea, pulmonary consolidation, heart murmur, and stiff neck. The patient's fluid status should be assessed; both dehydration and fluid overload with resultant hypoxemia have been associated with delirium, and each is usually easily rectified. The appearance of the skin can be helpful, showing jaundice in hepatic encephalopathy, cyanosis in hypoxemia, or needle tracks in patients using intravenous drugs.

The neurologic examination requires a careful assessment of mental status. Patients with delirium often present with a fluctuating course; therefore, the diagnosis can be missed when one relies on a single time point of evaluation. Some but not all patients exhibit the characteristic pattern of sundowning, a worsening of their condition in the evening. In these cases, assessment only during morning rounds may be falsely reassuring.

An altered level of consciousness ranging from hyperarousal to lethargy to coma is present in most patients with delirium and can be assessed easily at the bedside. In a patient with a relatively normal level of consciousness, a screen for an attentional deficit is in order, as this deficit is the classic neuropsychological hallmark of delirium. Attention can be assessed while taking a history from the patient. Tangential speech, a fragmentary flow of ideas, or inability to follow complex commands often signifies an attentional problem. There are formal neuropsychological tests to assess attention, but a simple bedside test of digit span forward is quick and fairly sensitive. In this task, patients are asked to repeat successively longer random strings of digits beginning with two digits in a row. Average adults can repeat a string of five to seven digits before faltering; a digit span of four or less usually indicates an attentional deficit unless hearing or language barriers are present.

More formal neuropsychological testing can be extraordinarily helpful in assessing a delirious patient, but it is usually too cumbersome and time-consuming in the inpatient setting. A simple Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) (see Table 371-5) can provide some information regarding orientation, language, and visuospatial skills; however, performance of some tasks on the MMSE such as spelling "world" backward and serial subtraction of digits will be impaired by delirious patients' attentional deficits alone and are therefore unreliable.

The remainder of the screening neurologic examination should focus on identifying new focal neurologic deficits. Focal strokes or mass lesions in isolation are rarely the cause of delirium, but patients with underlying extensive cerebrovascular disease or neurodegenerative conditions may not be able to cognitively tolerate even relatively small new insults. Patients also should be screened for additional signs of neurodegenerative conditions such as parkinsonism, which is seen not only in idiopathic Parkinson's disease but also in other dementing conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and progressive supranuclear palsy. The presence of multifocal myoclonus or asterixis on the motor examination is nonspecific but usually indicates a metabolic or toxic etiology of the delirium.

Etiology

Some etiologies can be easily discerned through a careful history and physical examination, whereas others require confirmation with laboratory studies, imaging, or other ancillary tests. A large, diverse group of insults can lead to delirium, and the cause in many patients is often multifactorial. Common etiologies are listed in Table 25-1.

Table 25-1 Common Etiologies of Delirium

 
 
Toxins 
  Prescription medications: especially those with anticholinergic properties, narcotics, and benzodiazepines 
  Drugs of abuse: alcohol intoxication and alcohol withdrawal, opiates, ecstasy, LSD, GHB, PCP, ketamine, cocaine 
  Poisons: inhalants, carbon monoxide, ethylene glycol, pesticides 
Metabolic conditions 
  Electrolyte disturbances: hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia 
  Hypothermia and hyperthermia 
  Pulmonary failure: hypoxemia and hypercarbia 
  Liver failure/hepatic encephalopathy 
  Renal failure/uremia 
  Cardiac failure 
  Vitamin deficiencies: B12, thiamine, folate, niacin
  
  Dehydration and malnutrition 
  Anemia 
Infections 
  Systemic infections: urinary tract infections, pneumonia, skin and soft tissue infections, sepsis 
  CNS infections: meningitis, encephalitis, brain abscess 
Endocrinologic conditions 
  Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism 
  Hyperparathyroidism 
  Adrenal insufficiency 
Cerebrovascular disorders 
  Global hypoperfusion states 
  Hypertensive encephalopathy 
  Focal ischemic strokes and hemorrhages: especially nondominant parietal and thalamic lesions 
Autoimmune disorders 
  CNS vasculitis 
  Cerebral lupus 
Seizure-related disorders 
  Nonconvulsive status epilepticus 
  Intermittent seizures with prolonged postictal states 
Neoplastic disorders 
  Diffuse metastases to the brain 
  Gliomatosis cerebri 
  Carcinomatous meningitis 
Hospitalization 
Terminal end-of-life delirium 
 


Abbreviations: LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; GHB, -hydroxybutyrate; PCP, phencyclidine; CNS, central nervous system.
 

Prescribed, over-the-counter, and herbal medications are common precipitants of delirium. Drugs with anticholinergic properties, narcotics, and benzodiazepines are especially common offenders, but nearly any compound can lead to cognitive dysfunction in a predisposed patient. Whereas an elderly patient with baseline dementia may become delirious upon exposure to a relatively low dose of a medication, less susceptible individuals may become delirious only with very high doses of the same medication. This observation emphasizes the importance of correlating the timing of recent medication changes, including dose and formulation, with the onset of cognitive dysfunction.

In younger patients especially, illicit drugs and toxins are common causes of delirium. In addition to more classic drugs of abuse, the recent rise in availability of so-called club drugs, such as methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy), -hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and the phencyclidine (PCP)-like agent ketamine, has led to an increase in delirious young persons presenting to acute care settings. Many common prescription drugs such as oral narcotics and benzodiazepines are often abused and readily available on the street. Alcohol intoxication with high serum levels can cause confusion, but more commonly it is withdrawal from alcohol that leads to a classic hyperactive delirium. Alcohol and benzodiazepine withdrawal should be considered in all cases of delirium as even patients who drink only a few servings of alcohol every day can experience relatively severe withdrawal symptoms upon hospitalization.

Metabolic abnormalities such as electrolyte disturbances of sodium, calcium, magnesium, or glucose can cause delirium, and mild derangements can lead to substantial cognitive disturbances in susceptible individuals. Other common metabolic etiologies include liver and renal failure, hypercarbia and hypoxemia, vitamin deficiencies of thiamine and B12, autoimmune disorders including central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis, and endocrinopathies such as thyroid and adrenal disorders.

Systemic infections often cause delirium, especially in the elderly. A common scenario involves the development of an acute cognitive decline in the setting of a urinary tract infection in a patient with baseline dementia. Pneumonia, skin infections such as cellulitis, and frank sepsis also can lead to delirium. This so-called septic encephalopathy, often seen in the ICU, is probably due to the release of proinflammatory cytokines and their diffuse cerebral effects. CNS infections such as meningitis, encephalitis, and abscess are less common etiologies of delirium; however, in light of the high mortality rates associated with these conditions when they are not treated quickly, clinicians must always maintain a high index of suspicion.

In some susceptible individuals, exposure to the unfamiliar environment of a hospital can lead to delirium. This etiology usually occurs as part of a multifactorial delirium and should be considered a diagnosis of exclusion after all other causes have been thoroughly investigated. Many primary prevention and treatment strategies for delirium involve relatively simple methods to address the aspects of the inpatient setting that are most confusing.

Cerebrovascular etiologies are usually due to global hypoperfusion in the setting of systemic hypotension from heart failure, septic shock, dehydration, or anemia. Focal strokes in the right parietal lobe and medial dorsal thalamus rarely can lead to a delirious state. A more common scenario involves a new focal stroke or hemorrhage causing confusion in a patient who has decreased cerebral reserve. In these individuals, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish between cognitive dysfunction resulting from the new neurovascular insult itself and delirium due to the infectious, metabolic, and pharmacologic complications that can accompany hospitalization after stroke.

Because a fluctuating course often is seen in delirium, intermittent seizures may be overlooked when one is considering potential etiologies. Both nonconvulsive status epilepticus and recurrent focal or generalized seizures followed by postictal confusion can cause delirium; EEG remains essential for this diagnosis. Seizure activity spreading from an electrical focus in a mass or infarct can explain global cognitive dysfunction caused by relatively small lesions.

It is very common for patients to experience delirium at the end of life in palliative care settings. This condition, sometimes described as terminal restlessness, must be identified and treated aggressively as it is an important cause of patient and family discomfort at the end of life. It should be remembered that these patients also may be suffering from more common etiologies of delirium such as systemic infection.

Laboratory and Diagnostic Evaluation

A cost-effective approach to the diagnostic evaluation of delirium allows the history and physical examination to guide tests. No established algorithm for workup will fit all delirious patients due to the staggering number of potential etiologies, but one stepwise approach is detailed in Table 25-2. If a clear precipitant is identified early, such as an offending medication, little further workup is required. If, however, no likely etiology is uncovered with initial evaluation, an aggressive search for an underlying cause should be initiated.

Table 25-2 Stepwise Evaluation of a Patient with Delirium

 
 
Initial evaluation 
  History with special attention to medications (including over-the-counter and herbals) 
  General physical examination and neurologic examination 
  Complete blood count 
  Electrolyte panel including calcium, magnesium, phosphorus 
  Liver function tests, including albumin 
  Renal function tests 
First-tier further evaluation guided by initial evaluation 
  Systemic infection screen 
    Urinalysis and culture 
    Chest radiograph 
    Blood cultures 
  Electrocardiogram 
  Arterial blood gas 
  Serum and/or urine toxicology screen (perform earlier in young persons) 
  Brain imaging with MRI with diffusion and gadolinium (preferred) or CT 
  Suspected CNS infection: lumbar puncture after brain imaging 
  Suspected seizure-related etiology: electroencephalogram (EEG) (if high suspicion, should be performed immediately) 
Second-tier further evaluation 
  Vitamin levels: B12, folate, thiamine
  
  Endocrinologic laboratories: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free T4 ; cortisol 
  Serum ammonia 
  Sedimentation rate 
  Autoimmune serologies: antinuclear antibodies (ANA), complement levels; p-ANCA, c-ANCA 
  Infectious serologies: rapid plasmin reagin (RPR); fungal and viral serologies if high suspicion; HIV antibody 
  Lumbar puncture (if not already performed) 
  Brain MRI with and without gadolinium (if not already performed) 
 


Abbreviations: p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; c-ANCA, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.
 

Basic screening labs, including a complete blood count, electrolyte panel, and tests of liver and renal function, should be obtained in all patients with delirium. In elderly patients, screening for systemic infection, including chest radiography, urinalysis and culture, and possibly blood cultures, is important. In younger individuals, serum and urine drug and toxicology screening may be appropriate early in the workup. Additional laboratory tests addressing other autoimmune, endocrinologic, metabolic, and infectious etiologies should be reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis remains unclear after initial testing.

Multiple studies have demonstrated that brain imaging in patients with delirium is often unhelpful. However, if the initial workup is unrevealing, most clinicians quickly move toward imaging of the brain to exclude structural causes. A noncontrast CT scan can identify large masses and hemorrhages but is otherwise relatively insensitive for discovering an etiology of delirium. The ability of MRI to identify most acute ischemic strokes as well as to provide neuroanatomic detail that gives clues to possible infectious, inflammatory, neurodegenerative, and neoplastic conditions makes it the test of choice. Since MRI techniques are limited by availability, speed of imaging, patient cooperation, and contraindications to magnetic exposure, many clinicians begin with CT scanning and proceed to MRI if the etiology of delirium remains elusive.

Lumbar puncture (LP) must be obtained immediately after appropriate neuroimaging in all patients in whom CNS infection is suspected. Spinal fluid examination can also be useful in identifying inflammatory and neoplastic conditions as well as in the diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy through elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glutamine levels. As a result, LP should be considered in any delirious patient with a negative workup. EEG does not have a routine role in the workup of delirium, but it remains invaluable if seizure-related etiologies are considered.

Treatment: Delirium

Management of delirium begins with treatment of the underlying inciting factor (e.g., patients with systemic infections should be given appropriate antibiotics, and underlying electrolyte disturbances judiciously corrected). These treatments often lead to prompt resolution of delirium. Blindly targeting the symptoms of delirium pharmacologically only serves to prolong the time patients remain in the confused state and may mask important diagnostic information. Recent trials of medications used to boost cholinergic tone in delirious patients have led to mixed results, and this strategy is not currently recommended.

Relatively simple methods of supportive care can be highly effective in treating patients with delirium. Reorientation by the nursing staff and family combined with visible clocks, calendars, and outside-facing windows can reduce confusion. Sensory isolation should be prevented by providing glasses and hearing aids to patients who need them. Sundowning can be addressed to a large extent through vigilance to appropriate sleep-wake cycles. During the day, a well-lit room should be accompanied by activities or exercises to prevent napping. At night, a quiet, dark environment with limited interruptions by staff can assure proper rest. These sleep-wake cycle interventions are especially important in the ICU setting as the usual constant 24-h activity commonly provokes delirium. Attempting to mimic the home environment as much as possible also has been shown to help treat and even prevent delirium. Visits from friends and family throughout the day minimize the anxiety associated with the constant flow of new faces of staff and physicians. Allowing hospitalized patients to have access to home bedding, clothing, and nightstand objects makes the hospital environment less foreign and therefore less confusing. Simple standard nursing practices such as maintaining proper nutrition and volume status as well as managing incontinence and skin breakdown also help alleviate discomfort and resulting confusion.

In some instances, patients pose a threat to their own safety or to the safety of staff members, and acute management is required. Bed alarms and personal sitters are more effective and much less disorienting than physical restraints. Chemical restraints should be avoided, but when necessary, very low dose typical or atypical antipsychotic medications administered on an as-needed basis are effective. The recent association of antipsychotic use in the elderly with increased mortality rates underscores the importance of using these medications judiciously and only as a last resort. Benzodiazepines are not as effective as antipsychotics and often worsen confusion through their sedative properties. Although many clinicians still use benzodiazepines to treat acute confusion, their use should be limited to cases in which delirium is caused by alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal.

Prevention

In light of the high morbidity associated with delirium and the tremendously increased health care costs that accompany it, development of an effective strategy to prevent delirium in hospitalized patients is extremely important. Successful identification of high-risk patients is the first step, followed by initiation of appropriate interventions. One trial randomized more than 850 elderly inpatients to simple standardized protocols used to manage risk factors for delirium, including cognitive impairment, immobility, visual impairment, hearing impairment, sleep deprivation, and dehydration. Significant reductions in the number and duration of episodes of delirium were observed in the treatment group, but unfortunately, delirium recurrence rates were unchanged. Recent trials in the ICU have focused on identifying sedatives, such as dexmedetomidine, that are less likely to lead to delirium in critically ill patients. All hospitals and health care systems should work toward developing standardized protocols to address common risk factors with the goal of decreasing the incidence of delirium.
 
Acknowledgment

In the 16th edition, Allan H. Ropper contributed to a section on acute confusional states that was incorporated into this current chapter.
 
Further Readings

FONG TG et al: Delirium in elderly adults: Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. Nat Rev Neurol 5:210, 2009 [PMID: 19347026] 

 
GIRARD TD et al: Delirium as a predictor of long-term cognitive impairment in survivors of critical illness. Crit Care Med 38:1513,2010 [PMID: 20473145] 

 
INOUYE SK et al: Clarifying confusion: The confusion assessment method. A new method for detection of delirium. Ann Intern Med 113:941, 1990 [PMID: 2240918] 

 
每每每〞: A multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl J Med 340:669, 1999 

 
LAT I et al: The impact of delirium on clinical outcomes in mechanically ventilated surgical and trauma patients. Crit Care Med 37:1898, 2009 [PMID: 19384221] 

 
RIKER RR et al: Dexmedetomidine vs midazolam for sedation of critically ill patients: A randomized trial. JAMA 301:489, 2009 [PMID: 19188334] 
 
 

^^
Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders: Introduction

The cerebral cortex of the human brain contains approximately 20 billion neurons spread over an area of 2.5 m2. The primary sensory areas provide an obligatory portal for the entry of sensory information into cortical circuitry, and the primary motor areas provide a final common pathway for coordinating complex motor acts. The primary sensory and motor areas constitute 10% of the cerebral cortex. The rest is subsumed by modality-selective, heteromodal, paralimbic, and limbic areas collectively known as the association cortex (Fig. 26-1). The association cortex mediates the integrative processes that subserve cognition, emotion, and behavior. A systematic testing of these mental functions is necessary for the effective clinical assessment of the association cortex and its diseases.

Figure 26-1

 
 
 
Lateral (top) and medial (bottom) views of the cerebral hemispheres. The numbers refer to the Brodmann cytoarchitectonic designations. Area 17 corresponds to the primary visual cortex, 41每42 to the primary auditory cortex, 1每3 to the primary somatosensory cortex, and 4 to the primary motor cortex. The rest of the cerebral cortex contains association areas. AG, angular gyrus; B, Broca's area; CC, corpus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FEF, frontal eye fields (premotor cortex); FG, fusiform gyrus; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; ITG, inferior temporal gyrus; LG, lingual gyrus; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; MTG, middle temporal gyrus; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; PHG, parahippocampal gyrus; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; PSC, peristriate cortex; SC, striate cortex; SMG, supramarginal gyrus; SPL, superior parietal lobule; STG, superior temporal gyrus; STS, superior temporal sulcus; TP, temporopolar cortex; W, Wernicke's area.
 
 

According to current thinking, there are no centers for "hearing words," "perceiving space," or "storing memories." Cognitive and behavioral functions (domains) are coordinated by intersecting large-scale neural networks that contain interconnected cortical and subcortical components. The network approach to higher cerebral function has at least four implications of clinical relevance: (1) A single domain such as language or memory can be disrupted by damage to any one of several areas as long as those areas belong to the same network, (2) damage confined to a single area can give rise to multiple deficits involving the functions of all the networks that intersect in that region, (3) damage to a network component may give rise to minimal or transient deficits if other parts of the network undergo compensatory reorganization, and (4) individual anatomic sites within a network display a relative (but not absolute) specialization for different behavioral aspects of the relevant function. Five anatomically defined large-scale networks are most relevant to clinical practice: (1) a perisylvian network for language, (2) a parietofrontal network for spatial cognition, (3) an occipitotemporal network for face and object recognition, (4) a limbic network for retentive memory, and (5) a prefrontal network for cognitive and behavioral control.
 
The Left Perisylvian Network for Language: Aphasias and Related Conditions

Language allows the communication and elaboration of thoughts and experiences by linking them to arbitrary symbols known as words. The neural substrate of language is composed of a distributed network centered in the perisylvian region of the left hemisphere. The posterior pole of this network is located at the temporoparietal junction and includes a region known as Wernicke's area. An essential function of Wernicke's area is to transform sensory inputs into their neural word representations so that they can establish the distributed associations that give a word its meaning. The anterior pole of the language network is located in the inferior frontal gyrus and includes a region known as Broca's area. An essential function of this area is to transform neural word representations into their articulatory sequences so that the words can be uttered in the form of spoken language. The sequencing function of Broca's area also appears to involve the ordering of words into sentences that contain a meaning-appropriate syntax (grammar). Wernicke's and Broca's areas are interconnected with each other and with additional perisylvian, temporal, prefrontal, and posterior parietal regions, making up a neural network that subserves the various aspects of language function. Damage to any one of these components or to their interconnections can give rise to language disturbances (aphasia). Aphasia should be diagnosed only when there are deficits in the formal aspects of language, such as naming, word choice, comprehension, spelling, and syntax. Dysarthria and mutism do not by themselves lead to a diagnosis of aphasia. The language network shows a left hemisphere dominance pattern in the vast majority of the population. In approximately 90% of right-handers and 60% of left-handers, aphasia occurs only after lesions of the left hemisphere. In some individuals no hemispheric dominance for language can be discerned, and in some others (including a small minority of right handers) there is a right hemisphere dominance for language. A language disturbance that occurs after a right hemisphere lesion in a right hander is called crossed aphasia.

Clinical Examination

The clinical examination of language should include the assessment of naming, spontaneous speech, comprehension, repetition, reading, and writing. A deficit of naming (anomia) is the single most common finding in aphasic patients. When asked to name a common object (pencil or wristwatch), the patient may fail to come up with the appropriate word, may provide a circumlocutious description of the object ("the thing for writing"), or may come up with the wrong word (paraphasia). If the patient offers an incorrect but related word ("pen" for "pencil"), the naming error is known as a semantic paraphasia; if the word approximates the correct answer but is phonetically inaccurate ("plentil" for "pencil"), it is known as a phonemic paraphasia. Asking the patient to name body parts, geometric shapes, and component parts of objects (lapel of coat, cap of pen) can elicit mild forms of anomia in patients who otherwise can name common objects. In most anomias, the patient cannot retrieve the appropriate name when shown an object but can point to the appropriate object when the name is provided by the examiner. This is known as a one-way (or retrieval-based) naming deficit. A two-way naming deficit exists if the patient can neither provide nor recognize the correct name, indicating the likely presence of a comprehension impairment for the word. Spontaneous speech is described as "fluent" if it maintains appropriate output volume, phrase length, and melody or as "nonfluent" if it is sparse and halting and average utterance length is below four words. The examiner also should note if the speech is paraphasic or circumlocutious; if it shows a relative paucity of substantive nouns and action verbs versus function words (prepositions, conjunctions); and if word order, tenses, suffixes, prefixes, plurals, and possessives are appropriate. Comprehension can be tested by assessing the patient's ability to follow conversation, asking yes-no questions ("Can a dog fly?", "Does it snow in summer?") or asking the patient to point to appropriate objects ("Where is the source of illumination in this room?"). Statements with embedded clauses or a passive voice construction ("If a tiger is eaten by a lion, which animal stays alive?") help assess the ability to comprehend complex syntactic structure. Commands to close or open the eyes, stand up, sit down, or roll over should not be used to assess overall comprehension since appropriate responses aimed at such axial movements can be preserved in patients who otherwise have profound comprehension deficits.

Repetition is assessed by asking the patient to repeat single words, short sentences, or strings of words such as "No ifs, ands, or buts." The testing of repetition with tongue twisters such as "hippopotamus" and "Irish constabulary" provides a better assessment of dysarthria and pallilalia than of aphasia. Aphasic patients who have little difficulty with tongue twisters may have a particularly hard time repeating a string of function words. It is important to make sure that the number of words does not exceed the patient's attention span. Otherwise, the failure of repetition becomes a reflection of the narrowed attention span rather than an indication of an aphasic deficit. Reading should be assessed for deficits in reading aloud as well as comprehension. Writing is assessed for spelling errors, word order, and grammar. Alexia describes an inability to either read aloud or comprehend single words and simple sentences; agraphia (or dysgraphia) is used to describe an acquired deficit in the spelling or grammar of written language.

The correspondence between individual deficits of language function and lesion location does not display a rigid one-to-one relationship and should be conceptualized within the context of the distributed network model. Nonetheless, the classification of aphasias into specific clinical syndromes helps determine the most likely anatomic distribution of the underlying neurologic disease and has implications for etiology and prognosis (Table 26-1). The syndromes listed in Table 26-1 are most applicable to aphasias caused by cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs). They can be divided into "central" syndromes, which result from damage to the two epicenters of the language network (Broca's and Wernicke's areas), and "disconnection" syndromes, which arise from lesions that interrupt the functional connectivity of those centers with each other and with the other components of the language network. The syndromes outlined below are idealizations; pure syndromes occur rarely.

Table 26-1 Clinical Features of Aphasias and Related Conditions

 
 
  Comprehension Repetition of Spoken Language Naming Fluency 
Wernicke's Impaired Impaired Impaired Preserved or increased 
Broca's Preserved (except grammar) Impaired Impaired Decreased 
Global Impaired Impaired Impaired Decreased 
Conduction Preserved Impaired Impaired Preserved 
Nonfluent (motor) transcortical Preserved Preserved Impaired Impaired 
Fluent (sensory) transcortical Impaired Preserved Impaired Preserved 
Isolation Impaired Echolalia Impaired No purposeful speech 
Anomic Preserved Preserved Impaired Preserved except for word-finding pauses 
Pure word deafness Impaired only for spoken language Impaired Preserved Preserved 
Pure alexia Impaired only for reading Preserved Preserved Preserved 
 

 

Wernicke's Aphasia

Comprehension is impaired for spoken and written language, for single words as well as sentences. Language output is fluent but is highly paraphasic and circumlocutious. The tendency for paraphasic errors may be so pronounced that it leads to strings of neologisms, which form the basis of what is known as "jargon aphasia." Speech contains large numbers of function words (e.g., prepositions, conjunctions) but few substantive nouns or verbs that refer to specific actions. The output is therefore voluminous but uninformative. For example, a patient attempts to describe how his wife accidentally threw away something important, perhaps his dentures: "We don't need it anymore, she says. And with it when that was downstairs was my teeth-tick. . .a. . .den. . .dentith. . .my dentist. And they happened to be in that bag. . .see? How could this have happened? How could a thing like this happen. . .So she says we won't need it anymore. . .I didn't think we'd use it. And now if I have any problems anybody coming a month from now, 4 months from now, or 6 months from now, I have a new dentist. Where my two. . .two little pieces of dentist that I use. . .that I. . .all gone. If she throws the whole thing away. . .visit some friends of hers and she can't throw them away."

Gestures and pantomime do not improve communication. The patient does not seem to realize that his or her language is incomprehensible and may appear angry and impatient when the examiner fails to decipher the meaning of a severely paraphasic statement. In some patients this type of aphasia can be associated with severe agitation and paranoid behaviors. One area of comprehension that may be preserved is the ability to follow commands aimed at axial musculature. The dissociation between the failure to understand simple questions ("What is your name?") in a patient who rapidly closes his or her eyes, sits up, or rolls over when asked to do so is characteristic of Wernicke's aphasia and helps differentiate it from deafness, psychiatric disease, or malingering. Patients with Wernicke's aphasia cannot express their thoughts in meaning-appropriate words and cannot decode the meaning of words in any modality of input. This aphasia therefore has expressive as well as receptive components. Repetition, naming, reading, and writing also are impaired.

The lesion site most commonly associated with Wernicke's aphasia is the posterior portion of the language network and tends to involve at least parts of Wernicke's area. An embolus to the inferior division of the middle cerebral artery, to the posterior temporal or angular branches in particular, is the most common etiology (Chap. 370). Intracerebral hemorrhage, severe head trauma, and neoplasm are other causes. A coexisting right hemianopia or superior quadrantanopia is common and mild right nasolabial flattening may be found, but otherwise the examination is often unrevealing. The paraphasic, neologistic speech in an agitated patient with an otherwise unremarkable neurologic examination may lead to the suspicion of a primary psychiatric disorder such as schizophrenia or mania, but the other components characteristic of acquired aphasia and the absence of prior psychiatric disease usually settle the issue. Some patients with Wernicke's aphasia due to intracerebral hemorrhage or head trauma may improve as the hemorrhage or the injury heals. In most other patients, prognosis for recovery of language function is guarded.

Broca's Aphasia

Speech is nonfluent, labored, interrupted by many word-finding pauses, and usually dysarthric. It is impoverished in function words but enriched in meaning-appropriate nouns and verbs. Abnormal word order and the inappropriate deployment of bound morphemes (word endings used to denote tenses, possessives, or plurals) lead to a characteristic agrammatism. Speech is telegraphic and pithy but quite informative. In the following passage, a patient with Broca's aphasia describes his medical history: "I see. . .the dotor, dotor sent me. . .Bosson. Go to hospital. Dotor. . .kept me beside. Two, tee days, doctor send me home."

Output may be reduced to a grunt or single word ("yes" or "no"), which is emitted with different intonations in an attempt to express approval or disapproval. In addition to fluency, naming and repetition are impaired. Comprehension of spoken language is intact except for syntactically difficult sentences with a passive voice structure or embedded clauses. Reading comprehension also is preserved with the occasional exception of a specific inability to read small grammatical words such as conjunctions and pronouns. The last two features indicate that Broca's aphasia is not just an "expressive" or "motor" disorder and that it also may involve a comprehension deficit for function words and syntax. Patients with Broca's aphasia can be tearful, easily frustrated, and profoundly depressed. Insight into their condition is preserved, in contrast to Wernicke's aphasia. Even when spontaneous speech is severely dysarthric, the patient may be able to display a relatively normal articulation of words when singing. This dissociation has been used to develop specific therapeutic approaches (melodic intonation therapy) for Broca's aphasia. Additional neurologic deficits usually include right facial weakness, hemiparesis or hemiplegia, and a buccofacial apraxia characterized by an inability to carry out motor commands involving oropharyngeal and facial musculature (e.g., patients are unable to demonstrate how to blow out a match or suck through a straw). Visual fields are intact. The cause is most often infarction of Broca's area (the inferior frontal convolution; "B" in Fig. 26-1) and surrounding anterior perisylvian and insular cortex due to occlusion of the superior division of the middle cerebral artery (Chap. 370). Mass lesions, including tumor, intracerebral hemorrhage, and abscess, also may be responsible. Small lesions confined to the posterior part of Broca's area may lead to a nonaphasic and often reversible deficit of speech articulation that usually is accompanied by mild right facial weakness. When the cause of Broca's aphasia is stroke, recovery of language function generally peaks within 2 to 6 months, after which time further progress is limited.

Global Aphasia

Speech output is nonfluent, and comprehension of spoken language is severely impaired. Naming, repetition, reading, and writing also are impaired. This syndrome represents the combined dysfunction of Broca's and Wernicke's areas and usually results from strokes that involve the entire middle cerebral artery distribution in the left hemisphere. Most patients are initially mute or say a few words, such as "hi" or "yes." Related signs include right hemiplegia, hemisensory loss, and homonymous hemianopia. Occasionally, a patient with a lesion in Wernicke's area will present with a global aphasia that soon resolves into Wernicke's aphasia.

Conduction Aphasia

Speech output is fluent but paraphasic, comprehension of spoken language is intact, and repetition is severely impaired. Naming and writing also are impaired. Reading aloud is impaired, but reading comprehension is preserved. The lesion sites spare Broca's and Wernicke's areas but may induce a functional disconnection between the two so that neural word representations formed in Wernicke's area and adjacent regions cannot be conveyed to Broca's area for assembly into corresponding articulatory patterns. Occasionally, a Wernicke's area lesion gives rise to a transient Wernicke's aphasia that rapidly resolves into a conduction aphasia. The paraphasic output in conduction aphasia interferes with the ability to express meaning, but this deficit is not nearly as severe as the one displayed by patients with Wernicke's aphasia. Associated neurologic signs in conduction aphasia vary according to the primary lesion site.

Nonfluent Transcortical Aphasia (Transcortical Motor Aphasia)

The features are similar to those of Broca's aphasia, but repetition is intact and agrammatism may be less pronounced. The neurologic examination may be otherwise intact, but a right hemiparesis also can exist. The lesion site disconnects the intact language network from prefrontal areas of the brain and usually involves the anterior watershed zone between anterior and middle cerebral artery territories or the supplementary motor cortex in the territory of the anterior cerebral artery.

Fluent Transcortical Aphasia (Transcortical Sensory Aphasia)

Clinical features are similar to those of Wernicke's aphasia, but repetition is intact. The lesion site disconnects the intact core of the language network from other temporoparietal association areas. Associated neurologic findings may include hemianopia. Cerebrovascular lesions (e.g., infarctions in the posterior watershed zone) and neoplasms that involve the temporoparietal cortex posterior to Wernicke's area are the most common causes.

Isolation Aphasia

This rare syndrome represents a combination of the two transcortical aphasias. Comprehension is severely impaired, and there is no purposeful speech output. The patient may parrot fragments of heard conversations (echolalia), indicating that the neural mechanisms for repetition are at least partially intact. This condition represents the pathologic function of the language network when it is isolated from other regions of the brain. Broca's and Wernicke's areas tend to be spared, but there is damage to the surrounding frontal, parietal, and temporal cortex. Lesions are patchy and can be associated with anoxia, carbon monoxide poisoning, or complete watershed zone infarctions.

Anomic Aphasia

This form of aphasia may be considered the "minimal dysfunction" syndrome of the language network. Articulation, comprehension, and repetition are intact, but confrontation naming, word finding, and spelling are impaired. Speech is enriched in function words but impoverished in substantive nouns and verbs denoting specific actions. Language output is fluent but paraphasic, circumlocutious, and uninformative. Fluency may be interrupted by word-finding hesitations. The lesion sites can be anywhere within the left hemisphere language network, including the middle and inferior temporal gyri. Anomic aphasia is the single most common language disturbance seen in head trauma, metabolic encephalopathy, and Alzheimer's disease.

Pure Word Deafness

The most common causes are either bilateral or left-sided middle cerebral artery (MCA) strokes affecting the superior temporal gyrus. The net effect of the underlying lesion is to interrupt the flow of information from the auditory association cortex to Wernicke's area. Patients have no difficulty understanding written language and can express themselves well in spoken or written language. They have no difficulty interpreting and reacting to environmental sounds since primary auditory cortex and subcortical auditory relays are intact. Since auditory information cannot be conveyed to the language network, however, it cannot be decoded into neural word representations, and the patient reacts to speech as if it were in an alien tongue that cannot be deciphered. Patients cannot repeat spoken language but have no difficulty naming objects. In time, patients with pure word deafness teach themselves lipreading and may appear to have improved. There may be no additional neurologic findings, but agitated paranoid reactions are common in the acute stages. Cerebrovascular lesions are the most common cause.

Pure Alexia Without Agraphia

This is the visual equivalent of pure word deafness. The lesions (usually a combination of damage to the left occipital cortex and to a posterior sector of the corpus callosum〞the splenium) interrupt the flow of visual input into the language network. There is usually a right hemianopia, but the core language network remains unaffected. The patient can understand and produce spoken language, name objects in the left visual hemifield, repeat, and write. However, the patient acts as if illiterate when asked to read even the simplest sentence because the visual information from the written words (presented to the intact left visual hemifield) cannot reach the language network. Objects in the left hemifield may be named accurately because they activate nonvisual associations in the right hemisphere, which in turn can access the language network through transcallosal pathways anterior to the splenium. Patients with this syndrome also may lose the ability to name colors, although they can match colors. This is known as a color anomia. The most common etiology of pure alexia is a vascular lesion in the territory of the posterior cerebral artery or an infiltrating neoplasm in the left occipital cortex that involves the optic radiations as well as the crossing fibers of the splenium. Since the posterior cerebral artery also supplies medial temporal components of the limbic system, a patient with pure alexia also may experience an amnesia, but this is usually transient because the limbic lesion is unilateral.

Aphemia

There is an acute onset of severely impaired fluency (often mutism), which cannot be accounted for by corticobulbar, cerebellar, or extrapyramidal dysfunction. Recovery is the rule and involves an intermediate stage of hoarse whispering. Writing, reading, and comprehension are intact, and so this is not a true aphasic syndrome. Partial lesions of Broca's area or subcortical lesions that undercut its connections with other parts of the brain may be present. Occasionally, the lesion site is on the medial aspects of the frontal lobes and may involve the supplementary motor cortex of the left hemisphere.

Apraxia

This generic term designates a complex motor deficit that cannot be attributed to pyramidal, extrapyramidal, cerebellar, or sensory dysfunction and that does not arise from the patient's failure to understand the nature of the task. The form that is encountered most frequently in clinical practice is known as ideomotor apraxia. Commands to perform a specific motor act ("cough," "blow out a match") or pantomime the use of a common tool (a comb, hammer, straw, or toothbrush) in the absence of the real object cannot be followed. The patient's ability to comprehend the command is ascertained by demonstrating multiple movements and establishing that the correct one can be recognized. Some patients with this type of apraxia can imitate the appropriate movement (when it is demonstrated by the examiner) and show no impairment when handed the real object, indicating that the sensorimotor mechanisms necessary for the movement are intact. Some forms of ideomotor apraxia represent a disconnection of the language network from pyramidal motor systems: commands to execute complex movements are understood but cannot be conveyed to the appropriate motor areas even though the relevant motor mechanisms are intact. Buccofacial apraxia involves apraxic deficits in movements of the face and mouth. Limb apraxia encompasses apraxic deficits in movements of the arms and legs. Ideomotor apraxia almost always is caused by lesions in the left hemisphere and is commonly associated with aphasic syndromes, especially Broca's aphasia and conduction aphasia. Its presence cannot be ascertained in patients with language comprehension deficits. The ability to follow commands aimed at axial musculature ("close the eyes," "stand up") is subserved by different pathways and may be intact in otherwise severely aphasic and apraxic patients. Since the handling of real objects is not impaired, ideomotor apraxia by itself causes no major limitation of daily living activities. Patients with lesions of the anterior corpus callosum can display ideomotor apraxia confined to the left side of the body, a sign known as sympathetic dyspraxia. A severe form of sympathetic dyspraxia known as the alien hand syndrome is characterized by additional features of motor disinhibition on the left hand.

Ideational apraxia refers to a deficit in the execution of a goal-directed sequence of movements in patients who have no difficulty executing the individual components of the sequence. For example, when the patient is asked to pick up a pen and write, the sequence of uncapping the pen, placing the cap at the opposite end, turning the point toward the writing surface, and writing may be disrupted, and the patient may be seen trying to write with the wrong end of the pen or even with the removed cap. These motor sequencing problems usually are seen in the context of confusional states and dementias rather than focal lesions associated with aphasic conditions. Limb-kinetic apraxia involves a clumsiness in the actual use of tools that cannot be attributed to sensory, pyramidal, extrapyramidal, or cerebellar dysfunction. This condition can emerge in the context of focal premotor cortex lesions or corticobasal degeneration.

Gerstmann's Syndrome

The combination of acalculia (impairment of simple arithmetic), dysgraphia (impaired writing), finger anomia (an inability to name individual fingers such as the index and thumb), and right-left confusion (an inability to tell whether a hand, foot, or arm of the patient or examiner is on the right or left side of the body) is known as Gerstmann's syndrome. In making this diagnosis it is important to establish that the finger and left-right naming deficits are not part of a more generalized anomia and that the patient is not otherwise aphasic. When Gerstmann's syndrome is seen in isolation, it is commonly associated with damage to the inferior parietal lobule (especially the angular gyrus) in the left hemisphere.

Aprosodia

Variations of melodic stress and intonation influence the meaning and impact of spoken language. For example, the two statements "He is clever." and "He is clever?" contain an identical word choice and syntax but convey vastly different messages because of differences in the intonation and stress with which the statements are uttered. This aspect of language is known as prosody. Damage to perisylvian areas in the right hemisphere can interfere with speech prosody and can lead to syndromes of aprosodia. Damage to right hemisphere regions corresponding to Wernicke's area can selectively impair decoding of speech prosody, whereas damage to right hemisphere regions corresponding to Broca's area yields a greater impairment in the ability to introduce meaning-appropriate prosody into spoken language. The latter deficit is the most common type of aprosodia identified in clinical practice; the patient produces grammatically correct language with accurate word choice, but the statements are uttered in a monotone that interferes with the ability to convey the intended stress and affect. Patients with this type of aprosodia give the mistaken impression of being depressed or indifferent.

Subcortical Aphasia

Damage to subcortical components of the language network (e.g., the striatum and thalamus of the left hemisphere) also can lead to aphasia. The resulting syndromes contain combinations of deficits in the various aspects of language but rarely fit the specific patterns described in Table 26-1. In a patient with a CVA, an anomic aphasia accompanied by dysarthria or a fluent aphasia with hemiparesis should raise the suspicion of a subcortical lesion site.

Progressive Aphasias

Aphasias caused by cerebrovascular accidents start suddenly and display maximal deficits at the onset. The underlying lesion is relatively circumscribed and is associated with a total loss of neural function in at least part of the lesion site. These are the "classic" aphasias described above. Aphasias caused by neurodegenerative diseases have an insidious onset and a relentless progression so that the symptomatology changes over time. Since the neuronal loss within the areas encompassed by the neurodegeneration is partial and since it tends to include multiple components of the language network, the clinico-anatomic patterns are different from those described in Table 26-1.

Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis of Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA)

When a neurodegenerative disease selectively undermines language function, a clinical diagnosis of PPA is made. A patient with PPA comes to medical attention because of word-finding difficulties, abnormal speech patterns, word-comprehension impairments, or spelling errors of recent onset. PPA is diagnosed when other mental faculties, such as memory for daily events, visuospatial skills (assessed by tests of drawing and face recognition), and comportment (assessed by history obtained from a third party), remain relatively intact; when language is the major area of dysfunction for the first few years of the disease; and when structural brain imaging does not reveal a specific lesion, other than atrophy, that accounts for the language deficit. Impairments in other cognitive functions may emerge eventually, but the language dysfunction remains the most salient feature and deteriorates most rapidly throughout the illness.

Language in PPA

The language impairment in PPA varies from patient to patient. Some patients cannot find the right words to express thoughts; others cannot understand the meaning of heard or seen words; still others cannot name objects in the environment. The language impairment can be fluent (that is, with normal articulation, flow, and number of words per utterance) or nonfluent. The single most common sign of primary progressive aphasia is an inability to come up with the right word during conversation and/or an inability to name objects shown by the examiner (anomia). Distinct forms of agrammatism and/or word comprehension deficits also can arise. The agrammatism consists of inappropriate word order and misuse of small grammatical words. Comprehension deficits, if present, start with an occasional inability to understand single low-frequency words and gradually progress to encompass the comprehension of conversational speech.

The impairments of syntax, comprehension, naming, or writing in PPA form slightly different patterns from those seen in CVA-caused aphasias. Three subtypes of PPA can be recognized: an agrammatic variant characterized by poor fluency and impaired grammar, a semantic variant characterized by preserved fluency and syntax but poor single word comprehension, and a logopenic variant characterized by preserved syntax and comprehension but frequent word-finding pauses during spontaneous speech. The agrammatic variant also is known as progressive nonfluent aphasia and displays similarities to Broca's aphasia. However, dysarthria is usually absent. The semantic variant of PPA displays similarities to Wernicke's aphasia, but the comprehension difficulty tends to be most profound for single words denoting concrete objects.

Pathophysiology

The three variants of PPA display overlapping distributions of neuronal loss, but the agrammatic variant is most closely associated with atrophy in the anterior parts of the language network (where Broca's area is located), the semantic variant with atrophy in the anterior temporal components of the language network, and the logopenic variant with atrophy in the temporoparietal component of the language network. The abnormalities may remain confined to the left hemisphere perisylvian and anterior temporal cortices initially, but gradual deterioration in PPA leads to a loss of syndromic specificity as the disease progresses.

Neuropathology

In the majority of PPA cases, the neuropathology falls within the family of frontotemporal lobar degenerations (FTLDs) and displays various combinations of focal neuronal loss, gliosis, tau-positive inclusions including Pick bodies, and tau-negative TDP-43 inclusions. Familial forms of PPA with TDP-43 inclusions recently were linked to mutations of the progranulin gene on chromosome 17. The agrammatic variant most frequently is associated with tauopathy, whereas the semantic variant is most closely associated with TDP-43 inclusions. Alzheimer's pathology is seen most frequently in the logopenic variant. The clinical subtyping of PPA thus may help predict the nature of the underlying neuropathology. The intriguing possibility has been raised that a personal or family history of dyslexia may be a risk factor for primary progressive aphasia, at least in some patients, suggesting that this disease may arise on a background of genetic or developmental vulnerability that affects language-related areas of the brain.
 
The Parietofrontal Network for Spatial Orientation: Neglect and Related Conditions

Hemispatial Neglect

Adaptive orientation to significant events within the extrapersonal space is subserved by a large-scale network containing three major cortical components. The cingulate cortex provides access to a motivational mapping of the extrapersonal space, the posterior parietal cortex to a sensorimotor representation of salient extrapersonal events, and the frontal eye fields to motor strategies for attentional behaviors (Fig. 26-2). Subcortical components of this network include the striatum and the thalamus. Contralesional hemispatial neglect represents one outcome of damage to any of the cortical or subcortical components of this network. The traditional view that hemispatial neglect always denotes a parietal lobe lesion is inaccurate. In keeping with this anatomic organization, the clinical manifestations of neglect display three behavioral components: sensory events (or their mental representations) within the neglected hemispace have a lesser impact on overall awareness, there is a paucity of exploratory and orienting acts directed toward the neglected hemispace, and the patient behaves as if the neglected hemispace were motivationally devalued.

Figure 26-2

 
 
 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging of language and spatial attention in neurologically intact subjects. The red and black areas show regions of task-related significant activation. (Top) The subjects were asked to determine if two words were synonymous. This language task led to the simultaneous activation of the two epicenters of the language network, Broca's area (B) and Wernicke's area (W). The activations are exclusively in the left hemisphere. (Bottom) The subjects were asked to shift spatial attention to a peripheral target. This task led to the simultaneous activation of the three epicenters of the attentional network: the posterior parietal cortex (P), the frontal eye fields (F), and the cingulate gyrus (CG). The activations are predominantly in the right hemisphere. (Courtesy of Darren Gitelman, MD; with permission.)
 
 

According to one model of spatial cognition, the right hemisphere directs attention within the entire extrapersonal space, whereas the left hemisphere directs attention mostly within the contralateral right hemispace. Consequently, unilateral left hemisphere lesions do not give rise to much contralesional neglect since the global attentional mechanisms of the right hemisphere can compensate for the loss of the contralaterally directed attentional functions of the left hemisphere. Unilateral right hemisphere lesions, however, give rise to severe contralesional left hemispatial neglect because the unaffected left hemisphere does not contain ipsilateral attentional mechanisms. This model is consistent with clinical experience, which shows that contralesional neglect is more common, severe, and lasting after damage to the right hemisphere than after damage to the left hemisphere. Severe neglect for the right hemispace is rare, even in left-handers with left hemisphere lesions.

Clinical Examination

Patients with severe neglect may fail to dress, shave, or groom the left side of the body; fail to eat food placed on the left side of the tray; and fail to read the left half of sentences. When the examiner draws a large circle [12 to 15 cm (5 to 6 in.) in diameter] and asks the patient to place the numbers 1 to 12 as if the circle represented the face of a clock, there is a tendency to crowd the numbers on the right side and leave the left side empty. When asked to copy a simple line drawing, the patient fails to copy detail on the left, and when the patient is asked to write, there is a tendency to leave an unusually wide margin on the left.

Two bedside tests that are useful in assessing neglect are simultaneous bilateral stimulation and visual target cancellation. In the former, the examiner provides either unilateral or simultaneous bilateral stimulation in the visual, auditory, and tactile modalities. After right hemisphere injury, patients who have no difficulty detecting unilateral stimuli on either side experience the bilaterally presented stimulus as coming only from the right. This phenomenon is known as extinction and is a manifestation of the sensory-representational aspect of hemispatial neglect. In the target detection task, targets (e.g., A's) are interspersed with foils (e.g., other letters of the alphabet) on a 21.5- to 28.0-cm (8.5 to 11 in.) sheet of paper, and the patient is asked to circle all the targets. A failure to detect targets on the left is a manifestation of the exploratory deficit in hemispatial neglect (Fig. 26-3A). Hemianopia is not by itself sufficient to cause the target detection failure since the patient is free to turn the head and eyes to the left. Target detection failures therefore reflect a distortion of spatial attention, not just of sensory input. The normal tendency in target detection tasks is to start from the left upper quadrant and move systematically in horizontal or vertical sweeps. Some patients show a tendency to start the process from the right and proceed in a haphazard fashion. This represents a subtle manifestation of left neglect even if the patient eventually manages to detect all the appropriate targets. Some patients with neglect also may deny the existence of hemiparesis and may even deny ownership of the paralyzed limb, a condition known as anosognosia.

Figure 26-3

 
 
 
 
A. A 47-year-old man with a large frontoparietal lesion in the right hemisphere was asked to circle all the A's. Only targets on the right are circled. This is a manifestation of left hemispatial neglect. B. A 70-year-old woman with a 2-year history of degenerative dementia was able to circle most of the small targets but ignored the larger ones. This is a manifestation of simultanagnosia.
 
 

B芍lint's Syndrome, Simultanagnosia, Dressing Apraxia, and Construction Apraxia

Bilateral involvement of the network for spatial attention, especially its parietal components, leads to a state of severe spatial disorientation known as B芍lint's syndrome. B芍lint's syndrome involves deficits in the orderly visuomotor scanning of the environment (oculomotor apraxia) and in accurate manual reaching toward visual targets (optic ataxia). The third and most dramatic component of B芍lint's syndrome is known as simultanagnosia and reflects an inability to integrate visual information in the center of gaze with more peripheral information. The patient gets stuck on the detail that falls in the center of gaze without attempting to scan the visual environment for additional information. A patient with simultanagnosia "misses the forest for the trees." Complex visual scenes cannot be grasped in their entirety, leading to severe limitations in the visual identification of objects and scenes. For example, a patient who is shown a table lamp and asked to name the object may look at its circular base and call it an ashtray. Some patients with simultanagnosia report that objects they look at may vanish suddenly, probably indicating an inability to look back at the original point of gaze after brief saccadic displacements. Movement and distracting stimuli greatly exacerbate the difficulties of visual perception. Simultanagnosia sometimes can occur without the other two components of B芍lint's syndrome.

A modification of the letter cancellation task described above can be used for the bedside diagnosis of simultanagnosia. In this modification, some of the targets (e.g., A's) are made to be much larger than the others [7.5 to 10 cm vs. 2.5 cm (3 to 4 in. vs. 1 in.) in height], and all targets are embedded among foils. Patients with simultanagnosia display a counterintuitive but characteristic tendency to miss the larger targets (Fig. 26-3B). This occurs because the information needed for the identification of the larger targets cannot be confined to the immediate line of gaze and requires the integration of visual information across a more extensive field of view. The greater difficulty in the detection of the larger targets also indicates that poor acuity is not responsible for the impairment of visual function and that the problem is central rather than peripheral.

Another manifestation of bilateral (or right-sided) dorsal parietal lobe lesions is dressing apraxia. A patient with this condition is unable to align the body axis with the axis of the garment and can be seen struggling as he or she holds a coat from its bottom or extends his or her arm into a fold of the garment rather than into its sleeve. Lesions that involve the posterior parietal cortex also lead to severe difficulties in copying simple line drawings. This is known as a construction apraxia and is much more severe if the lesion is in the right hemisphere. In some patients with right hemisphere lesions, the drawing difficulties are confined to the left side of the figure and represent a manifestation of hemispatial neglect; in others, there is a more universal deficit in reproducing contours and three-dimensional perspective. Dressing apraxia and construction apraxia represent special instances of a more general disturbance in spatial orientation.

Causes of Spatial Disorientation

Cerebrovascular lesions and neoplasms in the right hemisphere are the most common causes of hemispatial neglect. Depending on the site of the lesion, a patient with neglect also may have hemiparesis, hemihypesthesia, and hemianopia on the left, but these are not invariant findings. The majority of these patients display considerable improvement of hemispatial neglect, usually within the first several weeks. B芍lint's syndrome results from bilateral dorsal parietal lesions; common settings include watershed infarction between the middle and posterior cerebral artery territories, hypoglycemia, and sagittal sinus thrombosis.

A progressive form of spatial disorientation known as the posterior cortical atrophy syndrome most commonly represents a variant of Alzheimer's disease with unusual concentrations of neurofibrillary degeneration in the parieto-occipital cortex and the superior colliculus. The patient displays a progressive B芍lint's syndrome, usually accompanied by dressing and construction apraxia. Corticobasal degeneration, a type of FTLD with abnormal tau inclusions, can have an asymmetric distribution. When the atrophy shows a predilection for the right cerebral hemisphere, a progressive left hemineglect syndrome emerges on a background of left-sided extrapyramidal dysfunction.
 
The Occipitotemporal Network for Face and Object Recognition: Prosopagnosia and Object Agnosia

Perceptual information about faces and objects initially is encoded in primary (striate) visual cortex and adjacent (upstream) peristriate visual association areas. This information subsequently is relayed first to the downstream visual association areas of occipitotemporal cortex and then to other heteromodal and paralimbic areas of the cerebral cortex. Bilateral lesions in the fusiform and lingual gyri of the occipitotemporal cortex disrupt this process and interfere with the ability of otherwise intact perceptual information to activate the distributed multimodal associations that lead to the recognition of faces and objects. The resultant face and object recognition deficits are known as associativeprosopagnosia and visual object agnosia.

A patient with prosopagnosia cannot recognize familiar faces, including, sometimes, the reflection of his or her own face in the mirror. This is not a perceptual deficit since prosopagnosic patients easily can tell whether two faces are identical. Furthermore, a prosopagnosic patient who cannot recognize a familiar face by visual inspection alone can use auditory cues to reach appropriate recognition if allowed to listen to the person's voice. The deficit in prosopagnosia is therefore modality-specific and reflects the existence of a lesion that prevents the activation of otherwise intact multimodal templates by relevant visual input. The deficit in prosopagnosia is not limited to the recognition of faces but also can extend to the recognition of individual members of larger generic object groups. For example, prosopagnosic patients characteristically have no difficulty with the generic identification of a face as a face or a car as a car, but they cannot recognize the identity of an individual face or the make of an individual car. This reflects a visual recognition deficit for proprietary features that characterize individual members of an object class. When recognition problems become more generalized and extend to the generic identification of common objects, the condition is known as visual object agnosia. In contrast to prosopagnosic patients, those with object agnosia cannot recognize a face as a face or a car as a car. It is important to distinguish visual object agnosia from anomia. A patient with anomia cannot name the object but can describe its use. In contrast, a patient with visual agnosia is unable either to name a visually presented object or to describe its use. Face and object recognition disorders also can result from the simultanagnosia of B芍lint's syndrome, in which case they are known as apperceptive agnosias as opposed to the associative agnosias that result from inferior temporal lobe lesions.

Causes

The characteristic lesions in prosopagnosia and visual object agnosia consist of bilateral infarctions in the territory of the posterior cerebral arteries. Associated deficits can include visual field defects (especially superior quadrantanopias) and a centrally based color blindness known as achromatopsia. Rarely, the responsible lesion is unilateral. In such cases, prosopagnosia is associated with lesions in the right hemisphere, and object agnosia with lesions in the left. Degenerative diseases of anterior and inferior temporal cortex can cause progressive associative prosopagnosia and object agnosia. The combination of progressive associative agnosia and a fluent aphasia is known as semantic dementia and usually is caused by FTLD with TDP-43 inclusions. Patients with semantic dementia fail to recognize faces and objects and cannot understand the meaning of words denoting objects.
 
The Limbic Network for Episodic Memory: Amnesias

Limbic and paralimbic areas (such as the hippocampus, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex), the anterior and medial nuclei of the thalamus, the medial and basal parts of the striatum, and the hypothalamus collectively constitute a distributed network known as the limbic system. The behavioral affiliations of this network include the coordination of emotion, motivation, autonomic tone, and endocrine function. An additional area of specialization for the limbic network and the one that is of most relevance to clinical practice is that of declarative (conscious) memory for recent episodes and experiences. A disturbance in this function is known as an amnestic state. In the absence of deficits in motivation, attention, language, or visuospatial function, the clinical diagnosis of a persistent global amnestic state is always associated with bilateral damage to the limbic network, usually within the hippocampo-entorhinal complex or the thalamus.

Although the limbic network is the site of damage for amnestic states, it is almost certainly not the storage site for memories. Memories are stored in widely distributed form throughout the cerebral cortex. The role attributed to the limbic network is to bind these distributed fragments into coherent events and experiences that can sustain conscious recall. Damage to the limbic network does not necessarily destroy memories but interferes with their conscious (declarative) recall in coherent form. The individual fragments of information remain preserved despite the limbic lesions and can sustain what is known as implicit memory. For example, patients with amnestic states can acquire new motor or perceptual skills even though they may have no conscious knowledge of the experiences that led to the acquisition of these skills.

The memory disturbance in the amnestic state is multimodal and includes retrograde and anterograde components. The retrograde amnesia involves an inability to recall experiences that occurred before the onset of the amnestic state. Relatively recent events are more vulnerable to retrograde amnesia than are more remote and more extensively consolidated events. A patient who comes to the emergency room complaining that he cannot remember his or her identity but can remember the events of the previous day almost certainly does not have a neurologic cause of memory disturbance. The second and most important component of the amnestic state is the anterograde amnesia, which indicates an inability to store, retain, and recall new knowledge. Patients with amnestic states cannot remember what they ate a few minutes ago or the details of an important event they may have experienced a few hours ago. In the acute stages, there also may be a tendency to fill in memory gaps with inaccurate, fabricated, and often implausible information. This is known as confabulation. Patients with the amnestic syndrome forget that they forget and tend to deny the existence of a memory problem when questioned.

Clinical Examination

A patient with an amnestic state is almost always disoriented, especially to time. Accurate temporal orientation and accurate knowledge of current news rule out a major amnestic state. The anterograde component of an amnestic state can be tested with a list of four to five words read aloud by the examiner up to five times or until the patient can immediately repeat the entire list without an intervening delay. In the next phase of testing, the patient is allowed to concentrate on the words and rehearse them internally for 1 min before being asked to recall them. Accurate performance in this phase indicates that the patient is motivated and sufficiently attentive to hold the words online for at least 1 min. The final phase of the testing involves a retention period of 5 to 10 min during which the patient is engaged in other tasks. Adequate recall at the end of this interval requires offline storage, retention, and retrieval. Amnestic patients fail this phase of the task and may even forget that they were given a list of words to remember. Accurate recognition of the words by multiple choice in a patient who cannot recall them indicates a less severe memory disturbance that affects mostly the retrieval stage of memory. The retrograde component of an amnesia can be assessed with questions related to autobiographical or historic events. The anterograde component of amnestic states is usually much more prominent than the retrograde component. In rare instances, usually associated with temporal lobe epilepsy or benzodiazepine intake, the retrograde component may dominate.

The assessment of memory can be quite challenging. Bedside evaluations may detect only the most severe impairments. Less severe memory impairments, as in the case of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy, mild head injury, or early dementia, require quantitative evaluations by neuropsychologists. Confusional states caused by toxic-metabolic encephalopathies and some types of frontal lobe damage interfere with attentional capacity and lead to secondary memory impairments, even in the absence of any limbic lesions. This sort of memory impairment can be differentiated from the amnestic state by the presence of additional impairments in the attention-related tasks described below in the section on the frontal lobes.

Causes, Including Alzheimer's Disease

Many neurologic diseases can give rise to an amnestic state. They include tumors (of the sphenoid wing, posterior corpus callosum, thalamus, or medial temporal lobe), infarctions (in the territories of the anterior or posterior cerebral arteries), head trauma, herpes simplex encephalitis, Wernicke-Korsakoff encephalopathy, paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis, and degenerative dementias such as Alzheimer's disease and Pick's disease. The one common denominator of all these diseases is the presence of bilateral lesions within one or more components in the limbic network. Occasionally, unilateral left-sided hippocampal lesions can give rise to an amnestic state, but the memory disorder tends to be transient. Depending on the nature and distribution of the underlying neurologic disease, the patient also may have visual field deficits, eye movement limitations, or cerebellar findings.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its prodromal state of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are the most common causes of progressive memory impairments. Temporal disorientation and poor recall of recent conversations are early manifestations. The predilection of the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus for early neurofibrillary degeneration in the MCI-AD spectrum is responsible for the initially selective impairment of episodic memory. In time, a full amnestic state emerges, but usually with additional impairments in language, attention, and visuospatial skills as the neurofibrillary degeneration spreads to additional neocortical areas.

Transient global amnesia is a distinctive syndrome usually seen in late middle age. Patients become acutely disoriented and repeatedly ask who they are, where they are, and what they are doing. The spell is characterized by anterograde amnesia (inability to retain new information) and a retrograde amnesia for relatively recent events that occurred before the onset. The syndrome usually resolves within 24 to 48 h and is followed by the filling in of the period affected by the retrograde amnesia, although there is persistent loss of memory for the events that occurred during the ictus. Recurrences are noted in approximately 20% of patients. Migraine, temporal lobe seizures, and perfusion abnormalities in the posterior cerebral territory have been postulated as causes of transient global amnesia. The absence of associated neurologic findings occasionally may lead to the incorrect diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder.
 
The Prefrontal Network for Attention and Behavior

Approximately one-third of all the cerebral cortex in the human brain is situated in the frontal lobes. The frontal lobes can be subdivided into motor-premotor, dorsolateral prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbitofrontal components. The terms frontal lobe syndrome and prefrontal cortex refer only to the last three of these four components. These are the parts of the cerebral cortex that show the greatest phylogenetic expansion in primates, especially in humans. The dorsolateral prefrontal, medial prefrontal, and orbitofrontal areas, along with the subcortical structures with which they are interconnected (i.e., the head of the caudate and the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus), collectively make up a large-scale network that coordinates exceedingly complex aspects of human cognition and behavior.

The prefrontal network plays an important role in behaviors that require multitasking and the integration of thought with emotion. Its integrity appears important for the simultaneous awareness of context, options, consequences, relevance, and emotional impact that allows the formulation of adaptive inferences, decisions, and actions. Damage to this part of the brain impairs mental flexibility, reasoning, hypothesis formation, abstract thinking, foresight, judgment, the online (attentive) holding of information, and the ability to inhibit inappropriate responses. Cognitive operations impaired by prefrontal cortex lesions often are referred to as "executive functions."

Even very large bilateral prefrontal lesions may leave all sensory, motor, and basic cognitive functions intact while leading to isolated but dramatic alterations of personality and behavior. The most common clinical manifestations of damage to the prefrontal network take the form of two relatively distinct syndromes. In the frontal abulic syndrome, the patient shows a loss of initiative, creativity, and curiosity and displays a pervasive emotional blandness and apathy. In the frontal disinhibition syndrome, the patient becomes socially disinhibited and shows severe impairments of judgment, insight, and foresight. The dissociation between intact intellectual function and a total lack of even rudimentary common sense is striking. Despite the preservation of all essential memory functions, the patient cannot learn from experience and continues to display inappropriate behaviors without appearing to feel emotional pain, guilt, or regret when those behaviors repeatedly lead to disastrous consequences. The impairments may emerge only in real-life situations when behavior is under minimal external control and may not be apparent within the structured environment of the medical office. Testing judgment by asking patients what they would do if they detected a fire in a theater or found a stamped and addressed envelope on the road is not very informative since patients who answer these questions wisely in the office may still act very foolishly in the more complex real-life setting. The physician must therefore be prepared to make a diagnosis of frontal lobe disease on the basis of historic information alone even when the mental state is quite intact in the office examination.

Clinical Examination

The emergence of developmentally primitive reflexes, also known as frontal release signs, such as grasping (elicited by stroking the palm) and sucking (elicited by stroking the lips) are seen primarily in patients with large structural lesions that extend into the premotor components of the frontal lobes or in the context of metabolic encephalopathies. The vast majority of patients with prefrontal lesions and frontal lobe behavioral syndromes do not display these reflexes.

Damage to the frontal lobe disrupts a variety of attention-related functions, including working memory (the transient online holding of information), concentration span, the scanning and retrieval of stored information, the inhibition of immediate but inappropriate responses, and mental flexibility. The capacity for focusing on a trend of thought and the ability to shift the focus of attention voluntarily from one thought or stimulus to another can become impaired. Digit span (which should be seven forward and five reverse) is decreased; the recitation of the months of the year in reverse order (which should take less than 15 s) is slowed; and the fluency in producing words starting with the letter a, f, or s that can be generated in 1 min (normally  12 per letter) is diminished even in nonaphasic patients. Characteristically, there is a progressive slowing of performance as the task proceeds; e.g., a patient asked to count backward by threes may say "100, 97, 94,. . .91,. . .88," etc., and may not complete the task. In "go每no go" tasks (where the instruction is to raise the finger upon hearing one tap but keep it still upon hearing two taps), the patient shows a characteristic inability to keep still in response to the "no go" stimulus. Mental flexibility (tested by the ability to shift from one criterion to another in sorting or matching tasks) is impoverished; distractibility by irrelevant stimuli is increased; and there is a pronounced tendency for impersistence and perseveration.

These attentional deficits disrupt the orderly registration and retrieval of new information and lead to secondary memory deficits. Those memory deficits can be differentiated from the primary memory impairments of the amnestic state by showing that they improve when the attentional load of the task is decreased. Working memory (also known as immediate memory) is an attentional function based on the temporary online holding of information. It is closely associated with the integrity of the prefrontal network and the ascending reticular activating system. Retentive memory, in contrast, depends on the stable (offline) storage of information and is associated with the integrity of the limbic network. The distinction of the underlying neural mechanisms is illustrated by the observation that severely amnestic patients who cannot remember events that occurred a few minutes ago may have intact if not superior working memory capacity as shown in tests of digit span.

Causes: Trauma, Neoplasm, and Frontotemporal Dementia

The abulic syndrome tends to be associated with damage in dorsal prefrontal cortex, and the disinhibition syndrome with damage in ventral prefrontal cortex. These syndromes tend to arise almost exclusively after bilateral lesions. Unilateral lesions confined to the prefrontal cortex may remain silent until the pathology spreads to the other side; this explains why thromboembolic CVA is an unusual cause of the frontal lobe syndrome. Common settings for frontal lobe syndromes include head trauma, ruptured aneurysms, hydrocephalus, tumors (including metastases, glioblastoma, and falx or olfactory groove meningiomas), and focal degenerative diseases. A major clinical form of FTLD known as the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) causes a progressive frontal lobe syndrome that can start as early as the fifth decade of life. In these patients, the anterior temporal lobe and caudate nucleus are also atrophic. The behavioral changes can include shoplifting, compulsive gambling, sexual indiscretions, and obsessive-compulsive preoccupations, arising on a background of indifference. In many patients with Alzheimer's disease, neurofibrillary degeneration eventually spreads to prefrontal cortex and gives rise to components of the frontal lobe syndrome, but almost always on a background of severe memory impairment.

Lesions in the caudate nucleus or in the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus (subcortical components of the prefrontal network) also can produce a frontal lobe syndrome. This is one reason why the changes in mental state associated with degenerative basal ganglia diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease may take the form of a frontal lobe syndrome. Because of its widespread connections with other regions of association cortex, one essential computational role of the prefrontal network is to function as an integrator, or "orchestrator," for other networks. Bilateral multifocal lesions of the cerebral hemispheres, none of which are individually large enough to cause specific cognitive deficits such as aphasia and neglect, can collectively interfere with the connectivity and integrating function of the prefrontal cortex. A frontal lobe syndrome is the single most common behavioral profile associated with a variety of bilateral multifocal brain diseases, including metabolic encephalopathy, multiple sclerosis, and vitamin B12 deficiency, among others. Many patients with the clinical diagnosis of a frontal lobe syndrome tend to have lesions that do not involve prefrontal cortex but involve either the subcortical components of the prefrontal network or its connections with other parts of the brain. To avoid making a diagnosis of "frontal lobe syndrome" in a patient with no evidence of frontal cortex disease, it is advisable to use the diagnostic term frontal network syndrome, with the understanding that the responsible lesions can lie anywhere within this distributed network.

A patient with frontal lobe disease raises potential dilemmas in differential diagnosis: the abulia and blandness may be misinterpreted as depression, and the disinhibition as idiopathicmania or acting out. Appropriate intervention may be delayed while a treatable tumor keeps expanding. An informed approach to frontal lobe disease and its behavioral manifestations may help prevent such errors.
 
Caring for Patients with Deficits of Higher Cerebral Function

Some of the deficits described in this chapter are so complex that they may bewilder not only the patient and family but also the physician. It is imperative to carry out a systematic clinical evaluation to characterize the nature of the deficits and explain them in lay terms to the patient and family. Such an explanation can allay at least some of the anxieties, address the mistaken impression that the deficit (e.g., social disinhibition or inability to recognize family members) is psychologically motivated, and lead to practical suggestions for daily living activities. The consultation of a skilled neuropsychologist may aid in the formulation of diagnosis and management. Patients with simultanagnosia, for example, may benefit from the counterintuitive instruction to stand back when they cannot find an item so that a greater search area falls within the immediate field of gaze. Some patients with frontal lobe disease can be extremely irritable and abusive to spouses yet display all the appropriate social graces during a visit to the medical office. In such cases, the history may be more important than the bedside examination in charting a course of treatment.

Reactive depression is common in patients with higher cerebral dysfunction and should be treated. These patients may be overly sensitive to the usual doses of antidepressants or anxiolytics and require a careful titration of dosage. Brain damage may cause a dissociation between feeling states and their expression so that a patient who may superficially appear jocular could still be suffering from an underlying depression that needs to be treated. In many cases, agitation may be controlled with reassurance. In other cases, treatment with benzodiazepines, antiepilectics, or sedating antidepressants may become necessary. If neuroleptics become absolutely necessary for the control of agitation, atypical neuroleptics are preferable because of their lower extrapyramidal side effects. Treatment with neuroleptics in elderly patients with dementia requires weighing the potential benefits against the potentially serious side effects.

Spontaneous improvement of cognitive deficits due to acute neurologic lesions is common. It is most rapid in the first few weeks but may continue for up to 2 years, especially in young individuals with single brain lesions. The mechanisms for this recovery are incompletely understood. Some of the initial deficits appear to arise from remote dysfunction (diaschisis) in parts of the brain that are interconnected with the site of initial injury. Improvement in these patients may reflect, at least in part, a normalization of the remote dysfunction. Other mechanisms may involve functional reorganization in surviving neurons adjacent to the injury or the compensatory use of homologous structures, e.g., the right superior temporal gyrus with recovery from Wernicke's aphasia. In some patients with large lesions involving Broca's and Wernicke's areas, only Wernicke's area may show contralateral compensatory reorganization (or bilateral functionality), giving rise to a situation in which a lesion that should have caused a global aphasia becomes associated with a residual Broca's aphasia. Prognosis for recovery from aphasia is best when Wernicke's area is spared. Cognitive rehabilitation procedures have been used in the treatment of higher cortical deficits. There are few controlled studies, but some show a benefit of rehabilitation in the recovery from hemispatial neglect and aphasia. Some types of deficits may be more prone to recovery than others. For example, patients with CVA and nonfluent aphasias are more likely to benefit from speech therapy than are patients with fluent aphasias and comprehension deficits. In general, lesions that lead to a denial of illness (e.g., anosognosia) are associated with cognitive deficits that are more resistant to rehabilitation. Periodic neuropsychological assessment is necessary for quantifying the pace of the improvement (or of the progression in the case of dementias) and for generating specific recommendations for cognitive rehabilitation, modifications in the home environment, the timetable for returning to work in patients recovering from acute lesions, and the scheduling of retirement or disability status in patients with degenerative diseases. Determining driving competence is challenging, especially in the early stages of dementing diseases. The diagnosis of a neurodegenerative disease is not by itself sufficient for asking the patient to stop driving. An on-the-road driving test and reports from family members may help time decisions related to this very important activity.

There is a mistaken belief that dementias are anatomically diffuse and that they cause global cognitive impairments. This is true only at the terminal stages. During most of the clinical course, dementias are exquisitely selective with respect to anatomy and cognitive pattern. Alzheimer's disease, for example, causes the greatest destruction in medial temporal areas belonging to the memory network and is clinically characterized by a correspondingly severe amnesia. There are other dementias in which memory is intact. Selective degeneration of the frontal lobes in FTLD leads to a gradual dissolution of behavior and executive functions. Primary progressive aphasia is characterized by a gradual atrophy of the left perisylvian language network and a selective dissolution of language that can remain isolated for up to 10 years. An enlightened approach to the differential diagnosis and to the individualized care of patients with acute and progressive damage to the cerebral cortex requires an understanding of the principles that link neural networks to higher cerebral functions.
 
Further Readings

BARTSCH T el al: Selective affection of hippocampal CA-1 neurons in patients with transient global amnesia without long-term sequelae. Brain, 129:2874, 2006 [PMID: 17003071] 

 
CATANI M et al: Perisylvian language networks of the human brain. Ann Neurol 57:8, 2006 

 
DELEON J et al: Neural regions essential for distinct cognitive processes underlying picture naming. Brain, 130:1408, 2007 [PMID: 17337482] 

 
DORICCI F et al: White matter (dis)connections and gray matter (dys)functions in visual neglect: Gaining insights into the brain networks of spatial awareness. Cortex 44:983, 2008 

 
HEISS W-D et al: Differential capacity of left and right hemispheric areas for compensation of poststroke aphasia. Ann Neurol 45:430, 1999 [PMID: 10211466] 

 
LEIGUARDA RC, MARSDEN CD: Limb apraxias: Higher-order disorders of sensorimotor integration. Brain 123:860, 2000 [PMID: 10775533] 

 
MESULAM M: Representation, inference and transcendent encoding in neurocognitive networks of the human brain. Ann Neurol 64:367, 2008 [PMID: 18991346] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Quantitative template for subtyping primary progressive aphasia. Arch Neurol 66:1545, 2009 

 
RUFF CC et al: Hemispheric differences in frontal and parietal influences on human occipital cortex: Direct confirmation with concurrent TMS-fMRI. J Cogn Neurosci 21:1146, 2008 

 
RUSCONI E et al: A disconnection account of Gerstmann syndrome: Functional neuroanatomy evidence. Ann Neurol 66:654, 2009 [PMID: 19938150] 

 
SCHMAHMANN JD, PANDYA DN: Disconnection syndromes of basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebrocerebellar systems. Cortex 44:1037, 2008 [PMID: 18614161] 

 
SEELEY W et al: Early frontotemporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and humans. Ann Neurol 60:660, 2006 [PMID: 17187353] 

 
WEINTRAUB S, MESULAM M: With or without FUS, it is the anatomy that dictates the dementia phenotype. Brain 132:2906, 2009 [PMID: 19861505] 
 
 

^^
Sleep Disorders: Introduction

Disturbed sleep is among the most frequent health complaints physicians encounter. More than one-half of adults in the United States experience at least intermittent sleep disturbance. For most, it is an occasional night of poor sleep or daytime sleepiness. However, the Institute of Medicine has estimated that 50每70 million Americans suffer from a chronic disorder of sleep and wakefulness, which can lead to serious impairment of daytime functioning. In addition, such problems may contribute to or exacerbate medical or psychiatric conditions. Thirty years ago, many such complaints were treated with hypnotic medications without further diagnostic evaluation. Since then, a distinct class of sleep and arousal disorders has been identified.
 
Physiology of Sleep and Wakefulness

Given the opportunity, most adults will sleep 7每8 h per night, although the timing, duration, and internal structure of sleep vary among healthy individuals and as a function of age. At the extremes, infants and the elderly have frequent interruptions of sleep. In the United States, adults tend to have one consolidated sleep episode per day, although in some cultures sleep may be divided into a mid-afternoon nap and a shortened night sleep. Two principal neural systems govern the expression of the sleep and wakefulness states within the daily cycle. The first potentiates sleep in proportion to the duration of wakefulness (the "sleep homeostat"), while the second rhythmically modulates sleep and wakefulness tendencies at appropriate phases of the 24-h day (the circadian clock). Intrinsic abnormalities in the function of either of these systems, or extrinsic disturbances (environmental, drug- or illness-related) that supersede their normal expression, can lead to clinically recognizable sleep disorders.

States and Stages of Sleep

States and stages of human sleep are defined on the basis of characteristic patterns in the electroencephalogram (EEG), the electrooculogram (EOG〞a measure of eye-movement activity), and the surface electromyogram (EMG) measured on the chin and neck. The continuous recording of this array of electrophysiologic parameters to define sleep and wakefulness is termed polysomnography.

Polysomnographic profiles define two states of sleep: (1) rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep and (2) non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep. NREM sleep is further subdivided into three stages, characterized by increasing arousal threshold and slowing of the cortical EEG. REM sleep is characterized by a low-amplitude, mixed-frequency EEG similar to that of NREM stage N1 sleep. The EOG shows bursts of REM similar to those seen during eyes-open wakefulness. Chin EMG activity is absent, reflecting the brainstem-mediated muscle atonia that is characteristic of that state.

Organization of Human Sleep

Normal nocturnal sleep in adults displays a consistent organization from night to night (Fig. 27-1). After sleep onset, sleep usually progresses through NREM stages N1每N3 sleep within 45每60 min. Slow-wave sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep) predominates in the first third of the night and comprises 15每25% of total nocturnal sleep time in young adults. The percentage of slow-wave sleep is influenced by several factors, most notably age (see below). Prior sleep deprivation increases the rapidity of sleep onset and both the intensity and amount of slow-wave sleep.

Figure 27-1

 
 
 
Stages of REM sleep (solid bars), the three stages of NREM sleep, and wakefulness over the course of the entire night for representative young and older adult men. Characteristic features of sleep in older people include reduction of slow-wave sleep, frequent spontaneous awakenings, early sleep onset, and early morning awakening. (From the Division of Sleep Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital.)
 
 

The first REM sleep episode usually occurs in the second hour of sleep. More rapid onset of REM sleep in an adult (particularly if <30 min) may suggest pathology such as endogenous depression, narcolepsy, circadian rhythm disorders, or drug withdrawal. NREM and REM alternate through the night with an average period of 90每110 min (the "ultradian" sleep cycle). Overall, REM sleep constitutes 20每25% of total sleep, and NREM stages N1 and N2 are 50每60%.

Age has a profound impact on sleep state organization (Fig. 27-1). Slow-wave sleep is most intense and prominent during childhood, decreasing sharply coincident with puberty and across the second and third decades of life. After age 30, there is a continued decline in the amount of slow-wave sleep, and the amplitude of delta EEG activity comprising slow-wave sleep is profoundly reduced. The depth of slow-wave sleep, as measured by the arousal threshold to auditory stimulation, also decreases with age. In the otherwise healthy older person, slow-wave sleep may be completely absent, particularly in males. Paradoxically, older people are better able to tolerate acute sleep deprivation than young adults, maintaining reaction time and sustaining vigilance with fewer lapses of attention.

A different age profile exists for REM sleep than for slow-wave sleep. In infancy, REM sleep may comprise 50% of total sleep time, and the percentage is inversely proportional to developmental age. The amount of REM sleep falls off sharply over the first postnatal year as a mature REM-NREM cycle develops; thereafter, REM sleep occupies a relatively constant percentage of total sleep time.

Neuroanatomy of Sleep

Experimental studies in animals have variously implicated the medullary reticular formation, the thalamus, and the basal forebrain in the generation of sleep, while the brainstem reticular formation, the midbrain, the subthalamus, the thalamus, and the basal forebrain have all been suggested to play a role in the generation of wakefulness or EEG arousal.

Current models suggest that the capacity for sleep and wakefulness generation is distributed along an axial "core" of neurons extending from the brainstem rostrally to the basal forebrain. A cluster of -aminobutyric acid (GABA) and galaninergic neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic (VLPO) hypothalamus is selectively activated coincident with sleep onset. These neurons project to and inhibit the multiple neural wakefulness centers that comprise the ascending arousal system, and selective cell-specific lesions of VLPO substantially reduce sleep time, indicating that the hypothalamic VLPO neurons play an executive role in sleep regulation. More recent data have identified another sleep center, the median preoptic nucleus (MnPOn) of the hypothalamus with similar activation patterns and projections, suggesting that, like that of wakefulness, executive control of sleep may also be multicentric.

Specific regions in the pons are associated with the neurophysiologic correlates of REM sleep. Small lesions in the dorsal pons result in the loss of the descending muscle inhibition normally associated with REM sleep; microinjections of the cholinergic agonist carbachol into the pontine reticular formation produce a state with all of the features of REM sleep. These experimental manipulations are mimicked by pathologic conditions in humans and animals. A prominent feature of narcolepsy, for example, is abrupt, complete, or partial paralysis (cataplexy) in response to a variety of stimuli, a pathologic activation of neural systems mediating the atonia of normal REM sleep. In narcoleptic dogs, physostigmine, a central cholinesterase inhibitor, increases the frequency of cataplexy episodes, while atropine decreases their frequency. Conversely, in REM sleep behavior disorder (see below), patients suffer from a failure of normal motor inhibition during REM sleep, resulting in involuntary, occasionally violent, movement arising out of dream episodes.

Neurochemistry of Sleep

Early experimental studies that focused on the raphe nuclei of the brainstem appeared to implicate serotonin as the primary sleep-promoting neurotransmitter, while catecholamines were considered to be responsible for wakefulness. Simple neurochemical models have given way to more complex formulations involving multiple parallel waking systems. Pharmacologic studies suggest that histamine, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, and noradrenaline are all involved in wake promotion. A novel neuropeptide, orexin (also known as hypocretin), localized to a cluster of neurons in the lateral hypothalamus and originally identified based on its pathogenic role in narcolepsy (see below), also appears to be involved in the control of wakefulness.

In the basal forebrain (BF), adenosine receptors on cholinergic neurons are thought to play a role in assessing homeostatic sleep need by providing an index of cellular energy status. Projections from these BF neurons to executive sleep centers such as VLPO thus allow incorporation of homeostatic sleep need into the control of sleep state expression. At a practical level, this model suggests that the alerting effects of caffeine, an adenosine receptor antagonist, reflect the attenuation of the homeostatic signal from the basal forebrain.

The prominent hypnotic effects of benzodiazepine receptor agonists suggest that endogenous ligands of this receptor may be involved in normal sleep physiology. While neurosteroids with activity at this receptor have been identified, their role in normal sleep-wake control remains unclear. In addition, a broad array of endogenous sleep- and wake-promoting substances have been identified, the role of which in normal sleep-wake control remains unclear. These include corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), prostaglandin D2, delta sleep每inducing peptide, muramyl dipeptide, interleukin 1, fatty acid primary amides, and melatonin.

Physiology of Circadian Rhythmicity

The sleep-wake cycle is the most evident of the many 24-h rhythms in humans. Prominent daily variations also occur in endocrine, thermoregulatory, cardiac, pulmonary, renal, gastrointestinal, and neurobehavioral functions. At the molecular level, endogenous circadian rhythmicity is driven by self-sustaining transcriptional/translational feedback loops (Fig. 27-2). In evaluating a daily variation in humans, it is important to distinguish between those rhythmic components passively evoked by periodic environmental or behavioral changes (e.g., the increase in blood pressure and heart rate that occurs upon assumption of the upright posture) and those actively driven by an endogenous oscillatory process (e.g., the circadian variation in plasma cortisol that persists under a variety of environmental and behavioral conditions).

Figure 27-2

 
 
 
Model of the molecular feedback loop at the core of the mammalian circadian clock. The positive element of the feedback loop (+) is the transcriptional activation of the Per1 gene (and probably other clock genes) by a heterodimer of the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1 (also called MOP3) bound to an E-box DNA regulatory element. The Per1 transcript and its product, the clock component PER1 protein, accumulate in the cell cytoplasm. As it accumulates, the PER1 protein is recruited into a multiprotein complex thought to contain other circadian clock component proteins such as cryptochromes (CRYs), Period proteins (PERs), and others. This complex is then transported into the cell nucleus (across the dotted line), where it functions as the negative element in the feedback loop (每) by inhibiting the activity of the CLOCK-BMAL1 transcription factor heterodimer. As a consequence of this action, the concentration of PER1 and other clock proteins in the inhibitory complex falls, allowing CLOCK-BMAL1 to activate transcription of Per1 and other genes and begin another cycle. The dynamics of the 24-h molecular cycle are controlled at several levels, including regulation of the rate of PER protein degradation by casein kinase-1 epsilon (CK1E). Additional limbs of this genetic regulatory network, omitted for the sake of clarity, are thought to contribute stability. Question marks denote putative clock proteins, such as Timeless (TIM), as yet lacking genetic proof of a role in the mammalian clock mechanism. (Copyright Charles J. Weitz, PhD, Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School.)
 
 

While it is now recognized that many peripheral tissues in mammals have circadian clocks that regulate diverse physiologic processes, these independent tissue-specific oscillations are coordinated by a central neural pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus. Bilateral destruction of these nuclei results in a loss of the endogenous circadian rhythm of locomotor activity, which can be restored only by transplantation of the same structure from a donor animal. The genetically determined period of this endogenous neural oscillator, which averages ~24.2 h in humans, is normally synchronized to the 24-h period of the environmental light-dark cycle. Small differences in circadian period underlie variations in diurnal preference, with the circadian period shorter in individuals who typically rise early compared to those who typically go to bed late. Entrainment of mammalian circadian rhythms by the light-dark cycle is mediated via the retinohypothalamic tract, a monosynaptic pathway that links specialized, photoreceptive retinal ganglion cells directly to the SCN. Humans are exquisitely sensitive to the resetting effects of light, particularly the shorter wavelengths (~460每500 nm) of the visible spectrum.

The timing and internal architecture of sleep are directly coupled to the output of the endogenous circadian pacemaker. Paradoxically, the endogenous circadian rhythms of sleep tendency, sleepiness, and REM sleep propensity all peak near the habitual wake time, just after the nadir of the endogenous circadian temperature cycle, whereas the circadian wake propensity rhythm peaks 1每3 h before the habitual bedtime. These rhythms are thus timed to oppose the homeostatic decline of sleep tendency during the habitual sleep episode and the rise of sleep tendency throughout the usual waking day, respectively. Misalignment of the output of the endogenous circadian pacemaker with the desired sleep-wake cycle can, therefore, induce insomnia, decreased alertness, and impaired performance evident in night-shift workers and airline travelers.

Behavioral Correlates of Sleep States and Stages

Polysomnographic staging of sleep correlates with behavioral changes during specific states and stages. During the transitional state between wakefulness and sleep (stage N1 sleep), subjects may respond to faint auditory or visual signals without "awakening." Short-term memory incorporation is inhibited at the onset of NREM stage N1 sleep, which may explain why individuals aroused from that transitional sleep stage frequently deny having been asleep. Such transitions may intrude upon behavioral wakefulness after sleep deprivation, notwithstanding attempts to remain continuously awake (see "Shift-Work Disorder," below).

Awakenings from REM sleep are associated with recall of vivid dream imagery >80% of the time. The reliability of dream recall increases with REM sleep episodes occurring later in the night. Imagery may also be reported after NREM sleep interruptions, though these typically lack the detail and vividness of REM sleep dreams. The incidence of NREM sleep dream recall can be increased by selective REM sleep deprivation, suggesting that REM sleep and dreaming per se are not inexorably linked.

Physiologic Correlates of Sleep States and Stages

All major physiologic systems are influenced by sleep. Changes in cardiovascular function include a decrease in blood pressure and heart rate during NREM and particularly during slow-wave sleep. During REM sleep, phasic activity (bursts of eye movements) is associated with variability in both blood pressure and heart rate mediated principally by the vagus nerve. Cardiac dysrhythmias may occur selectively during REM sleep. Respiratory function also changes. In comparison to relaxed wakefulness, respiratory rate becomes more regular during NREM sleep (especially slow-wave sleep) and tonic REM sleep and becomes very irregular during phasic REM sleep. Minute ventilation decreases in NREM sleep out of proportion to the decrease in metabolic rate at sleep onset, resulting in a higher PCO2.

Endocrine function also varies with sleep. Slow-wave sleep is associated with secretion of growth hormone in men, while sleep in general is associated with augmented secretion of prolactin in both men and women. Sleep has a complex effect on the secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH): during puberty, sleep is associated with increased LH secretion, whereas sleep in the postpubertal female inhibits LH secretion in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Sleep onset (and probably slow-wave sleep) is associated with inhibition of thyroid-stimulating hormone and of the adrenocorticotropic hormone每cortisol axis, an effect that is superimposed on the prominent circadian rhythms in the two systems.

The pineal hormonemelatonin is secreted predominantly at night in both day- and night-active species, reflecting the direct modulation of pineal activity by the circadian pacemaker through a circuitous neural pathway from the SCN to the pineal gland. Melatonin secretion is not dependent upon the occurrence of sleep, persisting in individuals kept awake at night. Secretion is inhibited by ambient light, an effect mediated by a neural connection from the retina via the SCN. The role of endogenous melatonin in normal sleep-wake regulation is unclear, but administration of exogenous melatonin can potentiate sleepiness and facilitate sleep onset when administered in the afternoon or evening, at a time when endogenous melatonin levels are low. The efficacy of melatonin as a sleep-promoting therapy for patients with insomnia is currently not known.

Sleep is also accompanied by alterations of thermoregulatory function. NREM sleep is associated with an attenuation of thermoregulatory responses to either heat or cold stress, and animal studies of thermosensitive neurons in the hypothalamus document an NREM-sleep-dependent reduction of the thermoregulatory set-point. REM sleep is associated with complete absence of thermoregulatory responsiveness, resulting in functional poikilothermy. However, the potential adverse impact of this failure of thermoregulation is blunted by inhibition of REM sleep by extreme ambient temperatures.
 
Disorders of Sleep and Wakefulness

Approach to the Patient: Sleep Disorders

Patients may seek help from a physician because of one of several symptoms: (1) an acute or chronic inability to initiate or maintain sleep adequately at night (insomnia); (2) chronic fatigue, sleepiness, or tiredness during the day; or (3) a behavioral manifestation associated with sleep itself. The specific approach to an insomnia complaint will depend on the nature of comorbid medical or psychiatric disease, if present. In general, however, the insomnia complaint should be specifically addressed as soon as it is recognized. This more aggressive approach reflects growing evidence that chronic insomnia may contribute to comorbid disease processes. For example, specific management of symptomatic insomnia at the time of diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) has been shown to positively impact the response to antidepressants. Evidence that insomnia and sleep loss affect the perception of pain suggests that a similar approach is warranted in acute and chronic pain management. In general, at least for chronic insomnia, there is little evidence justifying an expectant approach in which specific insomnia therapy is deferred while comorbid disease is first addressed.

Table 27-1 outlines the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to the patient with a complaint of excessive daytime sleepiness.

Table 27-1 Evaluation of the Patient with the Complaint of Excessive Daytime Somnolence

 
 
Findings on History and Physical Examination Diagnostic Evaluation Diagnosis Therapy 
Obesity, snoring, hypertension Polysomnography with respiratory monitoring Obstructive sleep apnea Continuous positive airway pressure; ENT surgery (e.g., uvulopalatopharyngoplasty); dental appliance; pharmacologic therapy (e.g., protriptyline); weight loss 
Cataplexy, hypnogogic hallucinations, sleep paralysis, family history Polysomnography with multiple sleep latency testing Narcolepsy-cataplexy syndrome Stimulants (e.g., modafinil, methylphenidate); REM-suppressant antidepressants (e.g., protriptyline); genetic counseling 
Restless legs, disturbed sleep, predisposing medical condition (e.g., iron deficiency or renal failure) Assessment for predisposing medical conditions Restless legs syndrome Treatment of predisposing condition, if possible; dopamine agonists (e.g., pramipexole, ropinirole) 
Disturbed sleep, predisposing medical conditions (e.g., asthma), and/or predisposing medical therapies (e.g., theophylline) Sleep-wake diary recording Insomnias (see text) Treatment of predisposing condition and/or change in therapy, if possible; behavioral therapy; short-acting benzodiazepine receptor agonist (e.g., zolpidem) 
 


Abbreviations: EMG, electromyogram; ENT, ears, nose, throat; REM, rapid eye movement.
 

A careful history is essential. In particular, the duration, severity, and consistency of the symptoms are important, along with the patient's estimate of the consequences of the sleep disorder on waking function. Information from a friend or family member can be invaluable; some patients may be unaware of, or will underreport, such potentially embarrassing symptoms as heavy snoring or falling asleep while driving.

Patients with excessive sleepiness should be advised to avoid all driving until effective therapy has been achieved.

Completion by the patient of a day-by-day sleep-work-drug log for at least 2 weeks can help the physician better understand the nature of the complaint. Work times and sleep times (including daytime naps and nocturnal awakenings) as well as drug and alcohol use, including caffeine and hypnotics, should be noted each day.

Polysomnography is necessary for the diagnosis of specific disorders such as narcolepsy and sleep apnea and may be of utility in other settings as well.

Evaluation of Insomnia

Insomnia is the complaint of inadequate sleep; it can be classified according to the nature of sleep disruption and the duration of the complaint. Insomnia is subdivided into difficulty falling asleep (sleep onset insomnia), frequent or sustained awakenings (sleep maintenance insomnia), or early morning awakenings (sleep offset insomnia), though most insomnia patients present with two or more of these symptoms. Other insomnia patients present with persistent sleepiness/fatigue despite sleep of adequate duration (nonrestorative sleep). Similarly, the duration of the symptom influences diagnostic and therapeutic considerations. An insomnia complaint lasting one to several nights (within a single episode) is termed transient insomnia and is typically the result of situational stress or a change in sleep schedule or environment (e.g., jet lag disorder). Short-term insomnia lasts from a few days to 3 weeks. Disruption of this duration is usually associated with more protracted stress, such as recovery from surgery or short-term illness. Long-term insomnia, or chronic insomnia, lasts for months or years and, in contrast with short-term insomnia, requires a thorough evaluation of underlying causes (see below). Chronic insomnia is often a waxing and waning disorder, with spontaneous or stressor-induced exacerbations.

An occasional night of poor sleep, typically in the setting of stress or excitement about external events, is both common and without lasting consequences. However, persistent insomnia can lead to impaired daytime function, injury due to accidents, and the development of major depression. In addition, there is emerging evidence that individuals with chronic insomnia have increased utilization of health care resources, even after controlling for comorbid medical and psychiatric disorders.

All insomnias can be exacerbated and perpetuated by behaviors that are not conducive to initiating or maintaining sleep. Inadequate sleep hygiene is characterized by a behavior pattern prior to sleep or a bedroom environment that is not conducive to sleep, or irregularity in the timing or duration of the nightly sleep episode. Noise, light, or technology (e.g., television, radio, cell phone, mobile email device or computer) in the bedroom can interfere with sleep, as can a bed partner with periodic limb movements during sleep or one who snores loudly. Clocks can heighten the anxiety about the time it has taken to fall asleep. Drugs that act on the central nervous system, large meals, vigorous exercise, or hot showers just before sleep may all interfere with sleep onset. Many individuals participate in stressful work-related activities in the evening, producing a state incompatible with sleep onset. In preference to hypnotic medications, patients should be counseled to avoid stressful activities before bed, develop a soporific bedtime ritual, and prepare and reserve the bedroom environment for sleeping. Consistent, regular bedtimes and rising times should be maintained daily, including weekends.

Primary Insomnia

Many patients with chronic insomnia have no clear, single identifiable underlying cause for their difficulties with sleep. Rather, such patients often have multiple etiologies for their insomnia, which may evolve over the years. In addition, the chief sleep complaint may change over time, with initial insomnia predominating at one point, and multiple awakenings or nonrestorative sleep occurring at other times. Subsyndromal psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety and mood complaints), negative conditioning to the sleep environment (psychophysiologic insomnia, see below), amplification of the time spent awake (paradoxical insomnia), physiologic hyperarousal, and poor sleep hygiene (see above) may all be present. As these processes may be both causes and consequences of chronic insomnia, many individuals will have a progressive course to their symptoms in which the severity is proportional to the chronicity, and much of the complaint may persist even after effective treatment of the initial inciting etiology. Treatment of insomnia is often directed to each of the putative contributing factors: behavior therapies for anxiety and negative conditioning (see below), pharmacotherapy and/or psychotherapy for mood/anxiety disorders, and an emphasis on maintenance of good sleep hygiene.

If insomnia persists after treatment of these contributing factors, empirical pharmacotherapy is often used on a nightly or intermittent basis. A variety of sedative compounds are used for this purpose. Alcohol and antihistamines are the most commonly used nonprescription sleep aids. The former may help with sleep onset but is associated with sleep disruption during the night and can escalate into abuse, dependence, and withdrawal in the predisposed individual. Antihistamines, which are the primary active ingredient in most over-the-counter sleep aids, may be of benefit when used intermittently but often produce rapid tolerance and may have multiple side effects (especially anticholinergic), which limit their use, particularly in the elderly. Benzodiazepine-receptor agonists are the most effective and well-tolerated class of medications for insomnia. The broad range of half-lives allows flexibility in the duration of sedative action. The most commonly prescribed agents in this family are zaleplon (5每20 mg), with a half-life of 1每2 h; zolpidem (5每10 mg) and triazolam (0.125每0.25 mg), with half-lives of 2每3 h; eszopiclone (1每3 mg), with a half-life of 5.5每8 h; and temazepam (15每30 mg) and lorazepam (0.5每2 mg), with half-lives of 6每12 h. Generally, side effects are minimal when the dose is kept low and the serum concentration is minimized during the waking hours (by using the shortest-acting effective agent). At least one benzodiazepine receptor agonist (eszopiclone) continues to be effective for 6 months of nightly use. However, longer durations of use have not been evaluated, and it is unclear whether this is true of other agents in this class. Moreover, with even brief continuous use of benzodiazepine-receptor agonists, rebound insomnia can occur upon discontinuation. The likelihood of rebound insomnia and tolerance can be minimized by short durations of treatment, intermittent use, or gradual tapering of the dose. For acute insomnia, nightly use of a benzodiazepine receptor agonist for a maximum of 2每4 weeks is advisable. For chronic insomnia, intermittent use is recommended, unless the consequences of untreated insomnia outweigh concerns regarding chronic use. Benzodiazepine receptor agonists should be avoided, or used very judiciously, in patients with a history of substance or alcohol abuse. The heterocyclic antidepressants (trazodone, amitriptyline, and doxepin) are the most commonly prescribed alternatives to benzodiazepine-receptor agonists due to their lack of abuse potential and lower cost. Trazodone (25每100 mg) is used more commonly than the tricyclic antidepressants as it has a much shorter half-life (5每9 h), has much less anticholinergic activity (sparing patients, particularly the elderly, constipation, urinary retention, and tachycardia), is associated with less weight gain, and is much safer in overdose. The risk of priapism is small (~1 in 10,000).

Psychophysiologic Insomnia

Persistent psychophysiologic insomnia is a behavioral disorder in which patients are preoccupied with a perceived inability to sleep adequately at night. This sleep disorder begins like any other acute insomnia; however, the poor sleep habits and sleep-related anxiety ("insomnia phobia") persist long after the initial incident. Such patients become hyperaroused by their own efforts to sleep or by the sleep environment, and the insomnia becomes a conditioned or learned response. Patients may be able to fall asleep more easily at unscheduled times (when not trying) or outside the home environment. Polysomnographic recording in patients with psychophysiologic insomnia reveals an objective sleep disturbance, often with an abnormally long sleep latency; frequent nocturnal awakenings; and an increased amount of stage N1 transitional sleep. Rigorous attention should be paid to improving sleep hygiene, correction of counterproductive, arousing behaviors before bedtime, and minimizing exaggerated beliefs regarding the negative consequences of insomnia. Behavioral therapies are the treatment modality of choice, with intermittent use of medications. When patients are awake for >20 min, they should read or perform other relaxing activities to distract themselves from insomnia-related anxiety. In addition, bedtime and wake time should be scheduled to restrict time in bed to be equal to their perceived total sleep time. This will generally produce sleep deprivation, greater sleep drive, and, eventually, better sleep. Time in bed can then be gradually expanded. In addition, methods directed toward producing relaxation in the sleep setting (e.g., meditation, muscle relaxation) are encouraged.

Adjustment Insomnia (Acute Insomnia)

This typically develops after a change in the sleeping environment (e.g., in an unfamiliar hotel or hospital bed) or before or after a significant life event, such as a change of occupation, loss of a loved one, illness, or anxiety over a deadline or examination. Increased sleep latency, frequent awakenings from sleep, and early morning awakening can all occur. Recovery is generally rapid, usually within a few weeks. Treatment is symptomatic, with intermittent use of hypnotics and resolution of the underlying stress. Altitude insomnia describes a sleep disturbance that is a common consequence of exposure to high altitude. Periodic breathing of the Cheyne-Stokes type occurs during NREM sleep about half the time at high altitude, with restoration of a regular breathing pattern during REM sleep. Both hypoxia and hypocapnia are thought to be involved in the development of periodic breathing. Frequent awakenings and poor quality sleep characterize altitude insomnia, which is generally worse on the first few nights at high altitude but may persist. Treatment with acetazolamide can decrease time spent in periodic breathing and substantially reduce hypoxia during sleep.

Comorbid Insomnia

Insomnia Associated with Mental Disorders

Approximately 80% of patients with psychiatric disorders describe sleep complaints. There is considerable heterogeneity, however, in the nature of the sleep disturbance both between conditions and among patients with the same condition. Depression can be associated with sleep onset insomnia, sleep maintenance insomnia, or early morning wakefulness. However, hypersomnia occurs in some depressed patients, especially adolescents and those with either bipolar or seasonal (fall/winter) depression (Chap. 391). Indeed, sleep disturbance is an important vegetative sign of depression and may commence before any mood changes are perceived by the patient. Consistent polysomnographic findings in depression include decreased REM sleep latency, lengthened first REM sleep episode, and shortened first NREM sleep episode; however, these findings are not specific for depression, and the extent of these changes varies with age and symptomatology. Depressed patients also show decreased slow-wave sleep and reduced sleep continuity.

In mania and hypomania, sleep latency is increased and total sleep time can be reduced. Patients with anxiety disorders tend not to show the changes in REM sleep and slow-wave sleep seen in endogenously depressed patients. Chronic alcoholics lack slow-wave sleep, have decreased amounts of REM sleep (as an acute response to alcohol), and have frequent arousals throughout the night. This is associated with impaired daytime alertness. The sleep of chronic alcoholics may remain disturbed for years after discontinuance of alcohol usage. Sleep architecture and physiology are disturbed in schizophrenia, with a decreased amount of slow-wave sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep) and a lack of augmentation of REM sleep following REM sleep deprivation; chronic schizophrenics often show day-night reversal, sleep fragmentation, and insomnia.

Insomnia Associated with Neurologic Disorders

A variety of neurologic diseases result in sleep disruption through both indirect, nonspecific mechanisms (e.g., pain in cervical spondylosis or low back pain) or by impairment of central neural structures involved in the generation and control of sleep itself. For example, dementia from any cause has long been associated with disturbances in the timing of the sleep-wake cycle, often characterized by nocturnal wandering and an exacerbation of symptomatology at night (so-called sundowning).

Epilepsy may rarely present as a sleep complaint (Chap. 369). Often the history is of abnormal behavior, at times with convulsive movements during sleep. The differential diagnosis includes REM sleep behavior disorder, sleep apnea syndrome, and periodic movements of sleep (see above). Diagnosis requires nocturnal polysomnography with a full EEG montage. Other neurologic diseases associated with abnormal movements, such as Parkinson's disease, hemiballismus, Huntington's chorea, and Tourette's syndrome (Chap. 372), are also associated with disrupted sleep, presumably through secondary mechanisms. However, the abnormal movements themselves are greatly reduced during sleep. Headache syndromes (migraine or cluster headache) may show sleep-associated exacerbations (Chap. 14) by unknown mechanisms.

Fatal familial insomnia is a rare hereditary disorder caused by degeneration of anterior and dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus. Insomnia is a prominent early symptom. Patients develop progressive autonomic dysfunction, followed by dysarthria, myoclonus, coma, and death. The pathogenesis is a mutation in the prion gene (Chap. 383).

Insomnia Associated with Other Medical Disorders

A number of medical conditions are associated with disruptions of sleep. The association is frequently nonspecific, e.g., sleep disruption due to chronic pain from rheumatologic disorders. Attention to this association is important in that sleep-associated symptoms are often the presenting or most bothersome complaint. Treatment of the underlying medical problem is the most useful approach. Sleep disruption can also result from the use of medications such as glucocorticoids (see below).

One prominent association is between sleep disruption and asthma. In many asthmatics there is a prominent daily variation in airway resistance that results in marked increases in asthmatic symptoms at night, especially during sleep. In addition, treatment of asthma with theophylline-based compounds, adrenergic agonists, or glucocorticoids can independently disrupt sleep. When sleep disruption is a side effect of asthma treatment, inhaled glucocorticoids (e.g., beclomethasone) that do not disrupt sleep may provide a useful alternative.

Cardiac ischemia may also be associated with sleep disruption. The ischemia itself may result from increases in sympathetic tone as a result of sleep apnea. Patients may present with complaints of nightmares or vivid, disturbing dreams, with or without awareness of the more classic symptoms of angina or of the sleep-disordered breathing. Treatment of the sleep apnea may substantially improve the angina and the nocturnal sleep quality. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea can also occur as a consequence of sleep-associated cardiac ischemia that causes pulmonary congestion exacerbated by the recumbent posture.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is also associated with sleep disruption, as is cystic fibrosis, menopause, hyperthyroidism, gastroesophageal reflux, chronic renal failure, and liver failure.

Medication-, Drug-, or Alcohol-Dependent Insomnia

Disturbed sleep can result from ingestion of a wide variety of agents. Caffeine is perhaps the most common pharmacologic cause of insomnia. It produces increased latency to sleep onset, more frequent arousals during sleep, and a reduction in total sleep time for up to 8每14 h after ingestion. Even small amounts of coffee can significantly disturb sleep in some patients; therefore, a 1- to 2-month trial without caffeine should be attempted in patients with these symptoms. Similarly, alcohol and nicotine can interfere with sleep, despite the fact that many patients use them to relax and promote sleep. Although alcohol can increase drowsiness and shorten sleep latency, even moderate amounts of alcohol increase awakenings in the second half of the night. In addition, alcohol ingestion prior to sleep is contraindicated in patients with sleep apnea because of the inhibitory effects of alcohol on upper airway muscle tone. Acutely, amphetamines and cocaine suppress both REM sleep and total sleep time, which return to normal with chronic use. Withdrawal leads to an REM sleep rebound. A number of prescribed medications can produce insomnia. Antidepressants, sympathomimetics, and glucocorticoids are common causes. In addition, severe rebound insomnia can result from the acute withdrawal of hypnotics, especially following the use of high doses of benzodiazepines with a short half-life. For this reason, hypnotic doses should be low to moderate, and prolonged drug tapering is encouraged.

Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS)

Patients with this sensorimotor disorder report an irresistible urge to move the legs, or sometimes the upper extremities, that is often associated with creepy-crawling or aching dysesthesias deep within the affected limbs. For most patients with RLS, the dysesthesias and restlessness are much worse in the evening or night compared to the daytime and frequently interfere with the ability to fall asleep. The symptoms appear with inactivity and are temporarily relieved by movement. In contrast, paresthesias secondary to peripheral neuropathy persist with activity. The severity of this chronic disorder may wax and wane over time and can be exacerbated by sleep deprivation, caffeine, alcohol, serotonergic antidepressants, and pregnancy. The prevalence is 1每5% of young to middle-age adults and 10每20% of those aged >60 years. There appear to be important differences in RLS prevalence among racial groups, with higher prevalence in those of Northern European ancestry. Roughly one-third of patients (particularly those with an early age of onset) will have multiple affected family members. At least three separate chromosomal loci have been identified in familial RLS, though no gene has been identified to date. Iron deficiency and renal failure may cause RLS, which is then considered secondary RLS. The symptoms of RLS are exquisitely sensitive to dopaminergic drugs (e.g., pramipexole 0.25每0.5 mg q8PM or ropinirole 0.5每4 mg q8PM), which are the treatments of choice. Opioids, benzodiazepines, and gabapentin may also be of therapeutic value. Most patients with restless legs also experience periodic limb movements of sleep, although the reverse is not the case.

Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)

Periodic limb movements of sleep (PLMS), previously known as nocturnal myoclonus, consists of stereotyped, 0.5- to 5.0-s extensions of the great toe and dorsiflexion of the foot, which recur every 20每40 s during NREM sleep, in episodes lasting from minutes to hours, as documented by bilateral surface EMG recordings of the anterior tibialis on polysomnography. PLMS is the principal objective polysomnographic finding in 17% of patients with insomnia and 11% of those with excessive daytime somnolence (Fig. 27-3). It is often unclear whether it is an incidental finding or the cause of disturbed sleep. When deemed to be the latter, PLMS is called PLMD. PLMS occurs in a wide variety of sleep disorders (including narcolepsy, sleep apnea, REM sleep behavior disorder, and various forms of insomnia) and may be associated with frequent arousals and an increased number of sleep-stage transitions. The pathophysiology is not well understood, though individuals with high spinal transections can exhibit periodic leg movements during sleep, suggesting the existence of a spinal generator. Treatment options include dopaminergic medications or benzodiazepines.

Figure 27-3

 
 
 
 
Polysomnographic recordings of (A) obstructive sleep apnea and (B) periodic limb movement of sleep. Note the snoring and reduction in air flow in the presence of continued respiratory effort, associated with the subsequent oxygen desaturation (upper panel). Periodic limb movements occur with a relatively constant intermovement interval and are associated with changes in the EEG and heart rate acceleration (lower panel). RAT, right anterior tibialis; LAT, left anterior tibialis. (From the Division of Sleep Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital.)
 
 

Evaluation of Daytime Sleepiness

Daytime impairment due to sleep loss may be difficult to quantify for several reasons. First, patients may be unaware of the extent of sleep deprivation. In obstructive sleep apnea, for example, the brief arousals from sleep associated with respiratory recovery after each apneic episode results in daytime sleepiness, despite the fact that the patient may be unaware of the sleep fragmentation. Second, subjective descriptions of waking impairment vary from patient to patient. Patients may describe themselves as "sleepy," "fatigued," or "tired" and may have a clear sense of the meaning of those terms, while others may use the same terms to describe a completely different condition. Third, sleepiness, particularly when profound, may affect judgment in a manner analogous to ethanol, such that subjective awareness of the condition and the consequent cognitive and motor impairment is reduced. Finally, patients may be reluctant to admit that sleepiness is a problem, both because they are generally unaware of what constitutes normal alertness and because sleepiness is generally viewed pejoratively, ascribed more often to a deficit in motivation than to an inadequately addressed physiologic sleep need.

Specific questioning about the occurrence of sleep episodes during normal waking hours, both intentional and unintentional, is necessary to determine the extent of the adverse effects of sleepiness on a patient's daytime function. Specific areas to be addressed include the occurrence of inadvertent sleep episodes while driving or in other safety-related settings, sleepiness while at work or school (and the relationship of sleepiness to work and school performance), and the effect of sleepiness on social and family life. Standardized questionnaires, e.g., the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, are now commonly used in clinical and research settings to quantify daytime sleep tendency and screen for excessive sleepiness.

Driving is particularly hazardous for patients with increased sleepiness. Reaction time is equally impaired by 24 h of sleep loss as by a blood alcohol level of 0.10 g/dL. More than half of Americans admit to having fallen asleep while driving. An estimated 250,000 motor vehicle crashes per year are due to drowsy drivers, causing about 20% of all serious crash injuries and deaths. Drowsy driving legislation, aimed at improving education of all drivers about the hazards of driving drowsy and establishing sanctions comparable to those for drunk driving, has been enacted in New Jersey and is pending in several other states. Screening for sleep disorders, provision of an adequate number of safe highway rest areas, maintenance of unobstructed shoulder rumble strips, and strict enforcement and compliance monitoring of hours-of-service policies are needed to reduce the risk of sleep-related transportation crashes. Evidence for significant daytime impairment in association either with the diagnosis of a primary sleep disorder, such as narcolepsy or sleep apnea, or with imposed or self-selected sleep-wake schedules (see "Shift-Work Disorder," below) raises the issue of the physician's responsibility to notify motor vehicle licensing authorities of the increased risk of sleepiness-related motor vehicle crashes. As with epilepsy, legal requirements vary from state to state, and existing legal precedents do not provide a consistent interpretation of the balance between the physician's responsibility and the patient's right to privacy. At a minimum, physicians should inform patients who report a history of nodding off or falling asleep at the wheel or who have excessive daytime sleepiness about the increased risk of operating a motor vehicle, advise such patients not to drive a motor vehicle until the cause of the excessive sleepiness has been diagnosed and successful treatment has been implemented, and reevaluate the patient to determine when it is safe for the patient to resume driving. Each of those steps should be documented in the patient's medical record.

The distinction between fatigue and sleepiness can be useful in the differentiation of patients with complaints of fatigue or tiredness in the setting of disorders such as fibromyalgia (Chap. 335), chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 389), or endocrine deficiencies such as hypothyroidism (Chap. 341) or Addison's disease (Chap. 342). While patients with these disorders can typically distinguish their daytime symptoms from the sleepiness that occurs with sleep deprivation, substantial overlap can occur. This is particularly true when the primary disorder also results in chronic sleep disruption (e.g., sleep apnea in hypothyroidism) or in abnormal sleep (e.g., fibromyalgia).

While clinical evaluation of the complaint of excessive sleepiness is usually adequate, objective quantification is sometimes necessary. Assessment of daytime functioning as an index of the adequacy of sleep can be made with the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), which utilizes repeated measurement of sleep latency (time to onset of sleep) under standardized conditions during a day following quantified nocturnal sleep. The average latency across four to six tests (administered every 2 h across the waking day) provides an objective measure of daytime sleep tendency. Disorders of sleep that result in pathologic daytime somnolence can be reliably distinguished with the MSLT. In addition, the multiple measurements of sleep onset may identify direct transitions from wakefulness to REM sleep that are suggestive of specific pathologic conditions (e.g., narcolepsy).

Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy is both a disorder of the ability to sustain wakefulness voluntarily and a disorder of REM sleep regulation (Table 27-2). The classic "narcolepsy tetrad" consists of excessive daytime somnolence plus three specific symptoms related to an intrusion of REM sleep characteristics (e.g., muscle atonia, vivid dream imagery) into the transition between wakefulness and sleep: (1) sudden weakness or loss of muscle tone without loss of consciousness, often elicited by emotion (cataplexy); (2) hallucinations at sleep onset (hypnagogic hallucinations) or upon awakening (hypnopompic hallucinations); and (3) muscle paralysis upon awakening (sleep paralysis). The severity of cataplexy varies, as patients may have two to three attacks per day or per decade. Some patients with objectively confirmed narcolepsy (see below) may show no evidence of cataplexy. In those with cataplexy, the extent and duration of an attack may also vary, from a transient sagging of the jaw lasting a few seconds to rare cases of flaccid paralysis of the entire voluntary musculature for up to 20每30 min. Symptoms of narcolepsy typically begin in the second decade, although the onset ranges from ages 5每50 years. Once established, the disease is chronic without remissions. Secondary forms of narcolepsy have been described (e.g., after head trauma).

Table 27-2 Prevalence of Symptoms in Narcolepsy

 
 
Symptom Prevalence, % 
Excessive daytime somnolence 100 
Disturbed sleep 87 
Cataplexy 76 
Hypnagogic hallucinations 68 
Sleep paralysis 64 
Memory problems 50 
 


Source: Modified from TA Roth, L Merlotti, in SA Burton et al (eds): Narcolepsy 3rd International Symposium: Selected Symposium Proceedings. Chicago, Matrix Communications, 1989.
 

Narcolepsy affects about 1 in 4000 people in the United States and appears to have a genetic basis. Recently, several convergent lines of evidence suggest that the hypothalamic neuropeptide hypocretin (orexin) is involved in the pathogenesis of narcolepsy: (1) a mutation in the hypocretin receptor 2 gene has been associated with canine narcolepsy; (2) hypocretin "knockout" mice that are genetically unable to produce this neuropeptide exhibit behavioral and electrophysiologic features resembling human narcolepsy; and (3) cerebrospinal fluid levels of hypocretin are reduced in most patients who have narcolepsy with cataplexy. The inheritance pattern of narcolepsy in humans is more complex than in the canine model. However, almost all narcoleptics with cataplexy are positive for HLA DQB1*0602 (Chap. 315), suggesting that an autoimmune process may be responsible.

Diagnosis

The diagnostic criteria continue to be a matter of debate. Certainly, objective verification of excessive daytime somnolence, typically with MSLT mean sleep latencies <8 min, is an essential if nonspecific diagnostic feature. Other conditions that cause excessive sleepiness, such as sleep apnea or chronic sleep deprivation, must be rigorously excluded. The other objective diagnostic feature of narcolepsy is the presence of REM sleep in at least two of the naps during the MSLT. Abnormal regulation of REM sleep is also manifested by the appearance of REM sleep immediately or within minutes after sleep onset in 50% of narcoleptic patients, a rarity in unaffected individuals maintaining a conventional sleep-wake schedule. The REM-related symptoms of the classic narcolepsy tetrad are variably present. There is increasing evidence that narcoleptics with cataplexy (one-half to two-thirds of patients) may represent a more homogeneous group than those without this symptom. However, a history of cataplexy can be difficult to establish reliably. Hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations and sleep paralysis are often found in nonnarcoleptic individuals and may be present in only one-half of narcoleptics. Nocturnal sleep disruption is commonly observed in narcolepsy but is also a nonspecific symptom. Similarly, a history of "automatic behavior" during wakefulness (a trancelike state during which simple motor behaviors persist) is not specific for narcolepsy and serves principally to corroborate the presence of daytime somnolence.

Treatment: Narcolepsy

The treatment of narcolepsy is symptomatic. Somnolence is treated with wake-promoting therapeutics. Modafinil is now the drug of choice, principally because it is associated with fewer side effects than older stimulants and has a long half-life; 200每400 mg is given as a single daily dose. Older drugs such as methylphenidate (10 mg bid to 20 mg qid) or dextroamphetamine (10 mg bid) are still used as alternatives, particularly in refractory patients.

These latter medications are now available in slow-release formulations, extending their duration of action and allowing once-daily dosing.

Treatment of the REM-related phenomena of cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations, and sleep paralysis requires the potent REM sleep suppression produced by antidepressant medications. The tricyclic antidepressants [e.g., protriptyline (10每40 mg/d) and clomipramine (25每50 mg/d)] and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) [e.g., fluoxetine (10每20 mg/d)] are commonly used for this purpose. Efficacy of the antidepressants is limited largely by anticholinergic side effects (tricyclics) and by sleep disturbance and sexual dysfunction (SSRIs). Alternately, gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB), given at bedtime, and 4 h later, is effective in reducing daytime cataplectic episodes. Adequate nocturnal sleep time and planned daytime naps (when possible) are important preventive measures.

Sleep Apnea Syndromes

Respiratory dysfunction during sleep is a common, serious cause of excessive daytime somnolence as well as of disturbed nocturnal sleep. An estimated 2每5 million individuals in the United States have a reduction or cessation of breathing for 10每150 s from thirty to several hundred times every night during sleep. These episodes may be due to either an occlusion of the airway (obstructive sleep apnea), absence of respiratory effort (central sleep apnea), or a combination of these factors (mixed sleep apnea) (Fig. 27-3). Failure to recognize and treat these conditions appropriately may lead to impairment of daytime alertness, increased risk of sleep-related motor vehicle accidents, hypertension and other serious cardiovascular complications, and increased mortality. Sleep apnea is particularly prevalent in overweight men and in the elderly, yet it is estimated to remain undiagnosed in 80每90% of affected individuals. This is unfortunate since effective treatments are available. Readers are referred to Chap. 265 for a comprehensive review of the diagnosis and treatment of patients with these conditions.

Parasomnias

The term parasomnia refers to abnormal behaviors or experiences that arise from or occur during sleep. A continuum of parasomnias arise from NREM sleep, from brief confusional arousals to sleepwalking and night terrors. The presenting complaint is usually related to the behavior itself, but the parasomnias can disturb sleep continuity or lead to mild impairments in daytime alertness. Two main parasomnias occur in REM sleep: REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), which will be described below, and nightmare disorder.

Sleepwalking (Somnambulism)

Patients affected by this disorder carry out automatic motor activities that range from simple to complex. Individuals may walk, urinate inappropriately, eat, or exit from the house while remaining only partially aware. Full arousal may be difficult, and individuals may rarely respond to attempted awakening with agitation or even violence. Sleepwalking arises from slow-wave sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep), usually in the first 2 h of the night, and is most common in children and adolescents, when these sleep stages are most robust. Episodes are usually isolated but may be recurrent in 1每6% of patients. The cause is unknown, though it has a familial basis in roughly one-third of cases.

Sleep Terrors

This disorder, also called pavor nocturnus, occurs primarily in young children during the first several hours after sleep onset, in slow-wave sleep (NREM stage N3 sleep). The child suddenly screams, exhibiting autonomic arousal with sweating, tachycardia, and hyperventilation. The individual may be difficult to arouse and rarely recalls the episode on awakening in the morning. Parents are usually reassured to learn that the condition is self-limited and benign and that no specific therapy is indicated. Both sleep terrors and sleepwalking represent abnormalities of arousal. In contrast, nightmares occur during REM sleep and cause full arousal, with intact memory for the unpleasant episode.

Sleep Bruxism

Bruxism is an involuntary, forceful grinding of teeth during sleep that affects 10每20% of the population. The patient is usually unaware of the problem. The typical age of onset is 17每20 years, and spontaneous remission usually occurs by age 40. Sex distribution appears to be equal. In many cases, the diagnosis is made during dental examination, damage is minor, and no treatment is indicated. In more severe cases, treatment with a rubber tooth guard is necessary to prevent disfiguring tooth injury. Stress management or, in some cases, biofeedback can be useful when bruxism is a manifestation of psychological stress. There are anecdotal reports of benefit using benzodiazepines.

Sleep Enuresis

Bedwetting, like sleepwalking and night terrors, is another parasomnia that occurs during sleep in the young. Before age 5 or 6 years, nocturnal enuresis should probably be considered a normal feature of development. The condition usually improves spontaneously by puberty, has a prevalence in late adolescence of 1每3%, and is rare in adulthood. In older patients with enuresis, a distinction must be made between primary and secondary enuresis, the latter being defined as bedwetting in patients who have previously been fully continent for 6每12 months. Treatment of primary enuresis is reserved for patients of appropriate age (>5 or 6 years) and consists of bladder training exercises and behavioral therapy. Urologic abnormalities are more common in primary enuresis and must be assessed by urologic examination. Important causes of secondary enuresis include emotional disturbances, urinary tract infections or malformations, cauda equina lesions, epilepsy, sleep apnea, and certain medications. Symptomatic pharmacotherapy is usually accomplished with desmopressin (0.2 mg qhs), oxybutynin chloride (5每10 mg qhs), or imipramine (10每50 mg qhs).

Miscellaneous Parasomnias

Other clinical entities may be characterized as a parasomnia or a sleep-related movement disorder in that they occur selectively during sleep and are associated with some degree of sleep disruption. Examples include jactatio capitis nocturna (nocturnal headbanging, rhythmic movement disorder), confusional arousals, sleep-related eating disorder, and nocturnal leg cramps.

REM Sleep Behavior Disorder (Rbd)

RBD is a rare condition that is distinct from other parasomnias in that it occurs during REM sleep. It primarily afflicts men of middle age or older, many of whom have an existing, or developing, neurologic disease. Approximately one-half of patients with RBD will develop Parkinson's disease (Chap. 372) within 10每20 years. Presenting symptoms consist of agitated or violent behavior during sleep, as reported by a bed partner. In contrast to typical somnambulism, injury to the patient or bed partner is not uncommon, and, upon awakening, the patient reports vivid, often unpleasant, dream imagery. The principal differential diagnosis is nocturnal seizures, which can be excluded with polysomnography. In RBD, seizure activity is absent on the EEG, and disinhibition of the usual motor atonia is observed in the EMG during REM sleep, at times associated with complex motor behaviors. The pathogenesis is unclear, but damage to brainstem areas mediating descending motor inhibition during REM sleep may be responsible. In support of this hypothesis are the remarkable similarities between RBD and the sleep of animals with bilateral lesions of the pontine tegmentum in areas controlling REM sleep motor inhibition. Treatment with clonazepam (0.5每1.0 mg qhs) provides sustained improvement in almost all reported cases.
 
Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders

A subset of patients presenting with either insomnia or hypersomnia may have a disorder of sleep timing rather than sleep generation. Disorders of sleep timing can be either organic [i.e., due to an abnormality of circadian pacemaker(s) or its input from entraining stimuli] or environmental (i.e., due to a disruption of exposure to entraining stimuli from the environment). Regardless of etiology, the symptoms reflect the influence of the underlying circadian pacemaker on sleep-wake function. Thus, effective therapeutic approaches should aim to entrain the oscillator at an appropriate phase.

Jet Lag Disorder

More than 60 million persons experience transmeridian air travel annually, which is often associated with excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep onset insomnia, and frequent arousals from sleep, particularly in the latter half of the night. Gastrointestinal discomfort is common. The syndrome is transient, typically lasting 2每14 d depending on the number of time zones crossed, the direction of travel, and the traveler's age and phase-shifting capacity. Travelers who spend more time outdoors reportedly adapt more quickly than those who remain in hotel rooms, presumably due to brighter (outdoor) light exposure. Avoidance of antecedent sleep loss and obtaining nap sleep on the afternoon prior to overnight travel greatly reduce the difficulty of extended wakefulness. Laboratory studies suggest that sub milligram doses of the pineal hormonemelatonin can enhance sleep efficiency, but only if taken when endogenous melatonin concentrations are low (i.e., during biologic daytime), and that melatonin may induce phase shifts in human rhythms. A large-scale clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of melatonin as a treatment for jet lag disorder and other circadian sleep disorders is needed.

In addition to jet lag associated with travel across time zones, many patients report a behavioral pattern that has been termed social jet lag, in which their bedtimes and wake times on weekends or days off occur 4每8 h later than they do during the week. This recurrent displacement of the timing of the sleep-wake cycle is common in adolescents and young adults and is associated with sleep onset insomnia, poorer academic performance, increased risk of depressive symptoms, and excessive daytime sleepiness.

Shift-Work Disorder

More than 7 million workers in the United States regularly work at night, either on a permanent or rotating schedule. Many more begin work between 4 A.M. and 7 A.M., requiring them to commute and then work during the time of day that they would otherwise be asleep. In addition, each week millions more elect to remain awake at night to meet deadlines, drive long distances, or participate in recreational activities. This results in both sleep loss and misalignment of the circadian rhythm with respect to the sleep-wake cycle.

Studies of regular night-shift workers indicate that the circadian timing system usually fails to adapt successfully to such inverted schedules. This leads to a misalignment between the desired work-rest schedule and the output of the pacemaker and in disturbed daytime sleep in most individuals. Sleep deprivation, increased length of time awake prior to work, and misalignment of circadian phase produce decreased alertness and performance, increased reaction time, and increased risk of performance lapses, thereby resulting in greater safety hazards among night workers and other sleep-deprived individuals. Sleep disturbance nearly doubles the risk of a fatal work accident. Additional problems include higher rates of breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer and of cardiac, gastrointestinal, and reproductive disorders in long-term night-shift workers. Recently, the World Health Organization has added night-shift work to its list of probable carcinogens.

Sleep onset is associated with marked attenuation in perception of both auditory and visual stimuli and lapses of consciousness. The sleepy individual may thus attempt to perform routine and familiar motor tasks during the transition state between wakefulness and sleep (stage N1 sleep) in the absence of adequate processing of sensory input from the environment. Motor vehicle operators are especially vulnerable to sleep-related accidents since the sleep-deprived driver or operator often fails to heed the warning signs of fatigue. Such attempts to override the powerful biologic drive for sleep by the sheer force of will can yield a catastrophic outcome when sleep processes intrude involuntarily upon the waking brain. Such sleep-related attentional failures typically last only seconds but are known on occasion to persist for longer durations. These frequent brief intrusions of stage N1 sleep into behavioral wakefulness are a major component of the impaired psychomotor performance seen with sleepiness. There is a significant increase in the risk of sleep-related, fatal-to-the-driver highway crashes in the early morning and late afternoon hours, coincident with bimodal peaks in the daily rhythm of sleep tendency.

Resident physicians constitute another group of workers at risk for accidents and other adverse consequences of lack of sleep and misalignment of the circadian rhythm. Recurrent scheduling of resident physicians to work shifts of 24 h or more consecutive hours impairs psychomotor performance to a degree that is comparable to alcohol intoxication, doubles the risk of attentional failures among intensive care unit interns working at night, and significantly increases the risk of serious medical errors in intensive care units, including a fivefold increase in the risk of serious diagnostic mistakes. Some 20% of hospital interns report making a fatigue-related mistake that injured a patient, and 5% admit making a fatigue-related mistake that results in the death of a patient. Moreover, working for >24 h consecutively increases the risk of percutaneous injuries and more than doubles the risk of motor vehicle crashes on the commute home. For these reasons, in 2008 the Institute of Medicine concluded that the practice of scheduling resident physicians to work for more than 16 consecutive hours without sleep is hazardous for both resident physicians and their patients.

From 5 to 10% of individuals scheduled to work at night or in the early morning hours have much greater than average difficulties remaining awake during night work and sleeping during the day; these individuals are diagnosed with chronic and severe shift-work disorder (SWD). Patients with this disorder have a level of excessive sleepiness during night work and insomnia during day sleep that the physician judges to be clinically significant; the condition is associated with an increased risk of sleep-related accidents and with some of the illnesses associated with night-shift work. Patients with chronic and severe SWD are profoundly sleepy at night. In fact, their sleep latencies during night work average just 2 min, comparable to mean sleep latency durations of patients with narcolepsy or severe daytime sleep apnea.

Treatment: Shift-Work Disorder

Caffeine is frequently used to promote wakefulness. However, it cannot forestall sleep indefinitely, and it does not shield users from sleep-related performance lapses. Postural changes, exercise, and strategic placement of nap opportunities can sometimes temporarily reduce the risk of fatigue-related performance lapses. Properly timed exposure to bright light can facilitate rapid adaptation to night-shift work.

While many techniques (e.g., light treatment) used to facilitate adaptation to night-shift work may help patients with this disorder, modafinil is the only therapeutic intervention that has ever been evaluated as a treatment for this specific patient population. Modafinil (200 mg, taken 30每60 min before the start of each night shift) is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a treatment for the excessive sleepiness during night work in patients with SWD. Although treatment with modafinil significantly increases sleep latency and reduces the risk of lapses of attention during night work, SWD patients remain excessively sleepy at night, even while being treated with modafinil.

Safety programs should promote education about sleep and increase awareness of the hazards associated with night work. The goal should be to minimize both sleep deprivation and circadian disruption. Work schedules should be designed to minimize (1) exposure to night work, (2) the frequency of shift rotation so that shifts do not rotate more than once every 2每3 weeks, (3) the number of consecutive night shifts, and (4) the duration of night shifts. Shift durations of >16 h should be universally recognized as increasing the risk of sleep-related errors and performance lapses to a level that is unacceptable in nonemergency circumstances. At least 11 h off duty should be provided between work shifts, with at least one day off every week and two consecutive days off every month. Additional off duty time should be allocated after night work, since sleep efficiency is much lower during daytime hours.

Delayed Sleep Phase Disorder

Delayed sleep phase disorder is characterized by (1) reported sleep onset and wake times intractably later than desired, (2) actual sleep times at nearly the same clock hours daily, and (3) essentially normal all-night polysomnography except for delayed sleep onset. Patients exhibit an abnormally delayed endogenous circadian phase, with the temperature minimum during the constant routine occurring later than normal. This delayed phase could be due to (1) an abnormally long, genetically determined intrinsic period of the endogenous circadian pacemaker; (2) an abnormally reduced phase-advancing capacity of the pacemaker; (3) a slower rate of buildup of homeostatic sleep drive during wakefulness; or (4) an irregular prior sleep-wake schedule, characterized by frequent nights when the patient chooses to remain awake well past midnight (for social, school, or work reasons). In most cases, it is difficult to distinguish among these factors, since patients with an abnormally long intrinsic period are more likely to "choose" such late-night activities because they are unable to sleep at that time. Patients tend to be young adults. This self-perpetuating condition can persist for years and does not usually respond to attempts to reestablish normal bedtime hours. Treatment methods involving bright-light phototherapy during the morning hours or melatonin administration in the evening hours show promise in these patients, although the relapse rate is high.

Advanced Sleep Phase Disorder

Advanced sleep phase disorder (ASPD) is the converse of the delayed sleep phase syndrome. Most commonly, this syndrome occurs in older people, 15% of whom report that they cannot sleep past 5 A.M., with twice that number complaining that they wake up too early at least several times per week. Patients with ASPD experience excessive daytime sleepiness during the evening hours, when they have great difficulty remaining awake, even in social settings. Typically, patients awaken from 3 to 5 A.M. each day, often several hours before their desired wake times. In addition to age-related ASPD, an early-onset familial variant of this condition has also been reported. In one such family, autosomal dominant ASPD was due to a missense mutation in a circadian clock component (PER2, as shown in Fig. 27-2) that altered the circadian period. Patients with ASPD may benefit from bright-light phototherapy during the evening hours, designed to reset the circadian pacemaker to a later hour.

Non-24-H Sleep-Wake Disorder

This condition can occur when the synchronizing input (i.e., the light-dark cycle) from the environment to the circadian pacemaker is compromised (as in many blind people with no light perception) or when the maximal phase-advancing capacity of the circadian pacemaker is not adequate to accommodate the difference between the 24-h geophysical day and the intrinsic period of the pacemaker in the patient. Alternatively, patients' self-selected exposure to artificial light may drive the circadian pacemaker to a >24-h schedule. Affected patients are not able to maintain a stable phase relationship between the output of the pacemaker and the 24-h day. Such patients typically present with an incremental pattern of successive delays in sleep propensity, progressing in and out of phase with local time. When the patient's endogenous circadian rhythms are out of phase with the local environment, insomnia coexists with excessive daytime sleepiness. Conversely, when the endogenous circadian rhythms are in phase with the local environment, symptoms remit. The intervals between symptomatic periods may last several weeks to several months. Blind individuals unable to perceive light are particularly susceptible to this disorder, although it can occur in sighted patients. Nightly low-dose (0.5 mg) melatonin administration has been reported to improve sleep and, in some cases, to induce synchronization of the circadian pacemaker.

Medical Implications of Circadian Rhythmicity

Prominent circadian variations have been reported in the incidence of acute myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death, and stroke, the leading causes of death in the United States. Platelet aggregability is increased in the early morning hours, coincident with the peak incidence of these cardiovascular events. Misalignment of circadian phase, such as occurs during night-shift work, induces insulin resistance and higher glucose levels in response to a standard meal. Blood pressure of night workers with sleep apnea is higher than that of day workers. A better understanding of the possible role of circadian rhythmicity in the acute destabilization of a chronic condition such as atherosclerotic disease could improve the understanding of its pathophysiology.

Diagnostic and therapeutic procedures may also be affected by the time of day at which data are collected. Examples include blood pressure, body temperature, the dexamethasone suppression test, and plasma cortisol levels. The timing of chemotherapy administration has been reported to have an effect on the outcome of treatment. In addition, both the toxicity and effectiveness of drugs can vary during the day. For example, more than a fivefold difference has been observed in mortality rates following administration of toxic agents to experimental animals at different times of day. Anesthetic agents are particularly sensitive to time-of-day effects. Finally, the physician must be increasingly aware of the public health risks associated with the ever-increasing demands made by the duty-rest-recreation schedules in our round-the-clock society.
 
Further Readings

AHMED I, THORPY M: Clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of narcolepsy. Clin Chest Med 31:371, 2010 [PMID: 20488294] 

 
CZEISLER CA: Medical and genetic differences in the adverse impact of sleep loss on performance: Ethical considerations for the medical profession. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc 120:249, 2009 [PMID: 19768182] 

 
DODSON ER et al: Therapeutics for circadian rhythm sleep disorder. Sleep Med Clin 5:701, 2010 [PMID: 21243069] 

 
DOGHRAMJI K: The evaluation and management of insomnia. Clin Chest Med 31:327, 2010 [PMID: 20488291] 

 
GAY PC: Sleep and sleep-disordered breathing in the hospitalized patient. Respir Care 55:1240, 2010 [PMID: 20800004] 

 
MONJAN AA: Perspective on sleep and aging. Front Neurol 1:124, 2010 [PMID: 21173893] 

 
ROMERO-CORRAL A et al: Interactions between obesity and obstructive sleep apnea: Implications for treatment. Chest 137:711, 2010 [PMID: 20202954] 
 
 

^^
The Human Visual System

The visual system provides a supremely efficient means for the rapid assimilation of information from the environment to aid in the guidance of behavior. The act of seeing begins with the capture of images focused by the cornea and lens on a light-sensitive membrane in the back of the eye called the retina. The retina is actually part of the brain, banished to the periphery to serve as a transducer for the conversion of patterns of light energy into neuronal signals. Light is absorbed by photopigment in two types of receptors: rods and cones. In the human retina there are 100 million rods and 5 million cones. The rods operate in dim (scotopic) illumination. The cones function under daylight (photopic) conditions. The cone system is specialized for color perception and high spatial resolution. The majority of cones are within the macula, the portion of the retina that serves the central 10∼ of vision. In the middle of the macula a small pit termed the fovea, packed exclusively with cones, provides the best visual acuity.

Photoreceptors hyperpolarize in response to light, activating bipolar, amacrine, and horizontal cells in the inner nuclear layer. After processing of photoreceptor responses by this complex retinal circuit, the flow of sensory information ultimately converges on a final common pathway: the ganglion cells. These cells translate the visual image impinging on the retina into a continuously varying barrage of action potentials that propagates along the primary optic pathway to visual centers within the brain. There are a million ganglion cells in each retina and hence a million fibers in each optic nerve.

Ganglion cell axons sweep along the inner surface of the retina in the nerve fiber layer, exit the eye at the optic disc, and travel through the optic nerve, optic chiasm, and optic tract to reach targets in the brain. The majority of fibers synapse on cells in the lateral geniculate body, a thalamic relay station. Cells in the lateral geniculate body project in turn to the primary visual cortex. This massive afferent retinogeniculocortical sensory pathway provides the neural substrate for visual perception. Although the lateral geniculate body is the main target of the retina, separate classes of ganglion cells project to other subcortical visual nuclei involved in different functions. Ganglion cells that mediate pupillary constriction and circadian rhythms are light sensitive owing to a novel visual pigment, melanopsin. Pupil responses are mediated by input to the pretectal olivary nuclei in the midbrain. The pretectal nuclei send their output to the Edinger-Westphal nuclei, which in turn provide parasympathetic innervation to the iris sphincter via an interneuron in the ciliary ganglion. Circadian rhythms are timed by a retinal projection to the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Visual orientation and eye movements are served by retinal input to the superior colliculus. Gaze stabilization and optokinetic reflexes are governed by a group of small retinal targets known collectively as the brainstem accessory optic system.

The eyes must be rotated constantly within their orbits to place and maintain targets of visual interest on the fovea. This activity, called foveation, or looking, is governed by an elaborate efferent motor system. Each eye is moved by six extraocular muscles that are supplied by cranial nerves from the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV), and abducens (VI) nuclei. Activity in these ocular motor nuclei is coordinated by pontine and midbrain mechanisms for smooth pursuit, saccades, and gaze stabilization during head and body movements. Large regions of the frontal and parietooccipital cortex control these brainstem eye movement centers by providing descending supranuclear input.
 
Clinical Assessment of Visual Function

Refractive State

In approaching a patient with reduced vision, the first step is to decide whether refractive error is responsible. In emmetropia, parallel rays from infinity are focused perfectly on the retina. Sadly, this condition is enjoyed by only a minority of the population. In myopia, the globe is too long, and light rays come to a focal point in front of the retina. Near objects can be seen clearly, but distant objects require a diverging lens in front of the eye. In hyperopia, the globe is too short, and hence a converging lens is used to supplement the refractive power of the eye. In astigmatism, the corneal surface is not perfectly spherical, necessitating a cylindrical corrective lens. In recent years it has become possible to correct refractive error with the excimer laser by performing LASIK (laser in situ keratomileusis) to alter the curvature of the cornea.

With the onset of middle age, presbyopia develops as the lens within the eye becomes unable to increase its refractive power to accommodate on near objects. To compensate for presbyopia, an emmetropic patient must use reading glasses. A patient already wearing glasses for distance correction usually switches to bifocals. The only exception is a myopic patient, who may achieve clear vision at near simply by removing glasses containing the distance prescription.

Refractive errors usually develop slowly and remain stable after adolescence, except in unusual circumstances. For example, the acute onset of diabetes mellitus can produce sudden myopia because of lens edema induced by hyperglycemia. Testing vision through a pinhole aperture is a useful way to screen quickly for refractive error. If visual acuity is better through a pinhole than it is with the unaided eye, the patient needs refraction to obtain best corrected visual acuity.

Visual Acuity

The Snellen chart is used to test acuity at a distance of 6 m (20 ft). For convenience, a scale version of the Snellen chart called the Rosenbaum card is held at 36 cm (14 in.) from the patient (Fig. 28-1). All subjects should be able to read the 6/6 m (20/20 ft) line with each eye using their refractive correction, if any. Patients who need reading glasses because of presbyopia must wear them for accurate testing with the Rosenbaum card. If 6/6 (20/20) acuity is not present in each eye, the deficiency in vision must be explained. If it is worse than 6/240 (20/800), acuity should be recorded in terms of counting fingers, hand motions, light perception, or no light perception. Legal blindness is defined by the Internal Revenue Service as a best corrected acuity of 6/60 (20/200) or less in the better eye or a binocular visual field subtending 20∼ or less. For driving the laws vary by state, but most states require a corrected acuity of 6/12 (20/40) in at least one eye for unrestricted privileges. Patients with a homonymous hemianopia should not drive.

Figure 28-1

 
 
 
The Rosenbaum card is a miniature, scale version of the Snellen chart for testing visual acuity at near. When the visual acuity is recorded, the Snellen distance equivalent should bear a notation indicating that vision was tested at near, not at 6 m (20 ft), or else the Jaeger number system should be used to report the acuity.
 
 

Pupils

The pupils should be tested individually in dim light with the patient fixating on a distant target. If the pupils respond briskly to light, there is no need to check the near response, because isolated loss of constriction (miosis) to accommodation does not occur. For this reason, the ubiquitous abbreviation PERRLA (pupils equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation) implies a wasted effort with the last step. However, it is important to test the near response if the light response is poor or absent. Light-near dissociation occurs with neurosyphilis (Argyll Robertson pupil), with lesions of the dorsal midbrain (obstructive hydrocephalus, pineal region tumors), and after aberrant regeneration (oculomotor nerve palsy, Adie's tonic pupil).

An eye with no light perception has no pupillary response to direct light stimulation. If the retina or optic nerve is only partially injured, the direct pupillary response will be weaker than the consensual pupillary response evoked by shining a light into the other eye. This relative afferent pupillary defect (Marcus Gunn pupil) can be elicited with the swinging flashlight test (Fig. 28-2). It is an extremely useful sign in retrobulbar optic neuritis and other optic nerve diseases, in which it may be the sole objective evidence for disease.

Figure 28-2

 
 
 
 
 
Demonstration of a relative afferent pupil defect (Marcus Gunn pupil) in the left eye, done with the patient fixating on a distant target. A. With dim background lighting, the pupils are equal and relatively large. B. Shining a flashlight into the right eye evokes equal, strong constriction of both pupils. C. Swinging the flashlight over to the damaged left eye causes dilation of both pupils, although they remain smaller than in A. Swinging the flashlight back over to the healthy right eye would result in symmetric constriction back to the appearance shown in B. Note that the pupils always remain equal; the damage to the left retina/optic nerve is revealed by weaker bilateral pupil constriction to a flashlight in the left eye compared with the right eye. (From P Levatin: Arch Ophthalmol 62:768, 1959. Copyright ? 1959 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.)
 
 

Subtle inequality in pupil size, up to 0.5 mm, is a fairly common finding in normal persons. The diagnosis of essential or physiologic anisocoria is secure as long as the relative pupil asymmetry remains constant as ambient lighting varies. Anisocoria that increases in dim light indicates a sympathetic paresis of the iris dilator muscle. The triad of miosis with ipsilateral ptosis and anhidrosis constitutes Horner's syndrome, although anhidrosis is an inconstant feature. Brainstem stroke, carotid dissection, and neoplasm impinging on the sympathetic chain occasionally are identified as the cause of Horner's syndrome, but most cases are idiopathic.

Anisocoria that increases in bright light suggests a parasympathetic palsy. The first concern is an oculomotor nerve paresis. This possibility is excluded if the eye movements are full and the patient has no ptosis or diplopia. Acute pupillary dilation (mydriasis) can result from damage to the ciliary ganglion in the orbit. Common mechanisms are infection (herpes zoster, influenza), trauma (blunt, penetrating, surgical), and ischemia (diabetes, temporal arteritis). After denervation of the iris sphincter the pupil does not respond well to light, but the response to near is often relatively intact. When the near stimulus is removed, the pupil redilates very slowly compared with the normal pupil, hence the term tonic pupil. In Adie's syndrome, a tonic pupil occurs in conjunction with weak or absent tendon reflexes in the lower extremities. This benign disorder, which occurs predominantly in healthy young women, is assumed to represent a mild dysautonomia. Tonic pupils are also associated with Shy-Drager syndrome, segmental hypohidrosis, diabetes, and amyloidosis. Occasionally, a tonic pupil is discovered incidentally in an otherwise completely normal, asymptomatic individual. The diagnosis is confirmed by placing a drop of dilute (0.125%) pilocarpine into each eye. Denervation hypersensitivity produces pupillary constriction in a tonic pupil, whereas the normal pupil shows no response. Pharmacologic dilatation from accidental or deliberate instillation of anticholinergic agents (atropine, scopolamine drops) into the eye also can produce pupillary mydriasis. In this situation, normal strength (1%) pilocarpine causes no constriction.

Both pupils are affected equally by systemic medications. They are small with narcotic use (morphine, heroin) and large with anticholinergics (scopolamine). Parasympathetic agents (pilocarpine, demecarium bromide) used to treat glaucoma produce miosis. In any patient with an unexplained pupillary abnormality, a slit-lamp examination is helpful to exclude surgical trauma to the iris, an occult foreign body, perforating injury, intraocular inflammation, adhesions (synechia), angle-closure glaucoma, and iris sphincter rupture from blunt trauma.

Eye Movements and Alignment

Eye movements are tested by asking the patient, with both eyes open, to pursue a small target such as a penlight into the cardinal fields of gaze. Normal ocular versions are smooth, symmetric, full, and maintained in all directions without nystagmus. Saccades, or quick refixation eye movements, are assessed by having the patient look back and forth between two stationary targets. The eyes should move rapidly and accurately in a single jump to their target. Ocular alignment can be judged by holding a penlight directly in front of the patient at about 1 m. If the eyes are straight, the corneal light reflex will be centered in the middle of each pupil. To test eye alignment more precisely, the cover test is useful. The patient is instructed to gaze upon a small fixation target in the distance. One eye is covered suddenly while the second eye is observed. If the second eye shifts to fixate on the target, it was misaligned. If it does not move, the first eye is uncovered and the test is repeated on the second eye. If neither eye moves, the eyes are aligned orthotropically. If the eyes are orthotropic in primary gaze but the patient complains of diplopia, the cover test should be performed with the head tilted or turned in whatever direction elicits diplopia. With practice the examiner can detect an ocular deviation (heterotropia) as small as 1每2∼ with the cover test. Deviations can be measured by placing prisms in front of the misaligned eye to determine the power required to neutralize the fixation shift evoked by covering the other eye.

Stereopsis

Stereoacuity is determined by presenting targets with retinal disparity separately to each eye by using polarized images. The most popular office tests measure a range of thresholds from 800每40 seconds of arc. Normal stereoacuity is 40 seconds of arc. If a patient achieves this level of stereoacuity, one is assured that the eyes are aligned orthotropically and that vision is intact in each eye. Random dot stereograms have no monocular depth cues and provide an excellent screening test for strabismus and amblyopia in children.

Color Vision

The retina contains three classes of cones, with visual pigments of differing peak spectral sensitivity: red (560 nm), green (530 nm), and blue (430 nm). The red and green cone pigments are encoded on the X chromosome, and the blue cone pigment on chromosome 7. Mutations of the blue cone pigment are exceedingly rare. Mutations of the red and green pigments cause congenital X-linked color blindness in 8% of males. Affected individuals are not truly color blind; rather, they differ from normal subjects in the way they perceive color and the way they combine primary monochromatic lights to match a particular color. Anomalous trichromats have three cone types, but a mutation in one cone pigment (usually red or green) causes a shift in peak spectral sensitivity, altering the proportion of primary colors required to achieve a color match. Dichromats have only two cone types and therefore will accept a color match based on only two primary colors. Anomalous trichromats and dichromats have 6/6 (20/20) visual acuity, but their hue discrimination is impaired. Ishihara color plates can be used to detect red-green color blindness. The test plates contain a hidden number that is visible only to subjects with color confusion from red-green color blindness. Because color blindness is almost exclusively X-linked, it is worth screening only male children.

The Ishihara plates often are used to detect acquired defects in color vision, although they are intended as a screening test for congenital color blindness. Acquired defects in color vision frequently result from disease of the macula or optic nerve. For example, patients with a history of optic neuritis often complain of color desaturation long after their visual acuity has returned to normal. Color blindness also can result from bilateral strokes involving the ventral portion of the occipital lobe (cerebral achromatopsia). Such patients can perceive only shades of gray and also may have difficulty recognizing faces (prosopagnosia). Infarcts of the dominant occipital lobe sometimes give rise to color anomia. Affected patients can discriminate colors but cannot name them.

Visual Fields

Vision can be impaired by damage to the visual system anywhere from the eyes to the occipital lobes. One can localize the site of the lesion with considerable accuracy by mapping the visual field deficit by finger confrontation and then correlating it with the topographic anatomy of the visual pathway (Fig. 28-3). Quantitative visual field mapping is performed by computer-driven perimeters (Humphrey, Octopus) that present a target of variable intensity at fixed positions in the visual field (Fig. 28-3A ). By generating an automated printout of light thresholds, these static perimeters provide a sensitive means of detecting scotomas in the visual field. They are exceedingly useful for serial assessment of visual function in chronic diseases such as glaucoma and pseudotumor cerebri.

Figure 28-3

 
 
 
Ventral view of the brain, correlating patterns of visual field loss with the sites of lesions in the visual pathway. The visual fields overlap partially, creating 120∼ of central binocular field flanked by a 40∼ monocular crescent on either side. The visual field maps in this figure were done with a computer-driven perimeter (Humphrey Instruments, Carl Zeiss, Inc.). It plots the retinal sensitivity to light in the central 30∼ by using a gray scale format. Areas of visual field loss are shown in black. The examples of common monocular, prechiasmal field defects are all shown for the right eye. By convention, the visual fields are always recorded with the left eye's field on the left and the right eye's field on the right, just as the patient sees the world.
 
 


The crux of visual field analysis is to decide whether a lesion is before, at, or behind the optic chiasm. If a scotoma is confined to one eye, it must be due to a lesion anterior to the chiasm, involving either the optic nerve or the retina. Retinal lesions produce scotomas that correspond optically to their location in the fundus. For example, a superior-nasal retinal detachment results in an inferior-temporal field cut. Damage to the macula causes a central scotoma (Fig. 28-3B ).

Optic nerve disease produces characteristic patterns of visual field loss. Glaucoma selectively destroys axons that enter the superotemporal or inferotemporal poles of the optic disc, resulting in arcuate scotomas shaped like a Turkish scimitar, which emanate from the blind spot and curve around fixation to end flat against the horizontal meridian (Fig. 28-3C ). This type of field defectmirrors the arrangement of the nerve fiber layer in the temporal retina. Arcuate or nerve fiber layer scotomas also result from optic neuritis, ischemic optic neuropathy, optic disc drusen, and branch retinal artery or vein occlusion.

Damage to the entire upper or lower pole of the optic disc causes an altitudinal field cut that follows the horizontal meridian (Fig. 28-3D ). This pattern of visual field loss is typical of ischemic optic neuropathy but also results from retinal vascular occlusion, advanced glaucoma, and optic neuritis.

About half the fibers in the optic nerve originate from ganglion cells serving the macula. Damage to papillomacular fibers causes a cecocentral scotoma that encompasses the blind spot and macula (Fig. 28-3E ). If the damage is irreversible, pallor eventually appears in the temporal portion of the optic disc. Temporal pallor from a cecocentral scotoma may develop in optic neuritis, nutritional optic neuropathy, toxic optic neuropathy, Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, and compressive optic neuropathy. It is worth mentioning that the temporal side of the optic disc is slightly more pale than the nasal side in most normal individuals. Therefore, it sometimes can be difficult to decide whether the temporal pallor visible on fundus examination represents a pathologic change. Pallor of the nasal rim of the optic disc is a less equivocal sign of optic atrophy.

At the optic chiasm, fibers from nasal ganglion cells decussate into the contralateral optic tract. Crossed fibers are damaged more by compression than are uncrossed fibers. As a result, mass lesions of the sellar region cause a temporal hemianopia in each eye. Tumors anterior to the optic chiasm, such as meningiomas of the tuberculum sella, produce a junctional scotoma characterized by an optic neuropathy in one eye and a superior-temporal field cut in the other eye (Fig. 28-3G ). More symmetric compression of the optic chiasm by a pituitary adenoma (Fig. 339-4), meningioma, craniopharyngioma, glioma, or aneurysm results in a bitemporal hemianopia (Fig. 28-3H ). The insidious development of a bitemporal hemianopia often goes unnoticed by the patient and will escape detection by the physician unless each eye is tested separately.

Figure 28-4

 
 
 
Retinal vasculitis, uveitis, and hemorrhage in a 32-year-old woman with Crohn's disease. Note that the veins are frosted with a white exudate. Visual acuity improved from 20/400 to 20/20 after treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone.
 
 

It is difficult to localize a postchiasmal lesion accurately, because injury anywhere in the optic tract, lateral geniculate body, optic radiations, or visual cortex can produce a homonymous hemianopia (i.e., a temporal hemifield defect in the contralateral eye and a matching nasal hemifield defect in the ipsilateral eye) (Fig. 28-3I ). A unilateral postchiasmal lesion leaves the visual acuity in each eye unaffected, although the patient may read the letters on only the left or right half of the eye chart. Lesions of the optic radiations tend to cause poorly matched or incongruous field defects in each eye. Damage to the optic radiations in the temporal lobe (Meyer's loop) produces a superior quadrantic homonymous hemianopia (Fig. 28-3J ), whereas injury to the optic radiations in the parietal lobe results in an inferior quadrantic homonymous hemianopia (Fig. 28-3K ). Lesions of the primary visual cortex give rise to dense, congruous hemianopic field defects. Occlusion of the posterior cerebral artery supplying the occipital lobe is a common cause of total homonymous hemianopia. Some patients with hemianopia after occipital stroke have macular sparing, because the macular representation at the tip of the occipital lobe is supplied by collaterals from the middle cerebral artery (Fig. 28-3L ). Destruction of both occipital lobes produces cortical blindness. This condition can be distinguished from bilateral prechiasmal visual loss by noting that the pupil responses and optic fundi remain normal.
 
Disorders

Red or Painful Eye

Corneal Abrasions

Corneal abrasions are seen best by placing a drop of fluorescein in the eye and looking with the slit lamp, using a cobalt-blue light. A penlight with a blue filter will suffice if a slit lamp is not available. Damage to the corneal epithelium is revealed by yellow fluorescence of the exposed basement membrane underlying the epithelium. It is important to check for foreign bodies. To search the conjunctival fornices, the lower lid should be pulled down and the upper lid everted. A foreign body can be removed with a moistened cotton-tipped applicator after a drop of a topical anesthetic such as proparacaine has been placed in the eye. Alternatively, it may be possible to flush the foreign body from the eye by irrigating copiously with saline or artificial tears. If the corneal epithelium has been abraded, antibiotic ointment and a patch should be applied to the eye. A drop of an intermediate-acting cycloplegic such as cyclopentolate hydrochloride 1% helps reduce pain by relaxing the ciliary body. The eye should be reexamined the next day. Minor abrasions may not require patching and cycloplegia.

Subconjunctival Hemorrhage

This results from rupture of small vessels bridging the potential space between the episclera and the conjunctiva. Blood dissecting into this space can produce a spectacular red eye, but vision is not affected and the hemorrhage resolves without treatment. Subconjunctival hemorrhage is usually spontaneous but can result from blunt trauma, eye rubbing, or vigorous coughing. Occasionally it is a clue to an underlying bleeding disorder.

Pinguecula

Pinguecula is a small, raised conjunctival nodule at the temporal or nasal limbus. In adults such lesions are extremely common and have little significance unless they become inflamed (pingueculitis). A pterygium resembles a pinguecula but has crossed the limbus to encroach on the corneal surface. Removal is justified when symptoms of irritation or blurring develop, but recurrence is a common problem.

Blepharitis

This refers to inflammation of the eyelids. The most common form occurs in association with acne rosacea or seborrheic dermatitis. The eyelid margins usually are colonized heavily by staphylococci. Upon close inspection, they appear greasy, ulcerated, and crusted with scaling debris that clings to the lashes. Treatment consists of warm compresses, strict eyelid hygiene, and topical antibiotics such as bacitracin/polymyxin B ophthalmic ointment. An external hordeolum (sty) is caused by staphylococcal infection of the superficial accessory glands of Zeis or Moll located in the eyelid margins. An internal hordeolum occurs after suppurative infection of the oil-secreting meibomian glands within the tarsal plate of the eyelid. Systemic antibiotics, usually tetracyclines or azithromycin, sometimes are necessary for treatment of meibomian gland inflammation (meibomitis) or chronic, severe blepharitis. A chalazion is a painless, granulomatous inflammation of a meibomian gland that produces a pealike nodule within the eyelid. It can be incised and drained or injected with glucocorticoids. Basal cell, squamous cell, or meibomian gland carcinoma should be suspected with any nonhealing ulcerative lesion of the eyelids.

Dacryocystitis

An inflammation of the lacrimal drainage system, dacryocystitis can produce epiphora (tearing) and ocular injection. Gentle pressure over the lacrimal sac evokes pain and reflux of mucus or pus from the tear puncta. Dacryocystitis usually occurs after obstruction of the lacrimal system. It is treated with topical and systemic antibiotics, followed by probing or surgery to reestablish patency. Entropion (inversion of the eyelid) or ectropion (sagging or eversion of the eyelid) can also lead to epiphora and ocular irritation.

Conjunctivitis

Conjunctivitis is the most common cause of a red, irritated eye. Pain is minimal, and visual acuity is reduced only slightly. The most common viral etiology is adenovirus infection. It causes a watery discharge, a mild foreign-body sensation, and photophobia. Bacterial infection tends to produce a more mucopurulent exudate. Mild cases of infectious conjunctivitis usually are treated empirically with broad-spectrum topical ocular antibiotics such as sulfacetamide 10%, polymyxin-bacitracin, or a trimethoprim-polymyxin combination. Smears and cultures usually are reserved for severe, resistant, or recurrent cases of conjunctivitis. To prevent contagion, patients should be admonished to wash their hands frequently, not to touch their eyes, and to avoid direct contact with others.

Allergic Conjunctivitis

This condition is extremely common and often is mistaken for infectious conjunctivitis. Itching, redness, and epiphora are typical. The palpebral conjunctiva may become hypertropic with giant excrescences called cobblestone papillae. Irritation from contact lenses or any chronic foreign body also can induce formation of cobblestone papillae. Atopic conjunctivitis occurs in subjects with atopic dermatitis or asthma. Symptoms caused by allergic conjunctivitis can be alleviated with cold compresses, topical vasoconstrictors, antihistamines, and mast cell stabilizers such as cromolyn sodium. Topical glucocorticoid solutions provide dramatic relief of immune-mediated forms of conjunctivitis, but their long-term use is ill advised because of the complications of glaucoma, cataract, and secondary infection. Topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g., ketorolac tromethamine) are better alternatives.

Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca

Also known as dry eye, this produces a burning foreign-body sensation, injection, and photophobia. In mild cases the eye appears surprisingly normal, but tear production measured by wetting of a filter paper (Schirmer strip) is deficient. A variety of systemic drugs, including antihistaminic, anticholinergic, and psychotropic medications, result in dry eye by reducing lacrimal secretion. Disorders that involve the lacrimal gland directly, such as sarcoidosis and Sj?gren's syndrome, also cause dry eye. Patients may develop dry eye after radiation therapy if the treatment field includes the orbits. Problems with ocular drying are also common after lesions affecting cranial nerve V or VII. Corneal anesthesia is particularly dangerous, because the absence of a normal blink reflex exposes the cornea to injury without pain to warn the patient. Dry eye is managed by frequent and liberal application of artificial tears and ocular lubricants. In severe cases the tear puncta can be plugged or cauterized to reduce lacrimal outflow.

Keratitis

Keratitis is a threat to vision because of the risk of corneal clouding, scarring, and perforation. Worldwide, the two leading causes of blindness from keratitis are trachoma from chlamydial infection and vitamin A deficiency related to malnutrition. In the United States, contact lenses play a major role in corneal infection and ulceration. They should not be worn by anyone with an active eye infection. In evaluating the cornea, it is important to differentiate between a superficial infection (keratoconjunctivitis) and a deeper, more serious ulcerative process. The latter is accompanied by greater visual loss, pain, photophobia, redness, and discharge. Slit-lamp examination shows disruption of the corneal epithelium, a cloudy infiltrate or abscess in the stroma, and an inflammatory cellular reaction in the anterior chamber. In severe cases, pus settles at the bottom of the anterior chamber, giving rise to a hypopyon. Immediate empirical antibiotic therapy should be initiated after corneal scrapings are obtained for Gram's stain, Giemsa stain, and cultures. Fortified topical antibiotics are most effective, supplemented with subconjunctival antibiotics as required. A fungal etiology should always be considered in a patient with keratitis. Fungal infection is common in warm humid climates, especially after penetration of the cornea by plant or vegetable material.

Herpes Simplex

The herpesviruses are a major cause of blindness from keratitis. Most adults in the United States have serum antibodies to herpes simplex, indicating prior viral infection (Chap. 179). Primary ocular infection generally is caused by herpes simplex type 1 rather than type 2. It manifests as a unilateral follicular blepharoconjunctivitis that is easily confused with adenoviral conjunctivitis unless telltale vesicles appear on the periocular skin or conjunctiva. A dendritic pattern of corneal epithelial ulceration revealed by fluorescein staining is pathognomonic for herpes infection but is seen in only a minority of primary infections. Recurrent ocular infection arises from reactivation of the latent herpesvirus. Viral eruption in the corneal epithelium may result in the characteristic herpes dendrite. Involvement of the corneal stroma produces edema, vascularization, and iridocyclitis. Herpes keratitis is treated with topical antiviral agents, cycloplegics, and oral acyclovir. Topical glucocorticoids are effective in mitigating corneal scarring but must be used with extreme caution because of the danger of corneal melting and perforation. Topical glucocorticoids also carry the risk of prolonging infection and inducing glaucoma.

Herpes Zoster

Herpes zoster from reactivation of latent varicella (chickenpox) virus causes a dermatomal pattern of painful vesicular dermatitis. Ocular symptoms can occur after zoster eruption in any branch of the trigeminal nerve but are particularly common when vesicles form on the nose, reflecting nasociliary (V1) nerve involvement (Hutchinson's sign). Herpes zoster ophthalmicus produces corneal dendrites, which can be difficult to distinguish from those seen in herpes simplex. Stromal keratitis, anterior uveitis, raised intraocular pressure, ocular motor nerve palsies, acute retinal necrosis, and postherpetic scarring and neuralgia are other common sequelae. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus is treated with antiviral agents and cycloplegics. In severe cases, glucocorticoids may be added to prevent permanent visual loss from corneal scarring.

Episcleritis

This is an inflammation of the episclera, a thin layer of connective tissue between the conjunctiva and the sclera. Episcleritis resembles conjunctivitis, but it is a more localized process and discharge is absent. Most cases of episcleritis are idiopathic, but some occur in the setting of an autoimmune disease. Scleritis refers to a deeper, more severe inflammatory process that frequently is associated with a connective tissue disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) or relapsing polychondritis. The inflammation and thickening of the sclera can be diffuse or nodular. In anterior forms of scleritis, the globe assumes a violet hue and the patient complains of severe ocular tenderness and pain. With posterior scleritis the pain and redness may be less marked, but there is often proptosis, choroidal effusion, reduced motility, and visual loss. Episcleritis and scleritis should be treated with NSAIDs. If these agents fail, topical or even systemic glucocorticoid therapy may be necessary, especially if an underlying autoimmune process is active.

Uveitis

Involving the anterior structures of the eye, uveitis also is called iritis or iridocyclitis. The diagnosis requires slit-lamp examination to identify inflammatory cells floating in the aqueous humor or deposited on the corneal endothelium (keratic precipitates). Anterior uveitis develops in sarcoidosis, ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome), and Beh?et's disease. It also is associated with herpes infections, syphilis, Lyme disease, onchocerciasis, tuberculosis, and leprosy. Although anterior uveitis can occur in conjunction with many diseases, no cause is found to explain the majority of cases. For this reason, laboratory evaluation usually is reserved for patients with recurrent or severe anterior uveitis. Treatment is aimed at reducing inflammation and scarring by judicious use of topical glucocorticoids. Dilatation of the pupil reduces pain and prevents the formation of synechiae.

Posterior Uveitis

This is diagnosed by observing inflammation of the vitreous, retina, or choroid on fundus examination. It is more likely than anterior uveitis to be associated with an identifiable systemic disease. Some patients have panuveitis, or inflammation of both the anterior and posterior segments of the eye. Posterior uveitis is a manifestation of autoimmune diseases such as sarcoidosis, Beh?et's disease, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, and inflammatory bowel disease (Fig. 28-4). It also accompanies diseases such as toxoplasmosis, onchocerciasis, cysticercosis, coccidioidomycosis, toxocariasis, and histoplasmosis; infections caused by organisms such as Candida, Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, herpes, and cytomegalovirus (see Fig. 182-1); and other diseases, such as syphilis, Lyme disease, tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease, Whipple's disease, and brucellosis. In multiple sclerosis, chronic inflammatory changes can develop in the extreme periphery of the retina (pars planitis or intermediate uveitis).

Acute Angle-Closure Glaucoma

This is a rare and frequently misdiagnosed cause of a red, painful eye. Susceptible eyes have a shallow anterior chamber because the eye has either a short axial length (hyperopia) or a lens enlarged by the gradual development of cataract. When the pupil becomes mid-dilated, the peripheral iris blocks aqueous outflow via the anterior chamber angle and the intraocular pressure rises abruptly, producing pain, injection, corneal edema, obscurations, and blurred vision. In some patients, ocular symptoms are overshadowed by nausea, vomiting, or headache, prompting a fruitless workup for abdominal or neurologic disease. The diagnosis is made by measuring the intraocular pressure during an acute attack or by observing a narrow chamber angle by means of a specially mirrored contact lens. Acute angle closure is treated with acetazolamide (PO or IV), topical beta blockers, prostaglandin analogues, 2-adrenergic agonists, and pilocarpine to induce miosis. If these measures fail, a laser can be used to create a hole in the peripheral iris to relieve pupillary block. Many physicians are reluctant to dilate patients routinely for fundus examination because they fear precipitating an angle-closure glaucoma. The risk is actually remote and more than outweighed by the potential benefit to patients of discovering a hidden fundus lesion visible only through a fully dilated pupil. Moreover, a single attack of angle closure after pharmacologic dilatation rarely causes any permanent damage to the eye and serves as an inadvertent provocative test to identify patients with narrow angles who would benefit from prophylactic laser iridectomy.

Endophthalmitis

This results from bacterial, viral, fungal, or parasitic infection of the internal structures of the eye. It usually is acquired by hematogenous seeding from a remote site. Chronically ill, diabetic, or immunosuppressed patients, especially those with a history of indwelling IV catheters or positive blood cultures, are at greatest risk for endogenous endophthalmitis. Although most patients have ocular pain and injection, visual loss is sometimes the only symptom. Septic emboli from a diseased heart valve or a dental abscess that lodge in the retinal circulation can give rise to endophthalmitis. White-centered retinal hemorrhages (Roth's spots) are considered pathognomonic for subacute bacterial endocarditis, but they also appear in leukemia, diabetes, and many other conditions. Endophthalmitis also occurs as a complication of ocular surgery, occasionally months or even years after the operation. An occult penetrating foreign body or unrecognized trauma to the globe should be considered in any patient with unexplained intraocular infection or inflammation.

Transient or Sudden Visual Loss

Amaurosis Fugax

This term refers to a transient ischemic attack of the retina (Chap. 370). Because neural tissue has a high rate of metabolism, interruption of blood flow to the retina for more than a few seconds results in transient monocular blindness, a term used interchangeably with amaurosis fugax. Patients describe a rapid fading of vision like a curtain descending, sometimes affecting only a portion of the visual field. Amaurosis fugax usually results from an embolus that becomes stuck within a retinal arteriole (Fig. 28-5). If the embolus breaks up or passes, flow is restored and vision returns quickly to normal without permanent damage. With prolonged interruption of blood flow, the inner retina suffers infarction. Ophthalmoscopy reveals zones of whitened, edematous retina following the distribution of branch retinal arterioles. Complete occlusion of the central retinal artery produces arrest of blood flow and a milky retina with a cherry-red fovea (Fig. 28-6). Emboli are composed of cholesterol (Hollenhorst plaque), calcium, or platelet-fibrin debris. The most common source is an atherosclerotic plaque in the carotid artery or aorta, although emboli also can arise from the heart, especially in patients with diseased valves, atrial fibrillation, or wall motion abnormalities.

Figure 28-5

 
 
 
Hollenhorst plaque lodged at the bifurcation of a retinal arteriole proves that a patient is shedding emboli from the carotid artery, great vessels, or heart.
 
 

Figure 28-6

 
 
 
Central retinal artery occlusion combined with ischemic optic neuropathy in a 19-year-old woman with an elevated titer of anticardiolipin antibodies. Note the orange dot (rather than cherry red) corresponding to the fovea and the spared patch of retina just temporal to the optic disc.
 
 


In rare instances, amaurosis fugax results from low central retinal artery perfusion pressure in a patient with a critical stenosis of the ipsilateral carotid artery and poor collateral flow via the circle of Willis. In this situation, amaurosis fugax develops when there is a dip in systemic blood pressure or a slight worsening of the carotid stenosis. Sometimes there is contralateral motor or sensory loss, indicating concomitant hemispheric cerebral ischemia.

Retinal arterial occlusion also occurs rarely in association with retinal migraine, lupus erythematosus, anticardiolipin antibodies (Fig. 28-6), anticoagulant deficiency states (protein S, protein C, and antithrombin deficiency), pregnancy, IV drug abuse, blood dyscrasias, dysproteinemias, and temporal arteritis.

Marked systemic hypertension causes sclerosis of retinal arterioles, splinter hemorrhages, focal infarcts of the nerve fiber layer (cotton-wool spots), and leakage of lipid and fluid (hard exudate) into the macula (Fig. 28-7). In hypertensive crisis, sudden visual loss can result from vasospasm of retinal arterioles and retinal ischemia. In addition, acute hypertension may produce visual loss from ischemic swelling of the optic disc. Patients with acute hypertensive retinopathy should be treated by lowering the blood pressure. However, the blood pressure should not be reduced precipitously, because there is a danger of optic disc infarction from sudden hypoperfusion.

Figure 28-7

 
 
 
Hypertensive retinopathy with scattered flame (splinter) hemorrhages and cotton-wool spots (nerve fiber layer infarcts) in a patient with headache and a blood pressure of 234/120.
 
 


Impending branch or central retinal vein occlusion can produce prolonged visual obscurations that resemble those described by patients with amaurosis fugax. The veins appear engorged and phlebitic, with numerous retinal hemorrhages (Fig. 28-8). In some patients venous blood flow recovers spontaneously, whereas others evolve a frank obstruction with extensive retinal bleeding ("blood and thunder" appearance), infarction, and visual loss. Venous occlusion of the retina is often idiopathic, but hypertension, diabetes, and glaucoma are prominent risk factors. Polycythemia, thrombocythemia, or other factors leading to an underlying hypercoagulable state should be corrected; aspirin treatment may be beneficial.

Figure 28-8

 
 
 
Central retinal vein occlusion can produce massive retinal hemorrhage ("blood and thunder"), ischemia, and vision loss.
 
 

Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy (AION)

This is caused by insufficient blood flow through the posterior ciliary arteries that supply the optic disc. It produces painless, monocular visual loss that is usually sudden, although some patients have progressive worsening. The optic disc appears swollen and surrounded by nerve fiber layer splinter hemorrhages (Fig. 28-9). AION is divided into two forms: arteritic and nonarteritic. The nonarteritic form is most common. No specific cause can be identified, although diabetes and hypertension are common risk factors. No treatment is available. About 5% of patients, especially those >age 60, develop the arteritic form of AION in conjunction with giant cell (temporal) arteritis (Chap. 326). It is urgent to recognize arteritic AION so that high doses of glucocorticoids can be instituted immediately to prevent blindness in the second eye. Symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica may be present; the sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level are usually elevated. In a patient with visual loss from suspected arteritic AION, temporal artery biopsy is mandatory to confirm the diagnosis. Glucocorticoids should be started immediately, without waiting for the biopsy to be completed. The diagnosis of arteritic AION is difficult to sustain in the face of a negative temporal artery biopsy, but such cases do occur rarely.

Figure 28-9

 
 
 
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy from temporal arteritis in a 78-year-old woman with pallid disc swelling, hemorrhage, visual loss, myalgia, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 86 mm/h.
 
 

Posterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy

This is an uncommon cause of acute visual loss, induced by the combination of severe anemia and hypotension. Cases have been reported after major blood loss during surgery, exsanguinating trauma, gastrointestinal bleeding, and renal dialysis. The fundus usually appears normal, although optic disc swelling develops if the process extends far enough anteriorly. Vision can be salvaged in some patients by prompt blood transfusion and reversal of hypotension.

Optic Neuritis

This is a common inflammatory disease of the optic nerve. In the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT), the mean age of patients was 32 years, 77% were female, 92% had ocular pain (especially with eye movements), and 35% had optic disc swelling. In most patients, the demyelinating event was retrobulbar and the ocular fundus appeared normal on initial examination (Fig. 28-10), although optic disc pallor slowly developed over subsequent months.

Figure 28-10

 
 
 
Retrobulbar optic neuritis is characterized by a normal fundus examination initially, hence the rubric "the doctor sees nothing, and the patient sees nothing." Optic atrophy develops after severe or repeated attacks.
 
 

Virtually all patients experience a gradual recovery of vision after a single episode of optic neuritis, even without treatment. This rule is so reliable that failure of vision to improve after a first attack of optic neuritis casts doubt on the original diagnosis. Treatment with high-dose IV methylprednisolone (250 mg every 6 h for 3 days) followed by oral prednisone (1 mg/kg per d for 11 days) makes no difference in final acuity (measured 6 months after the attack), but the recovery of visual function occurs more rapidly.

For some patients, optic neuritis remains an isolated event. However, the ONTT showed that the 15-year cumulative probability of developing clinically definite multiple sclerosis after optic neuritis is 50%. In patients with two or more demyelinating plaques on brain magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, treatment with interferon -1a can retard the development of more lesions. In summary, an MR scan is recommended in every patient with a first attack of optic neuritis. When visual loss is severe (worse than 20/100), treatment with IV followed by oral glucocorticoids hastens recovery. If multiple lesions are present on the MR scan, treatment with interferon -1a should be considered.

Leber's Hereditary Optic Neuropathy

This disease usually affects young men, causing gradual, painless, severe central visual loss in one eye, followed weeks or months later by the same process in the other eye. Acutely, the optic disc appears mildly plethoric with surface capillary telangiectases but no vascular leakage on fluorescein angiography. Eventually optic atrophy ensues. Leber's optic neuropathy is caused by a point mutation at codon 11778 in the mitochondrial gene encoding nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase (NADH) subunit 4. Additional mutations responsible for the disease have been identified, most in mitochondrial genes that encode proteins involved in electron transport. Mitochondrial mutations that cause Leber's neuropathy are inherited from the mother by all her children, but usually only sons develop symptoms.

Toxic Optic Neuropathy

This can result in acute visual loss with bilateral optic disc swelling and central or cecocentral scotomas. Such cases have been reported to result from exposure to ethambutol, methyl alcohol (moonshine), ethylene glycol (antifreeze), or carbon monoxide. In toxic optic neuropathy, visual loss also can develop gradually and produce optic atrophy (Fig. 28-11) without a phase of acute optic disc edema. Many agents have been implicated as a cause of toxic optic neuropathy, but the evidence supporting the association for many is weak. The following is a partial list of potential offending drugs or toxins: disulfiram, ethchlorvynol, chloramphenicol, amiodarone, monoclonal anti-CD3 antibody, ciprofloxacin, digitalis, streptomycin, lead, arsenic, thallium, d-penicillamine, isoniazid, emetine, and sulfonamides. Deficiency states induced by starvation, malabsorption, or alcoholism can lead to insidious visual loss. Thiamine, vitamin B12 , and folate levels should be checked in any patient with unexplained bilateral central scotomas and optic pallor.

Figure 28-11

 
 
 
Optic atrophy is not a specific diagnosis but refers to the combination of optic disc pallor, arteriolar narrowing, and nerve fiber layer destruction produced by a host of eye diseases, especially optic neuropathies.
 
 

Papilledema

This connotes bilateral optic disc swelling from raised intracranial pressure (Fig. 28-12). Headache is a common but not invariable accompaniment. All other forms of optic disc swelling (e.g., from optic neuritis or ischemic optic neuropathy, should be called "optic disc edema"). This convention is arbitrary but serves to avoid confusion. Often it is difficult to differentiate papilledema from other forms of optic disc edema by fundus examination alone. Transient visual obscurations are a classic symptom of papilledema. They can occur in only one eye or simultaneously in both eyes. They usually last seconds but can persist longer. Obscurations follow abrupt shifts in posture or happen spontaneously. When obscurations are prolonged or spontaneous, the papilledema is more threatening. Visual acuity is not affected by papilledema unless the papilledema is severe, long-standing, or accompanied by macular edema and hemorrhage. Visual field testing shows enlarged blind spots and peripheral constriction (Fig. 28-3F ). With unremitting papilledema, peripheral visual field loss progresses in an insidious fashion while the optic nerve develops atrophy. In this setting, reduction of optic disc swelling is an ominous sign of a dying nerve rather than an encouraging indication of resolving papilledema.

Figure 28-12

 
 
 
Papilledema means optic disc edema from raised intracranial pressure. This obese young woman with pseudotumor cerebri was misdiagnosed as a migraineur until fundus examination was performed, showing optic disc elevation, hemorrhages, and cotton-wool spots.
 
 

Evaluation of papilledema requires neuroimaging to exclude an intracranial lesion. MR angiography is appropriate in selected cases to search for a dural venous sinus occlusion or an arteriovenous shunt. If neuroradiologic studies are negative, the subarachnoid opening pressure should be measured by lumbar puncture. An elevated pressure, with normal cerebrospinal fluid, points by exclusion to the diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri (idiopathicintracranial hypertension). The majority of patients are young, female, and obese. Treatment with a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor such as acetazolamide lowers intracranial pressure by reducing the production of cerebrospinal fluid. Weight reduction is vital but often unsuccessful. If acetazolamide and weight loss fail and visual field loss is progressive, a shunt should be performed without delay to prevent blindness. Occasionally, emergency surgery is required for sudden blindness caused by fulminant papilledema.

Optic Disc Drusen

These are refractile deposits within the substance of the optic nerve head (Fig. 28-13). They are unrelated to drusen of the retina, which occur in age-related macular degeneration. Optic disc drusen are most common in people of northern European descent. Their diagnosis is obvious when they are visible as glittering particles on the surface of the optic disc. However, in many patients they are hidden beneath the surface, producing pseudopapilledema. It is important to recognize optic disc drusen to avoid an unnecessary evaluation for papilledema. Ultrasound or CT scanning is sensitive for detection of buried optic disc drusen because they contain calcium. In most patients, optic disc drusen are an incidental, innocuous finding, but they can produce visual obscurations. On perimetry they give rise to enlarged blind spots and arcuate scotomas from damage to the optic disc. With increasing age, drusen tend to become more exposed on the disc surface as optic atrophy develops. Hemorrhage, choroidal neovascular membrane, and AION are more likely to occur in patients with optic disc drusen. No treatment is available.

Figure 28-13

 
 
 
Optic disc drusen are calcified deposits of unknown etiology within the optic disc. They sometimes are confused with papilledema.
 
 

Vitreous Degeneration

This occurs in all individuals with advancing age, leading to visual symptoms. Opacities develop in the vitreous, casting annoying shadows on the retina. As the eye moves, these distracting "floaters" move synchronously, with a slight lag caused by inertia of the vitreous gel. Vitreous traction on the retina causes mechanical stimulation, resulting in perception of flashing lights. This photopsia is brief and is confined to one eye, in contrast to the bilateral, prolonged scintillations of cortical migraine. Contraction of the vitreous can result in sudden separation from the retina, heralded by an alarming shower of floaters and photopsia. This process, known as vitreous detachment, is a common involutional event in the elderly. It is not harmful unless it damages the retina. A careful examination of the dilated fundus is important in any patient complaining of floaters or photopsia to search for peripheral tears or holes. If such a lesion is found, laser application can forestall a retinal detachment. Occasionally a tear ruptures a retinal blood vessel, causing vitreous hemorrhage and sudden loss of vision. On attempted ophthalmoscopy the fundus is hidden by a dark red haze of blood. Ultrasound is required to examine the interior of the eye for a retinal tear or detachment. If the hemorrhage does not resolve spontaneously, the vitreous can be removed surgically. Vitreous hemorrhage also results from the fragile neovascular vessels that proliferate on the surface of the retina in diabetes, sickle cell anemia, and other ischemic ocular diseases.

Retinal Detachment

This produces symptoms of floaters, flashing lights, and a scotoma in the peripheral visual field corresponding to the detachment (Fig. 28-14). If the detachment includes the fovea, there is an afferent pupil defect and the visual acuity is reduced. In most eyes, retinal detachment starts with a hole, flap, or tear in the peripheral retina (rhegmatogenous retinal detachment). Patients with peripheral retinal thinning (lattice degeneration) are particularly vulnerable to this process. Once a break has developed in the retina, liquefied vitreous is free to enter the subretinal space, separating the retina from the pigment epithelium. The combination of vitreous traction on the retinal surface and passage of fluid behind the retina leads inexorably to detachment. Patients with a history of myopia, trauma, or prior cataract extraction are at greatest risk for retinal detachment. The diagnosis is confirmed by ophthalmoscopic examination of the dilated eye.

Figure 28-14

 
 
 
Retinal detachment appears as an elevated sheet of retinal tissue with folds. In this patient the fovea was spared, so acuity was normal, but a superior detachment produced an inferior scotoma.
 
 

Classic Migraine

(See also Chap. 14) This usually occurs with a visual aura lasting about 20 min. In a typical attack, a small central disturbance in the field of vision marches toward the periphery, leaving a transient scotoma in its wake. The expanding border of migraine scotoma has a scintillating, dancing, or zigzag edge, resembling the bastions of a fortified city, hence the term fortification spectra. Patients' descriptions of fortification spectra vary widely and can be confused with amaurosis fugax. Migraine patterns usually last longer and are perceived in both eyes, whereas amaurosis fugax is briefer and occurs in only one eye. Migraine phenomena also remain visible in the dark or with the eyes closed. Generally they are confined to either the right or the left visual hemifield, but sometimes both fields are involved simultaneously. Patients often have a long history of stereotypic attacks. After the visual symptoms recede, headache develops in most patients.

Transient Ischemic Attacks

Vertebrobasilar insufficiency may result in acute homonymous visual symptoms. Many patients mistakenly describe symptoms in the left or right eye when in fact the symptoms are occurring in the left or right hemifield of both eyes. Interruption of blood supply to the visual cortex causes a sudden fogging or graying of vision, occasionally with flashing lights or other positive phenomena that mimic migraine. Cortical ischemic attacks are briefer in duration than migraine, occur in older patients, and are not followed by headache. There may be associated signs of brainstem ischemia, such as diplopia, vertigo, numbness, weakness, and dysarthria.

Stroke

Stroke occurs when interruption of blood supply from the posterior cerebral artery to the visual cortex is prolonged. The only finding on examination is a homonymous visual field defect that stops abruptly at the vertical meridian. Occipital lobe stroke usually is due to thrombotic occlusion of the vertebrobasilar system, embolus, or dissection. Lobar hemorrhage, tumor, abscess, and arteriovenous malformation are other common causes of hemianopic cortical visual loss.

Factitious (Functional, Nonorganic) Visual Loss

This is claimed by hysterics or malingerers. The latter account for the vast majority, seeking sympathy, special treatment, or financial gain by feigning loss of sight. The diagnosis is suspected when the history is atypical, physical findings are lacking or contradictory, inconsistencies emerge on testing, and a secondary motive can be identified. In our litigious society, the fraudulent pursuit of recompense has spawned an epidemic of factitious visual loss.

Chronic Visual Loss

Cataract

Cataract is a clouding of the lens sufficient to reduce vision. Most cataracts develop slowly as a result of aging, leading to gradual impairment of vision. The formation of cataract occurs more rapidly in patients with a history of ocular trauma, uveitis, or diabetes mellitus. Cataracts are acquired in a variety of genetic diseases, such as myotonic dystrophy, neurofibromatosis type 2, and galactosemia. Radiation therapy and glucocorticoid treatment can induce cataract as a side effect. The cataracts associated with radiation or glucocorticoids have a typical posterior subcapsular location. Cataract can be detected by noting an impaired red reflex when viewing light reflected from the fundus with an ophthalmoscope or by examining the dilated eye with the slit lamp.

The only treatment for cataract is surgical extraction of the opacified lens. Over a million cataract operations are performed each year in the United States. The operation generally is done under local anesthesia on an outpatient basis. A plastic or silicone intraocular lens is placed within the empty lens capsule in the posterior chamber, substituting for the natural lens and leading to rapid recovery of sight. More than 95% of patients who undergo cataract extraction can expect an improvement in vision. In some patients, the lens capsule remaining in the eye after cataract extraction eventually turns cloudy, causing secondary loss of vision. A small opening is made in the lens capsule with a laser to restore clarity.

Glaucoma

Glaucoma is a slowly progressive, insidious optic neuropathy that usually is associated with chronic elevation of intraocular pressure. In African Americans it is the leading cause of blindness. The mechanism by which raised intraocular pressure injures the optic nerve is not understood. Axons entering the inferotemporal and superotemporal aspects of the optic disc are damaged first, producing typical nerve fiber bundle or arcuate scotomas on perimetric testing. As fibers are destroyed, the neural rim of the optic disc shrinks and the physiologic cup within the optic disc enlarges (Fig. 28-15). This process is referred to as pathologic "cupping." The cup-to-disc diameter is expressed as a ratio (e.g., 0.2/1). The cup-to-disc ratio ranges widely in normal individuals, making it difficult to diagnose glaucoma reliably simply by observing an unusually large or deep optic cup. Careful documentation of serial examinations is helpful. In a patient with physiologic cupping the large cup remains stable, whereas in a patient with glaucoma it expands relentlessly over the years. Detection of visual field loss by computerized perimetry also contributes to the diagnosis. Finally, most patients with glaucoma have raised intraocular pressure. However, many patients with typical glaucomatous cupping and visual field loss have intraocular pressures that apparently never exceed the normal limit of 20 mmHg (so-called low-tension glaucoma).

Figure 28-15

 
 
 
Glaucoma results in "cupping" as the neural rim is destroyed and the central cup becomes enlarged and excavated. The cup-to-disc ratio is about 0.7/1.0 in this patient.
 
 

In acute angle-closure glaucoma, the eye is red and painful due to abrupt, severe elevation of intraocular pressure. Such cases account for only a minority of glaucoma cases: most patients have open, anterior chamber angles. The cause of raised intraocular pressure in open angle glaucoma is unknown, but it is associated with gene mutations in the heritable forms.

Glaucoma is usually painless (except in angle-closure glaucoma). Foveal acuity is spared until end-stage disease is reached. For these reasons, severe and irreversible damage can occur before either the patient or the physician recognizes the diagnosis. Screening of patients for glaucoma by noting the cup-to-disc ratio on ophthalmoscopy and by measuring intraocular pressure is vital. Glaucoma is treated with topical adrenergic agonists, cholinergic agonists, beta blockers, and prostaglandin analogues. Occasionally, systemic absorption of beta blocker from eyedrops can be sufficient to cause side effects of bradycardia, hypotension, heart block, bronchospasm, or depression. Topical or oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are used to lower intraocular pressure by reducing aqueous production. Laser treatment of the trabecular meshwork in the anterior chamber angle improves aqueous outflow from the eye. If medical or laser treatments fail to halt optic nerve damage from glaucoma, a filter must be constructed surgically (trabeculectomy) or a valve placed to release aqueous from the eye in a controlled fashion.

Macular Degeneration

This is a major cause of gradual, painless, bilateral central visual loss in the elderly. The old term, "senile macular degeneration," misinterpreted by many patients as an unflattering reference, has been replaced with "age-related macular degeneration." It occurs in a nonexudative (dry) form and an exudative (wet) form. Inflammation may be important in both forms of macular degeneration; recent genetic data indicate that susceptibility is associated with variants in the gene for complement factor H, an inhibitor of the alternative complement pathway. The nonexudative process begins with the accumulation of extracellular deposits called drusen underneath the retinal pigment epithelium. On ophthalmoscopy, they are pleomorphic but generally appear as small discrete yellow lesions clustered in the macula (Fig. 28-16). With time they become larger, more numerous, and confluent. The retinal pigment epithelium becomes focally detached and atrophic, causing visual loss by interfering with photoreceptor function. Treatment with vitamins C and E, beta-carotene, and zinc may retard dry macular degeneration.

Figure 28-16

 
 
 
Age-related macular degeneration begins with the accumulation of drusen within the macula. They appear as scattered yellow subretinal deposits.
 
 

Exudative macular degeneration, which develops in only a minority of patients, occurs when neovascular vessels from the choroid grow through defects in Bruch's membrane and proliferate underneath the retinal pigment epithelium or the retina. Leakage from these vessels produces elevation of the retina, with distortion (metamorphopsia) and blurring of vision. Although the onset of these symptoms is usually gradual, bleeding from a subretinal choroidal neovascular membrane sometimes causes acute visual loss. Neovascular membranes can be difficult to see on fundus examination because they are located beneath the retina. Fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography, a new technique for acquiring images of the retina in cross-section, are extremely useful for their detection. Major or repeated hemorrhage under the retina from neovascular membranes results in fibrosis, development of a round (disciform) macular scar, and permanent loss of central vision.

A major therapeutic advance has occurred recently with the discovery that exudative macular degeneration can be treated with intraocular injection of a vascular endothelial growth factor antagonist. Either bevacizumab or ranibizumab is administered by direct injection into the vitreous cavity, beginning on a monthly basis. These antibodies cause the regression of neovascular membranes by blocking the action of vascular endothelial growth factor, thereby improving visual acuity.

Central Serous Chorioretinopathy

This primarily affects males between the ages of 20 and 50. Leakage of serous fluid from the choroid causes small, localized detachment of the retinal pigment epithelium and the neurosensory retina. These detachments produce acute or chronic symptoms of metamorphopsia and blurred vision when the macula is involved. They are difficult to visualize with a direct ophthalmoscope because the detached retina is transparent and only slightly elevated. Diagnosis of central serous chorioretinopathy is made easily by fluorescein angiography, which shows dye streaming into the subretinal space. The cause of central serous chorioretinopathy is unknown. Symptoms may resolve spontaneously if the retina reattaches, but recurrent detachment is common. Laser photocoagulation has benefited some patients with this condition.

Diabetic Retinopathy

A rare disease until 1921, when the discovery of insulin resulted in a dramatic improvement in life expectancy for patients with diabetes mellitus, diabetic retinopathy is now a leading cause of blindness in the United States. The retinopathy takes years to develop but eventually appears in nearly all cases. Regular surveillance of the dilated fundus is crucial for any patient with diabetes. In advanced diabetic retinopathy, the proliferation of neovascular vessels leads to blindness from vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, and glaucoma (see Fig. 344-9). These complications can be avoided in most patients by administration of panretinal laser photocoagulation at the appropriate point in the evolution of the disease. For further discussion of the manifestations and management of diabetic retinopathy, see Chap. 344.

Retinitis Pigmentosa

This is a general term for a disparate group of rod-cone dystrophies characterized by progressive night blindness, visual field constriction with a ring scotoma, loss of acuity, and an abnormal electroretinogram (ERG). It occurs sporadically or in an autosomal recessive, dominant, or X-linked pattern. Irregular black deposits of clumped pigment in the peripheral retina, called bone spicules because of their vague resemblance to the spicules of cancellous bone, give the disease its name (Fig. 28-17). The name is actually a misnomer because retinitis pigmentosa is not an inflammatory process. Most cases are due to a mutation in the gene for rhodopsin, the rod photopigment, or in the gene for peripherin, a glycoprotein located in photoreceptor outer segments. Vitamin A (15,000 IU/d) slightly retards the deterioration of the ERG in patients with retinitis pigmentosa but has no beneficial effect on visual acuity or fields.

Figure 28-17

 
 
 
Retinitis pigmentosa with black clumps of pigment in the retinal periphery known as "bone spicules." There is also atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, making the vasculature of the choroid easily visible.
 
 

Leber's congenital amaurosis, a rare cone dystrophy, has been treated by replacement of the missing RPE65 protein through gene therapy, resulting in modest improvement in visual function. Some forms of retinitis pigmentosa occur in association with rare, hereditary systemic diseases (olivopontocerebellar degeneration, Bassen-Kornzweig disease, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, Refsum's disease). Chronic treatment with chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, and phenothiazines (especially thioridazine) can produce visual loss from a toxic retinopathy that resembles retinitis pigmentosa.

Epiretinal Membrane

This is a fibrocellular tissue that grows across the inner surface of the retina, causing metamorphopsia and reduced visual acuity from distortion of the macula. A crinkled, cellophane-like membrane is visible on the retinal examination. Epiretinal membrane is most common in patients over 50 years of age and is usually unilateral. Most cases are idiopathic, but some occur as a result of hypertensive retinopathy, diabetes, retinal detachment, or trauma. When visual acuity is reduced to the level of about 6/24 (20/80), vitrectomy and surgical peeling of the membrane to relieve macular puckering are recommended. Contraction of an epiretinal membrane sometimes gives rise to a macular hole. Most macular holes, however, are caused by local vitreous traction within the fovea. Vitrectomy can improve acuity in selected cases.

Melanoma and Other Tumors

Melanoma is the most common primary tumor of the eye (Fig. 28-18). It causes photopsia, an enlarging scotoma, and loss of vision. A small melanoma is often difficult to differentiate from a benign choroidal nevus. Serial examinations are required to document a malignant pattern of growth. Treatment of melanoma is controversial. Options include enucleation, local resection, and irradiation. Metastatic tumors to the eye outnumber primary tumors. Breast and lung carcinomas have a special propensity to spread to the choroid or iris. Leukemia and lymphoma also commonly invade ocular tissues. Sometimes their only sign on eye examination is cellular debris in the vitreous, which can masquerade as a chronic posterior uveitis. Retrobulbar tumor of the optic nerve (meningioma, glioma) or chiasmal tumor (pituitary adenoma, meningioma) produces gradual visual loss with few objective findings except for optic disc pallor. Rarely, sudden expansion of a pituitary adenoma from infarction and bleeding (pituitary apoplexy) causes acute retrobulbar visual loss, with headache, nausea, and ocular motor nerve palsies. In any patient with visual field loss or optic atrophy, CT or MR scanning should be considered if the cause remains unknown after careful review of the history and thorough examination of the eye.

Figure 28-18

 
 
 
Melanoma of the choroid, appearing as an elevated dark mass in the inferior temporal fundus, just encroaching upon the fovea.
 
 

Proptosis

When the globes appear asymmetric, the clinician must first decide which eye is abnormal. Is one eye recessed within the orbit (enophthalmos), or is the other eye protuberant (exophthalmos, or proptosis)? A small globe or a Horner's syndrome can give the appearance of enophthalmos. True enophthalmos occurs commonly after trauma, from atrophy of retrobulbar fat, or from fracture of the orbital floor. The position of the eyes within the orbits is measured by using a Hertel exophthalmometer, a handheld instrument that records the position of the anterior corneal surface relative to the lateral orbital rim. If this instrument is not available, relative eye position can be judged by bending the patient's head forward and looking down upon the orbits. A proptosis of only 2 mm in one eye is detectable from this perspective. The development of proptosis implies a space-occupying lesion in the orbit and usually warrants CT or MR imaging.

Graves' Ophthalmopathy

This is the leading cause of proptosis in adults (Chap. 341). The proptosis is often asymmetric and can even appear to be unilateral. Orbital inflammation and engorgement of the extraocular muscles, particularly the medial rectus and the inferior rectus, account for the protrusion of the globe. Corneal exposure, lid retraction, conjunctival injection, restriction of gaze, diplopia, and visual loss from optic nerve compression are cardinal symptoms. Graves' ophthalmopathy is treated with oral prednisone (60 mg/d) for 1 month, followed by a taper over several months, topical lubricants, eyelid surgery, eye muscle surgery, or orbital decompression. Radiation therapy is not effective.

Orbital Pseudotumor

This is an idiopathic, inflammatory orbital syndrome that frequently is confused with Graves' ophthalmopathy. Symptoms are pain, limited eye movements, proptosis, and congestion. Evaluation for sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), and other types of orbital vasculitis or collagen-vascular disease is negative. Imaging often shows swollen eye muscles (orbital myositis) with enlarged tendons. By contrast, in Graves' ophthalmopathy the tendons of the eye muscles usually are spared. The Tolosa-Hunt syndrome may be regarded as an extension of orbital pseudotumor through the superior orbital fissure into the cavernous sinus. The diagnosis of orbital pseudotumor is difficult. Biopsy of the orbit frequently yields nonspecific evidence of fat infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. A dramatic response to a therapeutic trial of systemic glucocorticoids indirectly provides the best confirmation of the diagnosis.

Orbital Cellulitis

This causes pain, lid erythema, proptosis, conjunctival chemosis, restricted motility, decreased acuity, afferent pupillary defect, fever, and leukocytosis. It often arises from the paranasal sinuses, especially by contiguous spread of infection from the ethmoid sinus through the lamina papyracea of the medial orbit. A history of recent upper respiratory tract infection, chronic sinusitis, thick mucus secretions, or dental disease is significant in any patient with suspected orbital cellulitis. Blood cultures should be obtained, but they are usually negative. Most patients respond to empirical therapy with broad-spectrum IV antibiotics. Occasionally, orbital cellulitis follows an overwhelming course, with massive proptosis, blindness, septic cavernous sinus thrombosis, and meningitis. To avert this disaster, orbital cellulitis should be managed aggressively in the early stages, with immediate imaging of the orbits and antibiotic therapy that includes coverage of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Prompt surgical drainage of an orbital abscess or paranasal sinusitis is indicated if optic nerve function deteriorates despite antibiotics.

Tumors

Tumors of the orbit cause painless, progressive proptosis. The most common primary tumors are hemangioma, lymphangioma, neurofibroma, dermoid cyst, adenoid cystic carcinoma, optic nerve glioma, optic nerve meningioma, and benign mixed tumor of the lacrimal gland. Metastatic tumor to the orbit occurs frequently in breast carcinoma, lung carcinoma, and lymphoma. Diagnosis by fine-needle aspiration followed by urgent radiation therapy sometimes can preserve vision.

Carotid Cavernous Fistulas

With anterior drainage through the orbit these fistulas produce proptosis, diplopia, glaucoma, and corkscrew, arterialized conjunctival vessels. Direct fistulas usually result from trauma. They are easily diagnosed because of the prominent signs produced by high-flow, high-pressure shunting. Indirect fistulas, or dural arteriovenous malformations, are more likely to occur spontaneously, especially in older women. The signs are more subtle, and the diagnosis frequently is missed. The combination of slight proptosis, diplopia, enlarged muscles, and an injected eye often is mistaken for thyroid ophthalmopathy. A bruit heard upon auscultation of the head or reported by the patient is a valuable diagnostic clue. Imaging shows an enlarged superior ophthalmic vein in the orbits. Carotid cavernous shunts can be eliminated by intravascular embolization.

Ptosis

Blepharoptosis

This is an abnormal drooping of the eyelid. Unilateral or bilateral ptosis can be congenital, from dysgenesis of the levator palpebrae superioris, or from abnormal insertion of its aponeurosis into the eyelid. Acquired ptosis can develop so gradually that the patient is unaware of the problem. Inspection of old photographs is helpful in dating the onset. A history of prior trauma, eye surgery, contact lens use, diplopia, systemic symptoms (e.g., dysphagia or peripheral muscle weakness), or a family history of ptosis should be sought. Fluctuating ptosis that worsens late in the day is typical of myasthenia gravis. Examination should focus on evidence for proptosis, eyelid masses or deformities, inflammation, pupil inequality, or limitation of motility. The width of the palpebral fissures is measured in primary gaze to quantitate the degree of ptosis. The ptosis will be underestimated if the patient compensates by lifting the brow with the frontalis muscle.

Mechanical Ptosis

This occurs in many elderly patients from stretching and redundancy of eyelid skin and subcutaneous fat (dermatochalasis). The extra weight of these sagging tissues causes the lid to droop. Enlargement or deformation of the eyelid from infection, tumor, trauma, or inflammation also results in ptosis on a purely mechanical basis.

Aponeurotic Ptosis

This is an acquired dehiscence or stretching of the aponeurotic tendon, which connects the levator muscle to the tarsal plate of the eyelid. It occurs commonly in older patients, presumably from loss of connective tissue elasticity. Aponeurotic ptosis is also a common sequela of eyelid swelling from infection or blunt trauma to the orbit, cataract surgery, or hard contact lens use.

Myogenic Ptosis

The causes of myogenic ptosis include myasthenia gravis (Chap. 386) and a number of rare myopathies that manifest with ptosis. The term chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia refers to a spectrum of systemic diseases caused by mutations of mitochondrial DNA. As the name implies, the most prominent findings are symmetric, slowly progressive ptosis and limitation of eye movements. In general, diplopia is a late symptom because all eye movements are reduced equally. In the Kearns-Sayre variant, retinal pigmentary changes and abnormalities of cardiac conduction develop. Peripheral muscle biopsy shows characteristic "ragged-red fibers." Oculopharyngeal dystrophy is a distinct autosomal dominant disease with onset in middle age, characterized by ptosis, limited eye movements, and trouble swallowing. Myotonic dystrophy, another autosomal dominant disorder, causes ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, cataract, and pigmentary retinopathy. Patients have muscle wasting, myotonia, frontal balding, and cardiac abnormalities.

Neurogenic Ptosis

This results from a lesion affecting the innervation to either of the two muscles that open the eyelid: M邦ller's muscle or the levator palpebrae superioris. Examination of the pupil helps distinguish between these two possibilities. In Horner's syndrome, the eye with ptosis has a smaller pupil and the eye movements are full. In an oculomotor nerve palsy, the eye with the ptosis has a larger or a normal pupil. If the pupil is normal but there is limitation of adduction, elevation, and depression, a pupil-sparing oculomotor nerve palsy is likely (see next section). Rarely, a lesion affecting the small, central subnucleus of the oculomotor complex will cause bilateral ptosis with normal eye movements and pupils.

Double Vision (Diplopia)

The first point to clarify is whether diplopia persists in either eye after the opposite eye is covered. If it does, the diagnosis is monocular diplopia. The cause is usually intrinsic to the eye and therefore has no dire implications for the patient. Corneal aberrations (e.g., keratoconus, pterygium), uncorrected refractive error, cataract, or foveal traction may give rise to monocular diplopia. Occasionally it is a symptom of malingering or psychiatric disease. Diplopia alleviated by covering one eye is binocular diplopia and is caused by disruption of ocular alignment. Inquiry should be made into the nature of the double vision (purely side-by-side versus partial vertical displacement of images), mode of onset, duration, intermittency, diurnal variation, and associated neurologic or systemic symptoms. If the patient has diplopia while being examined, motility testing should reveal a deficiency corresponding to the patient's symptoms. However, subtle limitation of ocular excursions is often difficult to detect. For example, a patient with a slight left abducens nerve paresis may appear to have full eye movements despite a complaint of horizontal diplopia upon looking to the left. In this situation, the cover test provides a more sensitive method for demonstrating the ocular misalignment. It should be conducted in primary gaze and then with the head turned and tilted in each direction. In the above example, a cover test with the head turned to the right will maximize the fixation shift evoked by the cover test.

Occasionally, a cover test performed in an asymptomatic patient during a routine examination will reveal an ocular deviation. If the eye movements are full and the ocular misalignment is equal in all directions of gaze (concomitant deviation), the diagnosis is strabismus. In this condition, which affects about 1% of the population, fusion is disrupted in infancy or early childhood. To avoid diplopia, vision is suppressed from the nonfixating eye. In some children, this leads to impaired vision (amblyopia, or "lazy" eye) in the deviated eye.

Binocular diplopia results from a wide range of processes: infectious, neoplastic, metabolic, degenerative, inflammatory, and vascular. One must decide whether the diplopia is neurogenic in origin or is due to restriction of globe rotation by local disease in the orbit. Orbital pseudotumor, myositis, infection, tumor, thyroid disease, and muscle entrapment (e.g., from a blowout fracture) cause restrictive diplopia. The diagnosis of restriction is usually made by recognizing other associated signs and symptoms of local orbital disease in conjunction with imaging.

Myasthenia Gravis

(See also Chap. 386) This is a major cause of diplopia. The diplopia is often intermittent, variable, and not confined to any single ocular motor nerve distribution. The pupils are always normal. Fluctuating ptosis may be present. Many patients have a purely ocular form of the disease, with no evidence of systemic muscular weakness. The diagnosis can be confirmed by an IV edrophonium injection or by an assay for antiacetylcholine receptor antibodies. Negative results from these tests do not exclude the diagnosis. Botulism from food or wound poisoning can mimic ocular myasthenia.

After restrictive orbital disease and myasthenia gravis are excluded, a lesion of a cranial nerve supplying innervation to the extraocular muscles is the most likely cause of binocular diplopia.

Oculomotor Nerve

The third cranial nerve innervates the medial, inferior, and superior recti; inferior oblique; levator palpebrae superioris; and the iris sphincter. Total palsy of the oculomotor nerve causes ptosis, results in a dilated pupil, and leaves the eye "down and out" because of the unopposed action of the lateral rectus and superior oblique. This combination of findings is obvious. More challenging is the diagnosis of early or partial oculomotor nerve palsy. In this setting, any combination of ptosis, pupil dilation, and weakness of the eye muscles supplied by the oculomotor nerve may be encountered. Frequent serial examinations during the evolving phase of the palsy help ensure that the diagnosis is not missed. The advent of an oculomotor nerve palsy with a pupil involvement, especially when accompanied by pain, suggests a compressive lesion, such as a tumor or circle of Willis aneurysm. Neuroimaging should be obtained, along with a CT or MR angiogram. Occasionally, a catheter arteriogram must be done to exclude an aneurysm.

A lesion of the oculomotor nucleus in the rostral midbrain produces signs that differ from those caused by a lesion of the nerve itself. There is bilateral ptosis because the levator muscle is innervated by a single central subnucleus. There is also weakness of the contralateral superior rectus, because it is supplied by the oculomotor nucleus on the other side. Occasionally both superior recti are weak. Isolated nuclear oculomotor palsy is rare. Usually neurologic examination reveals additional signs that suggest brainstem damage from infarction, hemorrhage, tumor, or infection.

Injury to structures surrounding fascicles of the oculomotor nerve descending through the midbrain has given rise to a number of classic eponymic designations. In Nothnagel's syndrome, injury to the superior cerebellar peduncle causes ipsilateral oculomotor palsy and contralateral cerebellar ataxia. In Benedikt's syndrome, injury to the red nucleus results in ipsilateral oculomotor palsy and contralateral tremor, chorea, and athetosis. Claude's syndrome incorporates features of both of these syndromes, by injury to both the red nucleus and the superior cerebellar peduncle. Finally, in Weber's syndrome, injury to the cerebral peduncle causes ipsilateral oculomotor palsy with contralateral hemiparesis.

In the subarachnoid space the oculomotor nerve is vulnerable to aneurysm, meningitis, tumor, infarction, and compression. In cerebral herniation the nerve becomes trapped between the edge of the tentorium and the uncus of the temporal lobe. Oculomotor palsy also can result from midbrain torsion and hemorrhages during herniation. In the cavernous sinus, oculomotor palsy arises from carotid aneurysm, carotid cavernous fistula, cavernous sinus thrombosis, tumor (pituitary adenoma, meningioma, metastasis), herpes zoster infection, and the Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.

The etiology of an isolated, pupil-sparing oculomotor palsy often remains an enigma even after neuroimaging and extensive laboratory testing. Most cases are thought to result from microvascular infarction of the nerve somewhere along its course from the brainstem to the orbit. Usually the patient complains of pain. Diabetes, hypertension, and vascular disease are major risk factors. Spontaneous recovery over a period of months is the rule. If this fails to occur or if new findings develop, the diagnosis of microvascular oculomotor nerve palsy should be reconsidered. Aberrant regeneration is common when the oculomotor nerve is injured by trauma or compression (tumor, aneurysm). Miswiring of sprouting fibers to the levator muscle and the rectus muscles results in elevation of the eyelid upon downgaze or adduction. The pupil also constricts upon attempted adduction, elevation, or depression of the globe. Aberrant regeneration is not seen after oculomotor palsy from microvascular infarct and hence vitiates that diagnosis.

Trochlear Nerve

The fourth cranial nerve originates in the midbrain, just caudal to the oculomotor nerve complex. Fibers exit the brainstem dorsally and cross to innervate the contralateral superior oblique. The principal actions of this muscle are to depress and intort the globe. A palsy therefore results in hypertropia and excyclotorsion. The cyclotorsion seldom is noticed by patients. Instead, they complain of vertical diplopia, especially upon reading or looking down. The vertical diplopia also is exacerbated by tilting the head toward the side with the muscle palsy and alleviated by tilting it away. This "head tilt test" is a cardinal diagnostic feature.

Isolated trochlear nerve palsy results from all the causes listed above for the oculomotor nerve except aneurysm. The trochlear nerve is particularly apt to suffer injury after closed head trauma. The free edge of the tentorium is thought to impinge on the nerve during a concussive blow. Most isolated trochlear nerve palsies are idiopathic and hence are diagnosed by exclusion as "microvascular." Spontaneous improvement occurs over a period of months in most patients. A base-down prism (conveniently applied to the patient's glasses as a stick-on Fresnel lens) may serve as a temporary measure to alleviate diplopia. If the palsy does not resolve, the eyes can be realigned by weakening the inferior oblique muscle.

Abducens Nerve

The sixth cranial nerve innervates the lateral rectus muscle. A palsy produces horizontal diplopia, worse on gaze to the side of the lesion. A nuclear lesion has different consequences, because the abducens nucleus contains interneurons that project via the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the medial rectus subnucleus of the contralateral oculomotor complex. Therefore, an abducens nuclear lesion produces a complete lateral gaze palsy from weakness of both the ipsilateral lateral rectus and the contralateral medial rectus. Foville's syndrome after dorsal pontine injury includes lateral gaze palsy, ipsilateral facial palsy, and contralateral hemiparesis incurred by damage to descending corticospinal fibers. Millard-Gubler syndrome from ventral pontine injury is similar except for the eye findings. There is lateral rectus weakness only, instead of gaze palsy, because the abducens fascicle is injured rather than the nucleus. Infarct, tumor, hemorrhage, vascular malformation, and multiple sclerosis are the most common etiologies of brainstem abducens palsy.

After leaving the ventral pons, the abducens nerve runs forward along the clivus to pierce the dura at the petrous apex, where it enters the cavernous sinus. Along its subarachnoid course it is susceptible to meningitis, tumor (meningioma, chordoma, carcinomatous meningitis), subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, and compression by aneurysm or dolichoectatic vessels. At the petrous apex, mastoiditis can produce deafness, pain, and ipsilateral abducens palsy (Gradenigo's syndrome). In the cavernous sinus, the nerve can be affected by carotid aneurysm, carotid cavernous fistula, tumor (pituitary adenoma, meningioma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma), herpes infection, and Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.

Unilateral or bilateral abducens palsy is a classic sign of raised intracranial pressure. The diagnosis can be confirmed if papilledema is observed on fundus examination. The mechanism is still debated but probably is related to rostral-caudal displacement of the brainstem. The same phenomenon accounts for abducens palsy from low intracranial pressure (e.g., after lumbar puncture, spinal anesthesia, or spontaneous dural cerebrospinal fluid leak).

Treatment of abducens palsy is aimed at prompt correction of the underlying cause. However, the cause remains obscure in many instances despite diligent evaluation. As was mentioned above for isolated trochlear or oculomotor palsy, most cases are assumed to represent microvascular infarcts because they often occur in the setting of diabetes or other vascular risk factors. Some cases may develop as a postinfectious mononeuritis (e.g., after a viral flu). Patching one eye or applying a temporary prism will provide relief of diplopia until the palsy resolves. If recovery is incomplete, eye muscle surgery nearly always can realign the eyes, at least in primary position. A patient with an abducens palsy that fails to improve should be reevaluated for an occult etiology (e.g., chordoma, carcinomatous meningitis, carotid cavernous fistula, myasthenia gravis). Skull base tumors are easily missed even on contrast-enhanced neuroimaging studies.

Multiple Ocular Motor Nerve Palsies

These should not be attributed to spontaneous microvascular events affecting more than one cranial nerve at a time. This remarkable coincidence does occur, especially in diabetic patients, but the diagnosis is made only in retrospect after all other diagnostic alternatives have been exhausted. Neuroimaging should focus on the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure, and orbital apex, where all three ocular motor nerves are in close proximity. In a diabetic or immunocompromised host, fungal infection (Aspergillus, Mucorales, Cryptococcus) is a common cause of multiple nerve palsies. In a patient with systemic malignancy, carcinomatous meningitis is a likely diagnosis. Cytologic examination may be negative despite repeated sampling of the cerebrospinal fluid. The cancer-associated Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome also can produce ophthalmoplegia. Giant cell (temporal) arteritis occasionally manifests as diplopia from ischemic palsies of extraocular muscles. Fisher's syndrome, an ocular variant of Guillain-Barr谷, produces ophthalmoplegia with areflexia and ataxia. Often the ataxia is mild, and the reflexes are normal. Antiganglioside antibodies (GQ1b) can be detected in about 50% of cases.

Supranuclear Disorders of Gaze

These are often mistaken for multiple ocular motor nerve palsies. For example, Wernicke's encephalopathy can produce nystagmus and a partial deficit of horizontal and vertical gaze that mimics a combined abducens and oculomotor nerve palsy. The disorder occurs in malnourished or alcoholic patients and can be reversed by thiamine. Infarct, hemorrhage, tumor, multiple sclerosis, encephalitis, vasculitis, and Whipple's disease are other important causes of supranuclear gaze palsy. Disorders of vertical gaze, especially downward saccades, are an early feature of progressive supranuclear palsy. Smooth pursuit is affected later in the course of the disease. Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and olivopontocerebellar degeneration also can affect vertical gaze.

The frontal eye field of the cerebral cortex is involved in generation of saccades to the contralateral side. After hemispheric stroke, the eyes usually deviate toward the lesioned side because of the unopposed action of the frontal eye field in the normal hemisphere. With time, this deficit resolves. Seizures generally have the opposite effect: the eyes deviate conjugately away from the irritative focus. Parietal lesions disrupt smooth pursuit of targets moving toward the side of the lesion. Bilateral parietal lesions produce B芍lint's syndrome, which is characterized by impaired eye-hand coordination (optic ataxia), difficulty initiating voluntary eye movements (ocular apraxia), and visuospatial disorientation (simultanagnosia).

Horizontal Gaze

Descending cortical inputs mediating horizontal gaze ultimately converge at the level of the pons. Neurons in the paramedian pontine reticular formation are responsible for controlling conjugate gaze toward the same side. They project directly to the ipsilateral abducens nucleus. A lesion of either the paramedian pontine reticular formation or the abducens nucleus causes an ipsilateral conjugate gaze palsy. Lesions at either locus produce nearly identical clinical syndromes, with the following exception: vestibular stimulation (oculocephalic maneuver or caloric irrigation) will succeed in driving the eyes conjugately to the side in a patient with a lesion of the paramedian pontine reticular formation but not in a patient with a lesion of the abducens nucleus.

Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia

This results from damage to the medial longitudinal fasciculus ascending from the abducens nucleus in the pons to the oculomotor nucleus in the midbrain (hence, "internuclear"). Damage to fibers carrying the conjugate signal from abducens interneurons to the contralateral medial rectus motoneurons results in a failure of adduction on attempted lateral gaze. For example, a patient with a left internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO) will have slowed or absent adducting movements of the left eye (Fig. 28-19). A patient with bilateral injury to the medial longitudinal fasciculus will have bilateral INO. Multiple sclerosis is the most common cause, although tumor, stroke, trauma, or any brainstem process may be responsible. One-and-a-half syndrome is due to a combined lesion of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the abducens nucleus on the same side. The patient's only horizontal eye movement is abduction of the eye on the other side.

Figure 28-19

 
 
 
 
 
 
Left internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO). A. In primary position of gaze the eyes appear normal. B. Horizontal gaze to the left is intact. C. On attempted horizontal gaze to the right, the left eye fails to adduct. In mildly affected patients the eye may adduct partially or more slowly than normal. Nystagmus is usually present in the abducted eye. D. T2-weighted axial MRI image through the pons showing a demyelinating plaque in the left medial longitudinal fasciculus (arrow).
 
 

Vertical Gaze

This is controlled at the level of the midbrain. The neuronal circuits affected in disorders of vertical gaze are not fully elucidated, but lesions of the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal cause supranuclear paresis of upgaze, downgaze, or all vertical eye movements. Distal basilar artery ischemia is the most common etiology. Skew deviation refers to a vertical misalignment of the eyes, usually constant in all positions of gaze. The finding has poor localizing value because skew deviation has been reported after lesions in widespread regions of the brainstem and cerebellum.

Parinaud's Syndrome

Also known as dorsal midbrain syndrome, this is a distinct supranuclear vertical gaze disorder caused by damage to the posterior commissure. It is a classic sign of hydrocephalus from aqueductal stenosis. Pineal region tumors, cysticercosis, and stroke also cause Parinaud's syndrome. Features include loss of upgaze (and sometimes downgaze), convergence-retraction nystagmus on attempted upgaze, downward ocular deviation ("setting sun" sign), lid retraction (Collier's sign), skew deviation, pseudoabducens palsy, and light-near dissociation of the pupils.

Nystagmus

This is a rhythmic oscillation of the eyes, occurring physiologically from vestibular and optokinetic stimulation or pathologically in a wide variety of diseases (Chap. 21). Abnormalities of the eyes or optic nerves, present at birth or acquired in childhood, can produce a complex, searching nystagmus with irregular pendular (sinusoidal) and jerk features. This nystagmus is commonly referred to as congenital sensory nystagmus. This is a poor term because even in children with congenital lesions, the nystagmus does not appear until several months of age. Congenital motor nystagmus, which looks similar to congenital sensory nystagmus, develops in the absence of any abnormality of the sensory visual system. Visual acuity also is reduced in congenital motor nystagmus, probably by the nystagmus itself, but seldom below a level of 20/200.

Jerk Nystagmus

This is characterized by a slow drift off the target, followed by a fast corrective saccade. By convention, the nystagmus is named after the quick phase. Jerk nystagmus can be downbeat, upbeat, horizontal (left or right), and torsional. The pattern of nystagmus may vary with gaze position. Some patients will be oblivious to their nystagmus. Others will complain of blurred vision or a subjective to-and-fro movement of the environment (oscillopsia) corresponding to the nystagmus. Fine nystagmus may be difficult to see on gross examination of the eyes. Observation of nystagmoid movements of the optic disc on ophthalmoscopy is a sensitive way to detect subtle nystagmus.

Gaze-Evoked Nystagmus

This is the most common form of jerk nystagmus. When the eyes are held eccentrically in the orbits, they have a natural tendency to drift back to primary position. The subject compensates by making a corrective saccade to maintain the deviated eye position. Many normal patients have mild gaze-evoked nystagmus. Exaggerated gaze-evoked nystagmus can be induced by drugs (sedatives, anticonvulsants, alcohol); muscle paresis; myasthenia gravis; demyelinating disease; and cerebellopontine angle, brainstem, and cerebellar lesions.

Vestibular Nystagmus

Vestibular nystagmus results from dysfunction of the labyrinth (M谷ni豕re's disease), vestibular nerve, or vestibular nucleus in the brainstem. Peripheral vestibular nystagmus often occurs in discrete attacks, with symptoms of nausea and vertigo. There may be associated tinnitus and hearing loss. Sudden shifts in head position may provoke or exacerbate symptoms.

Downbeat Nystagmus

Downbeat nystagmus results from lesions near the craniocervical junction (Chiari malformation, basilar invagination). It also has been reported in brainstem or cerebellar stroke, lithium or anticonvulsant intoxication, alcoholism, and multiple sclerosis. Upbeat nystagmus is associated with damage to the pontine tegmentum from stroke, demyelination, or tumor.

Opsoclonus

This rare, dramatic disorder of eye movements consists of bursts of consecutive saccades (saccadomania). When the saccades are confined to the horizontal plane, the term ocular flutter is preferred. It can result from viral encephalitis, trauma, or a paraneoplastic effect of neuroblastoma, breast carcinoma, and other malignancies. It has also been reported as a benign, transient phenomenon in otherwise healthy patients.
 
Further Readings

Albert DM et al (eds): Albert and Jakobiec's Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008 

 
Cheung N et al: Diabetic retinopathy. Lancet 376:124, 2010 [PMID: 20580421] 

 
D'amico DJ: Clinical practice: Primary retinal detachment. N Engl J Med 359:2346, 2008 [PMID: 21607619] 

 
Jager RD et al: Age-related macular degeneration. N Engl J Med 358:2606, 2008 [PMID: 18550876] 

 
Maguire AM et al: Safety and efficacy of gene transfer for Leber's congenital amaurosis. N Engl J Med 358:2240, 2008 [PMID: 18441370] 

 
Mancuso K et al: Gene therapy for red-green colour blindness in adult primates. Nature 461:784, 2009 [PMID: 19759534] 

 
Optic Neuritis Study Group: Multiple sclerosis risk after optic neuritis: Final optic neuritis treatment trial follow-up. Arch Neurol 65:1545, 2008 

 
 

^^
Disorders of Smell and Taste: Introduction

All environmental chemicals necessary for life enter the body by the nose and mouth. The senses of smell (olfaction) and taste (gustation) monitor those chemicals, determine the flavor and palatability of foods and beverages, and warn of dangerous environmental conditions, including fire, air pollution, leaking natural gas, and bacteria-laden foodstuffs. These senses contribute significantly to quality of life and, when dysfunctional, can have untoward physical and psychological consequences. A basic understanding of these senses in health and disease is critical for the physician, since thousands of patients present to doctors' offices each year with complaints of chemosensory dysfunction. Among the more important developments in neurology has been the discovery that decreased smell function is perhaps the first sign of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), signifying their "presymptomatic" phase.

Anatomy and Physiology

Olfactory System

Odorous chemicals enter the nose during inhalation and active sniffing as well as during deglutition. After reaching the highest recesses of the nasal cavity, they dissolve in the olfactory mucus and diffuse or are actively transported to receptors on the cilia of olfactory receptor cells. The cilia, dendrites, cell bodies, and proximal axonal segments of these bipolar cells are situated within a specialized neuroepithelium that covers the cribriform plate, the superior nasal septum, the superior turbinate, and sectors of the middle turbinate (Fig. 29-1). Each of the 6 million bipolar receptor cells expresses only one of 450 receptor protein types, most of which respond to more than a single chemical. When damaged, the receptor cells can be replaced by stem cells near the basement membrane. Unfortunately, such replacement is often incomplete.

Figure 29-1

 
 
 
Anatomy of the olfactory neural pathways, showing the distribution of olfactory receptors in the roof of the nasal cavity. [Copyright David Klemm, Faculty and Curriculum Support (FACS), Georgetown University Medical Center; used with permission.]
 
 


After coalescing into bundles surrounded by glia-like ensheathing cells (termed fila), the receptor cell axons pass through the cribriform plate to the olfactory bulbs, where they synapse with dendrites of other cell types within the glomeruli (Fig. 29-2). These spherical structures, which make up a distinct layer of the olfactory bulb, are a site of convergence of information, since many more fibers enter than leave them. Receptor cells that express the same type of receptor project to the same glomeruli, effectively making each glomerulus a functional unit. The major projection neurons of the olfactory system〞the mitral and tufted cells〞send primary dendrites into the glomeruli, connecting not only with the incoming receptor cell axons but with dendrites of periglomerular cells. The activity of the mitral/tufted cells is modulated by the periglomerular cells, secondary dendrites from other mitral/tufted cells, and granule cells, the most numerous cells of the bulb. The latter cells, which are largely GABAergic, receive inputs from central brain structures and modulate the output of the mitral/tufted cells. Interestingly, like the olfactory receptor cells, some cells within the bulb undergo replacement. Thus, neuroblasts formed within the anterior subventricular zone of the brain migrate along the rostral migratory stream, ultimately becoming granule and periglomerular cells.

Figure 29-2

 
 
 
Schematic of the layers and wiring of the olfactory bulb. Each receptor type (red, green, blue) projects to a common glomerulus. The neural activity within each glomerulus is modulated by periglomerular cells. The activity of the primary projection cells, the mitral and tufted cells, is modulated by granule cells, periglomerular cells, and secondary dendrites from other mitral and tufted cells. (From www.med.yale.edu/neurosurg/treloar/index.html.)
 
 


The axons of the mitral and tufted cells synapse within the primary olfactory cortex (POC) (Fig. 29-3). The POC is defined as the cortical structures that receive direct projections from the olfactory bulb, most notably the piriform and entorhinal cortices. Although olfaction is unique in that its initial afferent projections bypass the thalamus, persons with damage to the thalamus can exhibit olfactory deficits, particularly ones of odor identification. Those deficits probably reflect the involvement of thalamic connections between the primary olfactory cortex and the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), where odor identification occurs. The close anatomic ties between the olfactory system and the amygdala, hippocampus, and hypothalamus help explain the intimate associations between odor perception and cognitive functions such as memory, motivation, arousal, autonomic activity, digestion, and sex.

Figure 29-3

 
 
 
Anatomy of the base of the brain showing the primary olfactory cortex.
 
 

Taste System

Tastants are sensed by specialized receptor cells present within taste buds: small grapefruit-like segmented structures on the lateral margins and dorsum of the tongue, the roof of the mouth, the pharynx, the larynx, and the superior esophagus (Fig. 29-4). Lingual taste buds are embedded in well-defined protuberances termed fungiform, foliate, and circumvallate papillae. After dissolving in a liquid, tastants enter the opening of the taste bud〞the taste pore〞and bind to receptors on microvilli, small extensions of receptor cells within each taste bud. Such binding changes the electrical potential across the taste cell, resulting in neurotransmitter release onto the first-order taste neurons. Although humans have 7500 taste buds, not all harbor taste-sensitive cells; some contain only one class of receptor (e.g., cells responsive only to sugars), whereas others contain cells sensitive to more than one class. The number of taste receptor cells per taste bud ranges from zero to well over 100. A small family of three G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)〞T1R1, T1R2, and T1R3〞mediate sweet and umami taste sensations. Umami ("savory") refers to the flavors of meat, cheese, and broth due to glutamate and related compounds. Bitter sensations, in contrast, depend on T2R receptors, a family of 30 GPCRs expressed on cells different from those which express the sweet and umami receptors. T2Rs sense a wide range of bitter substances but do not distinguish among them. Sour tastants are sensed by the PKD2L1 receptor, a member of the transient receptor potential protein (TRP) family. Perception of salty sensations, such as those induced by sodium chloride, arises from the entry of Na+ ions into the cells via specialized membrane channels such as the amiloride-sensitive Na+ channel.

Figure 29-4

 
 
 
Schematic of the taste bud and its opening (pore), as well as the location of buds on the three major types of papillae: fungiform (anterior), foliate (lateral), and circumvallate (posterior). TRC, taste receptor cell.
 
 


Taste information is sent to the brain via three cranial nerves (CNs): CN VII (the facial nerve, which involves the intermediate nerve with its branches, the greater petrosal and chorda tympani nerves); CN IX (the glossopharyngeal nerve); and CN X (the vagus nerve) (Fig. 29-5). CN VII innervates the anterior tongue and all of the soft palate, CN IX innervates the posterior tongue, and CN X innervates the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis, the larynx, and the proximal portion of the esophagus. The mandibular branch of CN V (V3) conveys somatosensory information (e.g., touch, burning, cooling, irritation) to the brain. Although not technically a gustatory nerve, CN V shares primary nerve routes with many of the gustatory nerve fibers and adds temperature, texture, pungency, and spiciness to the taste experience. The chorda tympani nerve is notable for taking a recurrent course through the facial canal in the petrosal portion of the temporal bone, passing through the middle ear, then exiting the skull via the petrotympanic fissure, where it joins the lingual nerve (a division of CN V) near the tongue. This nerve also carries parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular and sublingual glands, whereas the greater petrosal nerve supplies the palatine glands, thereby influencing saliva production.

Figure 29-5

 
 
 
Schematic of the cranial nerves that mediate taste function, including the chorda tympani nerve (CN VII), the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), and the vagus nerve (CN X). [Copyright David Klemm, Faculty and Curriculum Support (FACS), Georgetown University Medical Center; used with permission.]
 
 

The axons of the projection cells that synapse with taste buds enter the rostral portion of the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) within the medulla of the brainstem (Fig. 29-5). From the NTS, neurons then project to a division of the ventroposteromedial thalamic nucleus (VPM) via the medial lemniscus. From there projections are made to the rostral part of the frontal operculum and adjoining insula, a brain region considered the primary taste cortex (PTC). Projections from the primary taste cortex then go to the secondary taste cortex, namely, the caudolateral OFC. This brain region is involved in the conscious recognition of taste qualities. Moreover, since it contains cells that are activated by several sensory modalities, it is probably a center for establishing "flavor."

Disorders of Olfaction

The ability to smell is influenced by factors such as age, sex, general health, nutrition, smoking, and reproductive state. Women typically outperform men on tests of olfactory function and retain normal smell function to a later age. Significant decrements in the ability to smell are present in over 50% of the population between 65 and 80 years of age and in 75% of those 80 years and older (Fig. 29-6). Such presbyosmia helps explain why many elderly persons report that food has little flavor, a problem that can result in nutritional disturbances. It also helps explain why a disproportionate number of the elderly die in accidental gas poisonings. A relatively complete listing of conditions and disorders that have been associated with olfactory dysfunction is presented in Table 29-1.

Figure 29-6

 
 
 
Scores on the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) as a function of subject age and sex. Numbers by each data point indicate sample sizes. Note that women identify odorants better than men at all ages. (From Doty et al: Science 226:1421, 1984. Copyright 1984 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)
 
 
Table 29-1 Disorders and Conditions Associated with Compromised Olfactory Function as Measured by Olfactory Testing

 
 
22q11 deletion syndrome Liver disease 
AIDS/HIV infection Lubag disease 
Adenoid hypertrophy Medications 
Adrenal cortical insufficiency Migraine 
Age Multiple sclerosis 
Alcoholism Multi-infarct dementia 
Allergies Narcolepsy with cataplexy 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nutritional deficiencies 
Anorexia nervosa Obstructive pulmonary disease 
Asperger's syndrome Obesity 
Ataxias Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder Orthostatic tremor 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome Panic disorder 
Chemical exposure Parkinson's disease 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Pick's disease 
Congenital Posttraumatic stress disorder 
Cushing's syndrome Pregnancy 
Cystic fibrosis Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
Degenerative ataxias Psychopathy 
Diabetes Radiation (therapeutic, cranial) 
Down syndrome REM behavior disorder 
Epilepsy Refsum disease 
Facial paralysis Renal failure/end-stage kidney disease 
Frontotemporal lobe degeneration Restless leg syndrome 
Gonadal dysgenesis (Turner syndrome) Rhinosinusitis/polyposis 
Guamanian ALS/PD/dementia syndrome Schizophrenia 
Head trauma Seasonal affective disorder 
Herpes simplex encephalitis Sj?gren's syndrome 
Hypothyroidism Stroke 
Huntington's disease Tobacco smoking 
Iatrogenesis Toxic chemical exposure 
Kallmann's syndrome Upper respiratory infections 
Korsakoff's psychosis Usher syndrome 
Leprosy Vitamin B12 deficiency 
 

 

Aside from aging, the three most common identifiable causes of long-lasting or permanent smell loss seen in the clinic are, in order of frequency, severe upper respiratory infections, head trauma, and chronic rhinosinusitis. The physiologic basis for most head trauma每related losses is the shearing and subsequent scarring of the olfactory fila as they pass from the nasal cavity into the brain cavity. The cribriform plate does not have to be fractured or show pathology for smell loss to be present. Severity of trauma, as indexed by a poor Glasgow Coma Rating on presentation and the length of posttraumatic amnesia, is associated with higher risk of olfactory impairment. Fewer than 10% of posttraumatic anosmic patients recover age-related normal function over time. Upper respiratory infections, such as those associated with the common cold, influenza, pneumonia, or HIV, can directly and permanently harm the olfactory epithelium by decreasing receptor cell numbers, damaging cilia on remaining receptor cells, and inducing the replacement of sensory epithelium with respiratory epithelium. The smell loss associated with chronic rhinosinusitis is related to disease severity, with most loss occurring in cases in which rhinosinusitis and polyposis are both present. Although systemic glucocorticoid therapy usually can induce short-term functional improvement, it does not, on average, return smell test scores to normal, implying that chronic permanent neural loss is present and/or that short-term administration of systemic glucocorticoids does not mitigate the inflammation completely. It is well established that microinflammation in an otherwise seemingly normal epithelium can influence smell function.

A number of neurodegenerative diseases are accompanied by olfactory impairment, including AD, PD, Huntington's disease, Down syndrome, parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), multiple system atrophy, vascular parkinsonism, corticobasal syndrome, frontotemporal dementia, multiple sclerosis (MS), and idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) behavioral sleep disorder (iRBD). The olfactory disturbance of MS varies as a function of the plaque activity within the frontal and temporal lobes. In postmortem studies of patients with very mild "presymptomatic" signs of AD, poorer smell function has been associated with higher levels of AD-related pathology even after controlling for apolipoprotein E4 alleles and the level of episodic memory function present at the time of olfactory testing. Olfactory impairment in PD often predates the clinical diagnosis by at least 4 years. Studies of the sequence of Lewy body and abnormal -synuclein development in staged PD cases, along with evidence that the smell loss presents early, is stable over time, and is not affected by PD medications, suggest that the olfactory bulbs may be, along with the dorsomotor nucleus of the vagus, the site of first neural damage in PD. Smell loss is more marked in patients with early clinical manifestations of DLB than in those with mild AD. Interestingly, smell loss is minimal or nonexistent in progressive supranuclear palsy and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced parkinsonism.

The smell loss seen in iRBD is of the same magnitude as that found in PD. This is of particular interest to clinicians since patients with iRBD frequently develop PD and hyposmia. iRBD may actually represent an early associated condition of PD. REM behavior disorder not only is seen in its idiopathic form but also can be associated with narcolepsy. This led to a study of narcoleptic patients with and without REM behavior disorder that demonstrated that narcolepsy, independent of REM behavior disorder, was associated with significant impairments in olfactory function. Orexin A, also known as hypocretin-1, is dramatically diminished or undetectable in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with narcolepsy and cataplexy. The orexin-containing neurons in the hypothalamus project throughout the olfactory system (from the olfactory epithelium to the olfactory cortex), and damage to these orexin-containing projections may be one underlying mechanism for impaired olfactory performance in narcoleptic patients. The administration of intranasal orexin A (hypocretin-1) appears to result in improved olfactory function relative to a placebo, supporting the notion that mild olfactory impairment is not only a primary feature of narcolepsy with cataplexies but that CNS orexin deficiency may be a fundamental part of the mechanism for this loss.

Disorders of Taste

The majority of patients who present with complaints of taste dysfunction exhibit olfactory, not taste, loss. This is the case because most flavors attributed to taste actually depend on retronasal stimulation of the olfactory receptors during deglutition. As noted earlier, taste buds only mediate basic tastes such as sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami. Significant impairment of whole-mouth gustatory function is rare outside of generalized metabolic disturbances or systemic use of some medications, since taste bud regeneration occurs and peripheral damage alone would require the involvement of multiple cranial nerve pathways. Nonetheless, taste can be influenced by (1) the release of foul-tasting materials from the oral cavity from oral medical conditions and appliances (e.g. gingivitis, purulent sialadenitis), (2) transport problems of tastants to the taste buds (e.g., drying of the orolingual mucosa, infections, inflammatory conditions), (3) damage to the taste buds themselves (e.g., local trauma, invasive carcinomas), (4) damage to the neural pathways innervating the taste buds (e.g., middle ear infections), (5) damage to central structures (e.g., multiple sclerosis, tumor, epilepsy, stroke), and(6) systemic disturbances of metabolism (e.g., diabetes, thyroid disease, medications). Bell's palsy is among the most common causes of CN VII injury that results in taste disturbance. Unlike CN VII, CN IX is relatively protected along its path, although iatrogenic interventions such as tonsillectomy, bronchoscopy, laryngoscopy, and radiation therapy can result in selective injury. Migraine is associated on rare occasions with a gustatory prodrome or aura, and certain tastes may trigger a migraine. Although a number of disorders can affect CN IX, including tumors, trauma, vascular lesions, and infection, it remains unclear if noticeable taste disturbance can result from such factors.

Although both taste and smell can be adversely influenced by pharmacologic agents, drug-related taste alterations are more common. Indeed, over 250 medications have been reported to alter the ability to taste. Major offenders include antineoplastic agents, antirheumatic drugs, antibiotics, and blood pressure medications. Terbinafine, a commonly used antifungal, has been linked to taste disturbance lasting up to 3 years. In a controlled trial, nearly two-thirds of individuals taking eszopiclone (Lunesta) experienced a bitter dysgeusia which was stronger in women, systematically related to the time since drug administration, and positively correlated with both blood and saliva levels of the drug. Intranasal use of nasal gels and sprays containing zinc〞common over-the-counter prophylactics for upper respiratory viral infections〞has been implicated in loss of smell function. Whether their efficacy in preventing such infections, which are the most common cause of anosmia and hyposmia, outweighs their potential detriment to smell function requires study.

As with olfaction, a number of systemic disorders can affect taste. They include chronic renal failure, end-stage liver disease, vitamin and mineral deficiencies, diabetes, and hypothyroidism, to name a few. Psychiatric conditions can be associated with chemosensory alterations (e.g., depression, schizophrenia, bulimia). A review of tactile, gustatory, and olfactory hallucinations demonstrated that no one type of hallucinatory experience is pathognomonic to any specific diagnosis.

Clinical Evaluation

In most cases, a careful clinical history will establish the probable etiology of a chemosensory problem, including questions about its nature, onset, duration, and pattern of fluctuations. Sudden loss suggests the possibility of head trauma, ischemia, infection, or a psychiatric condition. Gradual loss can reflect the development of a progressive obstructive lesion. Intermittent loss suggests the likelihood of an inflammatory process. The patient should be asked about potential precipitating events, such as cold or flu infections before symptom onset, as they often are underappreciated. Information regarding head trauma, smoking habits, drug and alcohol abuse (e.g., intranasal cocaine, chronic alcoholism in the context of Wernicke's and Korsakoff's syndromes), exposures to pesticides and other toxic agents, and medical interventions are also informative. A determination of all the medications the patient was taking before and at the time of symptom onset is important, since many can cause chemosensory disturbances. Comorbid medical conditions associated with smell impairment, such as renal failure, liver disease, hypothyroidism, diabetes, and dementia, should be assessed. Delayed puberty in association with anosmia (with or without midline craniofacial abnormalities, deafness, and renal anomalies) suggests the possibility of Kallmann syndrome. Recollection of epistaxis, discharge (clear, purulent, or bloody), nasal obstruction, allergies, and somatic symptoms, including headache or irritation, may have localizing value. Questions related to memory, parkinsonian signs, and seizure activity (e.g., automatisms, occurrence of blackouts, auras, and d谷j角vu) should be posed. Pending litigation and the possibility of malingering should be considered.

Neurologic and otorhinolaryngologic (ORL) examinations, along with appropriate brain and nasosinus imaging, aid in the evaluation of patients with olfactory or gustatory complaints. The neural evaluation should focus on cranial nerve function, with particular attention to possible skull base and intracranial lesions. Visual acuity, field, and optic disc examinations aid in the detection of intracranial mass lesions that induce elevations in intracranial pressure (papilledema) and optic atrophy, especially when one is considering Foster Kennedy syndrome (ipsilateral optic nerve atrophy and contralateral papilledema usually due to a meningioma near the olfactory bulb or tract). The ORL examination should thoroughly assess the intranasal architecture and mucosal surfaces. Polyps, masses, and adhesions of the turbinates to the septum may compromise the flow of air to the olfactory receptors, since less than a fifth of the inspired air traverses the olfactory cleft in the unobstructed state. Blood serum tests may be helpful to identify conditions such as diabetes, infection, heavy metal exposure, nutritional deficiency (e.g., vitamins B6 and B12), allergy, and thyroid, liver, and kidney disease.

As with other sensory disorders, quantitative sensory testing is advised. Self-reports of patients can be misleading, and a number who complain of chemosensory dysfunction have normal function for their age and sex. Quantitative smell and taste testing provides valid information for worker's compensation and other legal claims as well as a way to assess treatment interventions accurately. A number of standardized olfactory and taste tests are commercially available. Most evaluate the ability of patients to detect and identify odors or tastes. For example, the most widely used of these tests, the 40-item University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT), employs norms based on nearly 4000 normal subjects. A determination is made of both absolute dysfunction (i.e., mild loss, moderate loss, severe loss, total loss, probable malingering) and relative dysfunction (percentile rank for age and sex). Although electrophysiologic testing is available at some smell and taste centers (e.g., odor event-related potentials), such tests require complex stimulus presentation and recording equipment and rarely provide additional diagnostic information. In addition to electrogustometers, commercial chemical taste tests are now available. Most employ filter paper strips impregnated with tastants, so no stimulus preparation is required. Like the UPSIT, these tests have published norms for establishing the degree of dysfunction.

Treatment and Management

Because of the various mechanisms by which olfactory and gustatory disturbance can occur, management of patients tends to be condition-specific. For example, patients with hypothyroidism, diabetes, or infections need to be given specific treatments to correct the underlying process adversely influencing chemoreception. For most patients who present primarily with obstructive/transport loss affecting the nasal and paranasal regions (e.g., allergic rhinitis, polyposis, intranasal neoplasms, nasal deviations), medical and/or surgical intervention is often beneficial. Antifungal and antibiotic treatments may reverse taste problems secondary to candidiasis or other oral infections. Chlorohexidine mouthwash mitigates some salty or bitter dysgeusias, conceivably as a result of its strong positive charge. Excessive dryness of the oral mucosa is a problem with many medications and conditions, and artificial saliva (e.g., Xerolube) or oral pilocarpine treatments may prove beneficial. Other methods to improve salivary flow include the use of mints, lozenges, or sugarless gum. Flavor enhancers may make food more palatable (e.g., monosodium glutamate), but caution is advised to avoid overusing ingredients containing sodium or sugar, particularly in circumstances in which a patient also has underlying hypertension or diabetes. Medications that induce distortions of taste often can be discontinued and replaced with other types of medications or modes of therapy. As mentioned earlier, pharmacologic agents result in taste disturbances much more frequently than smell disturbances, and over 250 medications have been reported to alter the sense of taste. Many drug-related effects are long-lasting and are not reversed by short-term drug discontinuance.

A study of endoscopic sinus surgery in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis and hyposmia revealed that patients with severe olfactory dysfunction before the surgery had a more dramatic and sustained improvement over time compared with patients with more mild olfactory dysfunction before intervention. In the case of intranasal and sinus-related inflammatory conditions such as those seen with allergy, viruses, and traumas, the use of intranasal or systemic glucocorticoids may be helpful. One common approach is a short course of oral prednisone, typically 60 mg daily for 4 days and then tapered by 10 mg daily. The utility of restoring olfaction with either topical or systemic glucocorticoids has been studied. Topical intranasal glucocorticoids were less effective in general than systemic glucocorticoids; however, nasal steroid administration techniques were not analyzed. Intranasal glucocorticoids are more effective if administered in Moffett's position (head in the inverted position such as over the edge of the bed with the bridge of the nose perpendicular to the floor). After head trauma, an initial trial of glucocorticoids may help reduce local edema and the potential deleterious deposition of scar tissue around olfactory fila at the level of the cribriform plate.

Treatments are limited for patients with chemosensory loss or primary injury to neural pathways. Nonetheless, spontaneous recovery can occur. In a follow-up study of 542 patients presenting with smell loss from a variety of causes, modest improvement occurred over an average period of 4 years in about half the participants. However, only 11% of the anosmic and 23% of the hyposmic patients regained normal age-related function. Interestingly, the amount of dysfunction present at the time of presentation, not etiology, was the best predictor of prognosis. Other predictors were the patient's age and the time between the onset of dysfunction and initial testing.

A nonblinded study reported that patients with hyposmia may benefit from smelling strong odors (e.g., eucalyptol, citronella, eugenol, and phenyl ethyl alcohol) before going to bed and immediately upon awaking each day over the course of several months. The rationale for this approach comes from animal studies demonstrating that prolonged exposure to odorants can induce increased neural activity within the olfactory bulb. -Lipoic acid (200 mg two or three times daily), an essential cofactor for many enzyme complexes with possible antioxidant effects, has been reported to be beneficial in mitigating smell loss after viral infection of the upper respiratory tract, although double-blind studies are needed to confirm this observation. This agent has also been suggested to be useful in some cases of hypogeusia and burning mouth syndrome.

The use of zinc and vitamin A in treating olfactory disturbances is controversial; not much benefit is obtained beyond replenishing established deficiencies. However, zinc improves taste function secondary to hepatic deficiencies, and retinoids (bioactive vitamin A derivatives) are known to play an essential role in the survival of olfactory neurons. One protocol in which zinc was infused with chemotherapy treatments suggested a possible protective effect against developing taste impairment. Diseases of the alimentary tract can not only influence chemoreceptive function but occasionally influence B12 absorption. This can result in a relative deficiency of B12, theoretically contributing to olfactory nerve disturbance. B2 (riboflavin) and magnesium supplements are reported in the alternative medicine literature to aid in the management of migraine headaches that may be associated with smell dysfunction.

A number of medicines have been reported to ameliorate olfactory symptoms, although strong scientific evidence for efficacy is generally lacking. A report that theophylline improved smell function was not double-blinded and lacked a control group, failing to take into account that some meaningful improvement occurs without treatment. Indeed, the percentage of patients reported to be responsive to the treatment was about the same as that noted by others to show spontaneous improvement over a similar time period (50%). Antiepileptics and some antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline) have been used to treat dysosmias and smell distortions, particularly after head trauma. Ironically, amitriptyline is also frequently on the list of medications that can ultimately distort smell and taste function, possibly from its anticholinergic effects. The use of donepezil (an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor) in AD may result in improvements in smell identification measures that correlate with overall clinician-based impressions of change scales [Clinician Interview Based Impression of Severity (CIBIC)-plus]. Smell identification function could become a useful measure to assess overall treatment response with this medication.

A major and often overlooked element of therapy comes from chemosensory testing itself. Confirmation or lack of confirmation of loss is beneficial to patients who come to believe, in light of unsupportive family members and medical providers, that they may be "crazy." In cases in which the loss is minor, patients can be informed of the likelihood of a more positive prognosis. Importantly, quantitative testing places the patient's problem into overall perspective. Thus, it is often therapeutic for an older person to know that although his or her smell function is not what it used to be, it still falls above the average of his or her peer group. Without testing, many such patients are simply told they are getting old and nothing can be done for them, leading in some cases to depression and decreased self-esteem.
 
Further Readings

Bromley SM, Doty RL: Olfaction in dentistry. Oral Dis 16:221, 2010 [PMID: 19732354] 

 
Calder辰n-Garcidue?as L et al: Urban air pollution: Influences on olfactory function and pathology in exposed children and young adults. Exp Toxicol Pathol 62:91, 2010 [PMID: 21602559] 

 
Deems DA et al: Smell and taste disorders: A study of 750 patients from the University of Pennsylvania Smell and Taste Center. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 117:519, 1991 [PMID: 2021470] 

 
Doty RL: The olfactory vector hypothesis of neurodegenerative disease: Is it viable? Ann Neurol 63:7, 2008 [PMID: 18232016] 

 
〞〞〞 (ed): Handbook of Olfaction and Gustation. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2003 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Drug-induced taste disorders: Incidence, prevention and management. Drug Safety 31:199, 2008 

 
Gottfried JA: Function follows form: Ecological constraints on odor codes and olfactory percepts. Curr Opin Neurobiol 19:422, 2009 [PMID: 19671493] 

 
Hawkes CH, Doty RL. Neurology of Olfaction. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2009 

 
Kern RC: Chronic sinusitis and anosmia: Pathologic changes in the olfactory mucosa. Laryngoscope 110:1071, 2000 [PMID: 10892672] 

 
London B et al: Predictors of prognosis in patients with olfactory disturbance. Ann Neurol 63:159, 2008 [PMID: 18058814] 
 
 

^^
Disorders of Hearing: Introduction

Hearing loss is one of the most common sensory disorders in humans and can present at any age. Nearly 10% of the adult population has some hearing loss, and one-third of individuals age >65 years have a hearing loss of sufficient magnitude to require a hearing aid.

Physiology of Hearing

The function of the external and middle ear is to amplify sound to facilitate conversion of the mechanical energy of the sound wave into an electrical signal by the inner ear hair cells, a process called mechanotransduction (Fig. 30-1). Sound waves enter the external auditory canal and set the tympanic membrane in motion, which in turn moves the malleus, incus, and stapes of the middle ear. Movement of the footplate of the stapes causes pressure changes in the fluid-filled inner ear, eliciting a traveling wave in the basilar membrane of the cochlea. The tympanic membrane and the ossicular chain in the middle ear serve as an impedance-matching mechanism, improving the efficiency of energy transfer from air to the fluid-filled inner ear.

Figure 30-1

 
 
 
 
Ear anatomy. A. Drawing of modified coronal section through external ear and temporal bone, with structures of the middle and inner ear demonstrated. B. High-resolution view of inner ear.
 
 

Stereocilia of the hair cells of the organ of Corti, which rests on the basilar membrane, are in contact with the tectorial membrane and are deformed by the traveling wave. A point of maximal displacement of the basilar membrane is determined by the frequency of the stimulating tone. High-frequency tones cause maximal displacement of the basilar membrane near the base of the cochlea, whereas for low-frequency sounds, the point of maximal displacement is toward the apex of the cochlea.

The inner and outer hair cells of the organ of Corti have different innervation patterns, but both are mechanoreceptors. The afferent innervation relates principally to the inner hair cells, and the efferent innervation relates principally to outer hair cells. The motility of the outer hair cells alters the micromechanics of the inner hair cells, creating a cochlear amplifier, which explains the exquisite sensitivity and frequency selectivity of the cochlea.

Beginning in the cochlea, the frequency specificity is maintained at each point of the central auditory pathway: dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei, trapezoid body, superior olivary complex, lateral lemniscus, inferior colliculus, medial geniculate body, and auditory cortex. At low frequencies, individual auditory nerve fibers can respond more or less synchronously with the stimulating tone. At higher frequencies, phase-locking occurs so that neurons alternate in response to particular phases of the cycle of the sound wave. Intensity is encoded by the amount of neural activity in individual neurons, the number of neurons that are active, and the specific neurons that are activated.

Disorders of the Sense of Hearing

Hearing loss can result from disorders of the auricle, external auditory canal, middle ear, inner ear, or central auditory pathways (Fig. 30-2). In general, lesions in the auricle, external auditory canal, or middle ear that impede the transmission of sound from the external environment to the inner ear cause conductive hearing loss, whereas lesions that impair mechanotransduction in the inner ear or transmission of the electrical signal along the eighth nerve to the brain cause sensorineural hearing loss.

Figure 30-2

 
 
 
An algorithm for the approach to hearing loss. HL, hearing loss; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; TM, tympanic membrane; SOM, serous otitis media; AOM, acute otitis media; BAER, brainstem auditory evoked response; *, CT scan of temporal bone; , MRI scan.
 
 

Conductive Hearing Loss

The external ear, the external auditory canal, and the middle ear apparatus is designed to collect and amplify sound and efficiently transfer the mechanical energy of the sound wave to the fluid-filled cochlea. Factors that obstruct the transmission of sound or serve to dampen the acoustical energy result in conductive hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss can occur from obstruction of the external auditory canal by cerumen, debris, and foreign bodies; swelling of the lining of the canal; atresia or neoplasms of the canal; perforations of the tympanic membrane; disruption of the ossicular chain, as occurs with necrosis of the long process of the incus in trauma or infection; otosclerosis; or fluid, scarring, or neoplasms in the middle ear. Rarely, inner ear malformations or pathologies may also be associated with conductive hearing loss.

Eustachian tube dysfunction is extremely common in adults and may predispose to acute otitis media (AOM) or serous otitis media (SOM). Trauma, AOM, or chronic otitis media are the usual factors responsible for tympanic membrane perforation. While small perforations often heal spontaneously, larger defects usually require surgical intervention. Tympanoplasty is highly effective (>90%) in the repair of tympanic membrane perforations. Otoscopy is usually sufficient to diagnose AOM, SOM, chronic otitis media, cerumen impaction, tympanic membrane perforation, and eustachian tube dysfunction; tympanometry can be useful to confirm the clinical suspicion of these conditions.

Cholesteatoma, a benign tumor composed of stratified squamous epithelium in the middle ear or mastoid, occurs frequently in adults. This is a slowly growing lesion that destroys bone and normal ear tissue. Theories of pathogenesis include traumatic immigration and invasion of squamous epithelium through a retraction pocket, implantation of squamous epithelia in the middle ear through a perforation or surgery, and metaplasia following chronic infection and irritation. On examination, there is often a perforation of the tympanic membrane filled with cheesy white squamous debris. A chronically draining ear that fails to respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy should raise suspicion of a cholesteatoma. Conductive hearing loss secondary to ossicular erosion is common. Surgery is required to remove this destructive process.

Conductive hearing loss with a normal ear canal and intact tympanic membrane suggests either ossicular pathology or the presence of "third window" in the inner ear (see below). Fixation of the stapes from otosclerosis is a common cause of low-frequency conductive hearing loss. It occurs equally in men and women and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance; in some cases, it may be a manifestation of osteogenesis imperfecta. Hearing impairment usually presents between the late teens and the forties. In women, the otosclerotic process is accelerated during pregnancy, and the hearing loss is often first noticeable at this time. A hearing aid or a simple outpatient surgical procedure (stapedectomy) can provide adequate auditory rehabilitation. Extension of otosclerosis beyond the stapes footplate to involve the cochlea (cochlear otosclerosis) can lead to mixed or sensorineural hearing loss. Fluoride therapy to prevent hearing loss from cochlear otosclerosis is of uncertain value.

Disorders that lead to the formation of a pathologic "third window" in the inner ear can be associated with conductive hearing loss. There are normally two major openings, or windows, that connect the inner ear with the middle ear and serve as conduits for transmission of sound; these are, respectively, the oval and round windows. A third window is formed where the normally hard otic bone surrounding the inner ear is eroded; dissipation of the acoustic energy at the third window is responsible for the "inner ear conductive hearing loss." The superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome resulting from erosion of the otic bone over the superior circular canal can present with conductive hearing loss that mimics otosclerosis. A common symptom is vertigo evoked by loud sounds (Tullio phenomenon), by Valsalva maneuvers that change middle ear pressure, or by applying positive pressure on the tragus (the cartilage anterior to the external opening of the ear canal),. Patients with this syndrome also complain of being able to hear the movement of their eyes and neck. A large jugular bulb or jugular bulb diverticulum can create a "third window" by eroding into the vestibular aqueduct or posterior semicircular canal; the symptoms are similar to those of the superior semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome.

Sensorineural Hearing Loss

Sensorineural hearing loss results from either damage to the mechanotransduction apparatus of the cochlea or disruption of the electrical conduction pathway from the inner ear to the brain. Thus, injury to hair cells, supporting cells, auditory neurons, or the central auditory pathway can cause sensorineural hearing loss. Damage to the hair cells of the organ of Corti may be caused by intense noise, viral infections, ototoxic drugs (e.g., salicylates, quinine and its synthetic analogues, aminoglycoside antibiotics, loop diuretics such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid, and cancer chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin), fractures of the temporal bone, meningitis, cochlear otosclerosis (see above), M谷ni豕re's disease, and aging. Congenital malformations of the inner ear may be the cause of hearing loss in some adults. Genetic predisposition alone or in concert with environmental exposures may also be responsible (see below).

Presbycusis (age-associated hearing loss) is the most common cause of sensorineural hearing loss in adults. In the early stages, it is characterized by symmetric, gentle to sharply sloping high-frequency hearing loss. With progression, the hearing loss involves all frequencies. More importantly, the hearing impairment is associated with significant loss in clarity. There is a loss of discrimination for phonemes, recruitment (abnormal growth of loudness), and particular difficulty in understanding speech in noisy environments such as at restaurants and social events. Hearing aids are helpful in enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio by amplifying sounds that are close to the listener. Although hearing aids are able to amplify sounds, they cannot restore the clarity of hearing. Thus, amplification with hearing aids may provide only limited rehabilitation once the word recognition score deteriorates below 50%. Cochlear implants are the treatment of choice when hearing aids prove inadequate, even when hearing loss is incomplete (see below).

M谷ni豕re's disease is characterized by episodic vertigo, fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus, and aural fullness. Tinnitus and/or deafness may be absent during the initial attacks of vertigo, but it invariably appears as the disease progresses and increases in severity during acute attacks. The annual incidence of M谷ni豕re's disease is 0.5每7.5 per 1000; onset is most frequently in the fifth decade of life but may also occur in young adults or the elderly. Histologically, there is distention of the endolymphatic system (endolymphatic hydrops) leading to degeneration of vestibular and cochlear hair cells. This may result from endolymphatic sac dysfunction secondary to infection, trauma, autoimmune disease, inflammatory causes, or tumor; an idiopathic etiology constitutes the largest category and is most accurately referred to as M谷ni豕re's disease. Although any pattern of hearing loss can be observed, typically, low-frequency, unilateral sensorineural hearing impairment is present. MRI should be obtained to exclude retrocochlear pathology such as a cerebellopontine angle tumor or demyelinating disorder. Therapy is directed toward the control of vertigo. A 2-g/d low-salt diet is the mainstay of treatment for control of rotatory vertigo. Diuretics, a short course of glucocorticoids, and intratympanic gentamicin may also be useful adjuncts in recalcitrant cases. Surgical therapy of vertigo is reserved for unresponsive cases and includes endolymphatic sac decompression, labyrinthectomy, and vestibular nerve section. Both labyrinthectomy and vestibular nerve section abolish rotatory vertigo in >90% of cases. Unfortunately, there is no effective therapy for hearing loss, tinnitus, or aural fullness from M谷ni豕re's disease.

Sensorineural hearing loss may also result from any neoplastic, vascular, demyelinating, infectious, or degenerative disease or trauma affecting the central auditory pathways. HIV leads to both peripheral and central auditory system pathology and is associated with sensorineural hearing impairment.

Primary diseases of the central nervous system can also present with hearing impairment. Characteristically, a reduction in clarity of hearing and speech comprehension is much greater than the loss of the ability to hear pure tone. Auditory testing is consistent with an auditory neuropathy; normal otoacoustic emissions (OAE) and an abnormal auditory brainstem response (ABR) is typical (see below). Hearing loss can accompany hereditary sensorimotor neuropathies and inherited disorders of myelin. Tumors of the cerebellopontine angle such as vestibular schwannoma and meningioma usually present with asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss with greater deterioration of speech understanding than pure tone hearing. Multiple sclerosis may present with acute unilateral or bilateral hearing loss; typically, pure tone testing remains relatively stable while speech understanding fluctuates. Isolated labyrinthine infarction can present with acute hearing loss and vertigo due to a cerebrovascular accident involving the posterior circulation, usually the anterior inferior cerebellar artery; it may also be the heralding sign of impending catastrophic basilar artery infarction (Chap. 370).

A finding of conductive and sensory hearing loss in combination is termed mixed hearing loss. Mixed hearing losses are due to pathology of both the middle and inner ear, as can occur in otosclerosis involving the ossicles and the cochlea, head trauma, chronic otitis media, cholesteatoma, middle ear tumors, and some inner ear malformations.

Trauma resulting in temporal bone fractures may be associated with conductive, sensorineural, or mixed hearing loss. If the fracture spares the inner ear, there may simply be conductive hearing loss due to rupture of the tympanic membrane or disruption of the ossicular chain. These abnormalities can be surgically corrected. Profound hearing loss and severe vertigo are associated with temporal bone fractures involving the inner ear. A perilymphatic fistula associated with leakage of inner ear fluid into the middle ear can occur and may require surgical repair. An associated facial nerve injury is not uncommon. CT is best suited to assess fracture of the traumatized temporal bone, evaluate the ear canal, and determine the integrity of the ossicular chain and the involvement of the inner ear. CSF leaks that accompany temporal bone fractures are usually self-limited; the value of prophylactic antibiotics is uncertain.

Tinnitus is defined as the perception of a sound when there is no sound in the environment. It may have a buzzing, roaring, or ringing quality and may be pulsatile (synchronous with the heartbeat). Tinnitus is often associated with either a conductive or sensorineural hearing loss. The pathophysiology of tinnitus is not well understood. The cause of the tinnitus can usually be determined by finding the cause of the associated hearing loss. Tinnitus may be the first symptom of a serious condition such as a vestibular schwannoma. Pulsatile tinnitus requires evaluation of the vascular system of the head to exclude vascular tumors such as glomus jugulare tumors, aneurysms, dural arteriovenous fistulas, and stenotic arterial lesions; it may also occur with SOM. It is most commonly associated with some abnormality of the jugular bulb such as a large jugular bulb or jugular bulb diverticulum.

Genetic Causes of Hearing Loss

More than half of childhood hearing impairment is thought to be hereditary; hereditary hearing impairment (HHI) can also manifest later in life. HHI may be classified as either nonsyndromic, when hearing loss is the only clinical abnormality, or syndromic, when hearing loss is associated with anomalies in other organ systems. Nearly two-thirds of HHIs are nonsyndromic, and the remaining one-third are syndromic. Between 70 and 80% of nonsyndromic HHI is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and designated DFNB; another 15每20% is autosomal dominant (DFNA). Less than 5% is X-linked or maternally inherited via the mitochondria.

Nearly 100 loci harboring genes for nonsyndromic HHI have been mapped, with equal numbers of dominant and recessive modes of inheritance; numerous genes have now been cloned (Table 30-1). The hearing genes fall into the categories of structural proteins (MYH9, MYO7A, MYO15, TECTA, DIAPH1), transcription factors (POU3F4, POU4F3), ion channels (KCNQ4, SLC26A4), and gap junction proteins (GJB2, GJB3, GJB6). Several of these genes, including GJB2, TECTA, and TMC1, cause both autosomal dominant and recessive forms of nonsyndromic HHI. In general, the hearing loss associated with dominant genes has its onset in adolescence or adulthood and varies in severity, whereas the hearing loss associated with recessive inheritance is congenital and profound. Connexin 26, product of the GJB2 gene, is particularly important because it is responsible for nearly 20% of all cases of childhood deafness; half of genetic deafness in children is GJB2-related. Two frameshift mutations, 35delG and 167delT, account for >50% of the cases; however, screening for these two mutations alone is insufficient and sequencing of the entire gene is required to diagnose GJB2-related recessive deafness. The 167delT mutation is highly prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews; 1 in 1765 individuals in this population are homozygous and affected. The hearing loss can also vary among the members of the same family, suggesting that other genes or factors influence the auditory phenotype.

Table 30-1 Hereditary Hearing Impairment Genes

 
 
Designation Gene Function 
Autosomal Dominant  
  CRYM  Thyroid hormone?binding protein 
DFNA1 DIAPH1  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNA2A KCNQ4  Potassium channel 
DFNA2B GJB3 (Cx31)  Gap junction 
DFNA3A GJB2 (Cx26)  Gap junction 
DFNA3B GJB6 (Cx30)  Gap junction 
DFNA4 MYH14  Class II nonmuscle myosin 
DFNA5 DFNA5  Unknown 
DFNA6/14/38 WFS1  Transmembrane protein 
DFNA8/12 TECTA  Tectorial membrane protein 
DFNA9 COCH  Unknown 
DFNA10 EYA4  Developmental gene 
DFNA11 MYO7A  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNA13 COL11A2  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNA15 POU4F3  Transcription factor 
DFNA17 MYH9  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNA20/26 ACTG1  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNA22 MYO6  Unconventional myosin 
DFNA28 TFCP2L3  Transcription factor 
DFNA36 TMC1  Transmembrane protein 
DFNA44 CCDC50  Effector of EGF-mediated signaling 
DFNA48 MYO1A  Unconventional myosin 
DFNA50 MIRN96  MicroRNA 
DFNA51 TJP2  Tight junction protein 
Autosomal Recessive  
DFNB1A GJB2 (CX26)  Gap junction 
DFNB1B GJB6 (CX30)  Gap junction 
DFNB2 MYO7A  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNB3 MYO15  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNB4 PDS(SLC26A4)  Chloride/iodide transporter 
DFNB6 TMIE  Transmembrane protein 
DFNB7/B11 TMC1  Transmembrane protein 
DFNB9 OTOF  Trafficking of membrane vesicles 
DFNB8/10 TMPRSS3  Transmembrane serine protease 
DFNB12 CDH23  Intercellular adherence protein 
DFNB16 STRC  Stereocilia protein 
DFNB18 USH1C  Unknown 
DFNB21 TECTA  Tectorial membrane protein 
DFNB22 OTOA  Gel attachment to nonsensory 
DFNB23 PCDH15  Morphogenesis and cohesion 
DFNB24 RDX  Cytoskeletal protein 
DFNB25 GRXCR1  Reversible S-glutathionylation proteins 
DFNB28 TRIOBP  Cytoskeletal-organizing protein 
DFNB29 CLDN14  Tight junctions 
DFNB30 MYO3A  Hybrid motor-signaling myosin 
DFNB31 WHRN  PDZ domain?containing protein 
DFNB35 ESRRB  Estrogen-related receptor beta protein 
DFNB36 ESPN  Ca-insensitive actin-bundling protein 
DFNB37 MYO6  Unconventional myosin 
DFNB39 HFG  Hepatocyte growth factor 
DFNB49 MARVELD2  Tight junction protein 
DFNB53 COL11A2  Collagen protein 
DFNB59 PJVK  Zn-binding protein 
DFNB61 SLC26A5  Motor protein 
DFNB63 LRTOMT/COMT2  Putative methyltransferase 
DFNB66/67 LHFPL5  Tetraspan protein 
DFNB77 LOXHD1  Stereociliary protein 
DFNB79 TPRN  Unknown 
DFNB82 GPSM2  G protein signaling modulator 
DFNB84 PTPRQ  Type III receptor-like proteintyrosine phosphatase family 
 

 

In addition to GJB2, several other nonsyndromic genes are associated with hearing loss that progresses with age. The contribution of genetics to presbycusis is also becoming better understood. Sensitivity to aminoglycoside ototoxicity can be maternally transmitted through a mitochondrial mutation. Susceptibility to noise-induced hearing loss may also be genetically determined.

There are >400 syndromic forms of hearing loss. These include Usher syndrome (retinitis pigmentosa and hearing loss), Waardenburg syndrome (pigmentary abnormality and hearing loss), Pendred syndrome (thyroid organification defect and hearing loss), Alport syndrome (renal disease and hearing loss), Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (prolonged QT interval and hearing loss), neurofibromatosis type 2 (bilateral acoustic schwannoma), and mitochondrial disorders [mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS); myoclonic epilepsy and ragged red fibers (MERRF); progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO)] (Table 30-2).

Table 30-2 Syndromic Hereditary Hearing Impairment Genes

 
 
Syndrome Gene Function 
Alport syndrome COL4A3-5  Cytoskeletal protein 
BOR syndrome EYA1  Developmental gene 
  SIX5  Developmental gene 
  SIX1  Developmental gene 
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome KCNQ1

KCNE1
 Delayed rectifier K+ channel

Delayed rectifier K+ channel
 
Norrie disease NDP  Cell-cell interactions 
Pendred syndrome SLC26A4  Chloride/iodide transporter 
  FOXI1  Transcriptional activator of SLC26A4  
Treacher Collins TCOF1  Nucleolar-cytoplasmic transport 
Usher syndrome MYO7A  Cytoskeletal protein 
  USH1C  Unknown 
  CDH23  Intercellular adherence protein 
  PCDH15  Cell adhesion molecule 
  SANS  Harmonin-associated protein 
  USH2A  Cell adhesion molecule 
  VLGR1  G protein每coupled receptor 
  USH3  Unknown 
  WHRN  PDZ domain?containing protein 
WS type I, III PAX3  Transcription factor 
WS type II MITF  Transcription factor 
  SNAI2  Transcription factor 
WS type IV EDNRB  Endothelin B receptor 
  EDN3  Endothelin B receptor ligand 
  SOX10  Transcription factor 
 


Abbreviations: BOR, branchio-oto-renal syndrome; WS, Waardenburg syndrome.
 

Approach to the Patient: Disorders of the Sense of Hearing

The goal in the evaluation of a patient with auditory complaints is to determine (1) the nature of the hearing impairment (conductive vs. sensorineural vs. mixed), (2) the severity of the impairment (mild, moderate, severe, profound), (3) the anatomy of the impairment (external ear, middle ear, inner ear, or central auditory pathway), and (4) the etiology. The history should elicit characteristics of the hearing loss, including the duration of deafness, unilateral vs. bilateral involvement, nature of onset (sudden vs. insidious), and rate of progression (rapid vs. slow). Symptoms of tinnitus, vertigo, imbalance, aural fullness, otorrhea, headache, facial nerve dysfunction, and head and neck paresthesias should be noted. Information regarding head trauma, exposure to ototoxins, occupational or recreational noise exposure, and family history of hearing impairment may also be important. A sudden onset of unilateral hearing loss, with or without tinnitus, may represent a viral infection of the inner ear or a stroke. Patients with unilateral hearing loss (sensory or conductive) usually complain of reduced hearing, poor sound localization, and difficulty hearing clearly with background noise. Gradual progression of a hearing deficit is common with otosclerosis, noise-induced hearing loss, vestibular schwannoma, or M谷ni豕re's disease. Small vestibular schwannomas typically present with asymmetric hearing impairment, tinnitus, and imbalance (rarely vertigo); cranial neuropathy, in particular of the trigeminal or facial nerve, may accompany larger tumors. In addition to hearing loss, M谷ni豕re's disease may be associated with episodic vertigo, tinnitus, and aural fullness. Hearing loss with otorrhea is most likely due to chronic otitis media or cholesteatoma.

Examination should include the auricle, external ear canal, and tympanic membrane. The external ear canal of the elderly is often dry and fragile; it is preferable to clean cerumen with wall-mounted suction or cerumen loops and to avoid irrigation. In examining the eardrum, the topography of the tympanic membrane is more important than the presence or absence of the light reflex. In addition to the pars tensa (the lower two-thirds of the eardrum), the pars flaccida above the short process of the malleus should also be examined for retraction pockets that may be evidence of chronic eustachian tube dysfunction or cholesteatoma. Insufflation of the ear canal is necessary to assess tympanic membrane mobility and compliance. Careful inspection of the nose, nasopharynx, and upper respiratory tract is indicated. Unilateral serous effusion should prompt a fiberoptic examination of the nasopharynx to exclude neoplasms. Cranial nerves should be evaluated with special attention to facial and trigeminal nerves, which are commonly affected with tumors involving the cerebellopontine angle.

The Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests, with a 512-Hz tuning fork, are used to screen for hearing loss, differentiate conductive from sensorineural hearing losses, and to confirm the findings of audiologic evaluation. Rinne's test compares the ability to hear by air conduction with the ability to hear by bone conduction. The tines of a vibrating tuning fork are held near the opening of the external auditory canal, and then the stem is placed on the mastoid process; for direct contact, it may be placed on teeth or dentures. The patient is asked to indicate whether the tone is louder by air conduction or bone conduction. Normally, and in the presence of sensorineural hearing loss, a tone is heard louder by air conduction than by bone conduction; however, with conductive hearing loss of 30 dB (see "Audiologic Assessment," below), the bone-conduction stimulus is perceived as louder than the air-conduction stimulus. For the Weber test, the stem of a vibrating tuning fork is placed on the head in the midline and the patient asked whether the tone is heard in both ears or better in one ear than in the other. With a unilateral conductive hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the affected ear. With a unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, the tone is perceived in the unaffected ear. A 5-dB difference in hearing between the two ears is required for lateralization.

Laboratory Assessment of Hearing

Audiologic Assessment

The minimum audiologic assessment for hearing loss should include the measurement of pure tone air-conduction and bone-conduction thresholds, speech reception threshold, word recognition score, tympanometry, acoustic reflexes, and acoustic-reflex decay. This test battery provides a screening evaluation of the entire auditory system and allows one to determine whether further differentiation of a sensory (cochlear) from a neural (retrocochlear) hearing loss is indicated.

Pure tone audiometry assesses hearing acuity for pure tones. The test is administered by an audiologist and is performed in a sound-attenuated chamber. The pure tone stimulus is delivered with an audiometer, an electronic device that allows the presentation of specific frequencies (generally between 250 and 8000 Hz) at specific intensities. Air- and bone-conduction thresholds are established for each ear. Air-conduction thresholds are determined by presenting the stimulus in air with the use of headphones. Bone-conduction thresholds are determined by placing the stem of a vibrating tuning fork or an oscillator of an audiometer in contact with the head. In the presence of a hearing loss, broad-spectrum noise is presented to the nontest ear for masking purposes so that responses are based on perception from the ear under test.

The responses are measured in decibels. An audiogram is a plot of intensity in decibels of hearing threshold versus frequency. A decibel (dB) is equal to 20 times the logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure required to achieve threshold in the patient to the sound pressure required to achieve threshold in a normal hearing person. Therefore, a change of 6 dB represents doubling of sound pressure, and a change of 20 dB represents a tenfold change in sound pressure. Loudness, which depends on the frequency, intensity, and duration of a sound, doubles with approximately each 10-dB increase in sound pressure level. Pitch, on the other hand, does not directly correlate with frequency. The perception of pitch changes slowly in the low and high frequencies. In the middle tones, which are important for human speech, pitch varies more rapidly with changes in frequency.

Pure tone audiometry establishes the presence and severity of hearing impairment, unilateral vs. bilateral involvement, and the type of hearing loss. Conductive hearing losses with a large mass component, as is often seen in middle ear effusions, produce elevation of thresholds that predominate in the higher frequencies. Conductive hearing losses with a large stiffness component, as in fixation of the footplate of the stapes in early otosclerosis, produce threshold elevations in the lower frequencies. Often, the conductive hearing loss involves all frequencies, suggesting involvement of both stiffness and mass. In general, sensorineural hearing losses such as presbycusis affect higher frequencies more than lower frequencies. An exception is M谷ni豕re's disease, which is characteristically associated with low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss. Noise-induced hearing loss has an unusual pattern of hearing impairment in which the loss at 4000 Hz is greater than at higher frequencies. Vestibular schwannomas characteristically affect the higher frequencies, but any pattern of hearing loss can be observed.

Speech recognition requires greater synchronous neural firing than is necessary for appreciation of pure tones. Speech audiometry tests the clarity with which one hears. The speech reception threshold (SRT) is defined as the intensity at which speech is recognized as a meaningful symbol and is obtained by presenting two-syllable words with an equal accent on each syllable. The intensity at which the patient can repeat 50% of the words correctly is the SRT. Once the SRT is determined, discrimination or word recognition ability is tested by presenting one-syllable words at 25每40 dB above the SRT. The words are phonetically balanced in that the phonemes (speech sounds) occur in the list of words at the same frequency that they occur in ordinary conversational English. An individual with normal hearing or conductive hearing loss can repeat 88每100% of the phonetically balanced words correctly. Patients with a sensorineural hearing loss have variable loss of discrimination. As a general rule, neural lesions produce greater deficits in discrimination than do cochlear lesions. For example, in a patient with mild asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss, a clue to the diagnosis of vestibular schwannoma is the presence of greater than expected deterioration in discrimination ability. Deterioration in discrimination ability at higher intensities above the SRT also suggests a lesion in the eighth nerve or central auditory pathways.

Tympanometry measures the impedance of the middle ear to sound and is useful in diagnosis of middle-ear effusions. A tympanogram is the graphic representation of change in impedance or compliance as the pressure in the ear canal is changed. Normally, the middle ear is most compliant at atmospheric pressure, and the compliance decreases as the pressure is increased or decreased (type A); this pattern is seen with normal hearing or in the presence of sensorineural hearing loss. Compliance that does not change with change in pressure suggests middle-ear effusion (type B). With a negative pressure in the middle ear, as with eustachian tube obstruction, the point of maximal compliance occurs with negative pressure in the ear canal (type C). A tympanogram in which no point of maximal compliance can be obtained is most commonly seen with discontinuity of the ossicular chain (type Ad). A reduction in the maximal compliance peak can be seen in otosclerosis (type As).

During tympanometry, an intense tone elicits contraction of the stapedius muscle. The change in compliance of the middle ear with contraction of the stapedius muscle can be detected. The presence or absence of this acoustic reflex is important in determining the etiology of hearing loss as well as in the anatomic localization of facial nerve paralysis. The acoustic reflex can help differentiate between conductive hearing loss due to otosclerosis and that caused by an inner ear "third window": it is absent in otosclerosis and present in inner ear conductive hearing loss. Normal or elevated acoustic reflex thresholds in an individual with sensorineural hearing impairment suggests a cochlear hearing loss. An absent acoustic reflex in the setting of sensorineural hearing loss is not helpful in localizing the site of lesion. Assessment of acoustic reflex decay helps differentiate sensory from neural hearing losses. In neural hearing loss, the reflex adapts or decays with time.

Otoacoustic emissions (OAE) generated by outer hair cells only can be measured with microphones inserted into the external auditory canal. The emissions may be spontaneous or evoked with sound stimulation. The presence of OAEs indicates that the outer hair cells of the organ of Corti are intact and can be used to assess auditory thresholds and to distinguish sensory from neural hearing losses.

Evoked Responses

Electrocochleography measures the earliest evoked potentials generated in the cochlea and the auditory nerve. Receptor potentials recorded include the cochlear microphonic, generated by the outer hair cells of the organ of Corti, and the summating potential, generated by the inner hair cells in response to sound. The whole nerve action potential representing the composite firing of the first-order neurons can also be recorded during electrocochleography. Clinically, the test is useful in the diagnosis of M谷ni豕re's disease, where an elevation of the ratio of summating potential to action potential is seen.

Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs), also known as auditory brainstem responses (ABRs), are useful in differentiating the site of sensorineural hearing loss. In response to sound, five distinct electrical potentials arising from different stations along the peripheral and central auditory pathway can be identified using computer averaging from scalp surface electrodes. BAERs are valuable in situations in which patients cannot or will not give reliable voluntary thresholds. They are also used to assess the integrity of the auditory nerve and brainstem in various clinical situations, including intraoperative monitoring and in determination of brain death.

The vestibular-evoked myogenic potential (VEMP) test elicits a vestibulocollic reflex whose afferent limb arises from acoustically sensitive cells in the saccule, with signals conducted via the inferior vestibular nerve. VEMP is a biphasic, short-latency response recorded from the tonically contracted sternocleidomastoid muscle in response to loud auditory clicks or tones. VEMPs may be diminished or absent in patients with early and late M谷ni豕re's disease, vestibular neuritis, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, and vestibular schwannoma. On the other hand, the threshold for VEMPs may be lower in cases of superior canal dehiscence, other inner ear dehiscence, and perilymphatic fistula.

Imaging Studies

The choice of radiologic tests is largely determined by whether the goal is to evaluate the bony anatomy of the external, middle, and inner ear or to image the auditory nerve and brain. Axial and coronal CT of the temporal bone with fine 0.3- to 0.6-mm cuts is ideal for determining the caliber of the external auditory canal, integrity of the ossicular chain, and presence of middle-ear or mastoid disease; it can also detect inner ear malformations. CT is also ideal for the detection of bone erosion with chronic otitis media and cholesteatoma. MRI is superior to CT for imaging of retrocochlear pathology such as vestibular schwannoma, meningioma, other lesions of the cerebellopontine angle, demyelinating lesions of the brainstem, and brain tumors. Both CT and MRI are equally capable of identifying inner ear malformations and assessing cochlear patency for preoperative evaluation of patients for cochlear implantation.

Treatment: Disorders of the Sense of Hearing

In general, conductive hearing losses are amenable to surgical correction, while sensorineural hearing losses are more difficult to manage. Atresia of the ear canal can be surgically repaired, often with significant improvement in hearing. Tympanic membrane perforations due to chronic otitis media or trauma can be repaired with an outpatient tympanoplasty. Likewise, conductive hearing loss associated with otosclerosis can be treated by stapedectomy, which is successful in 90每95% of cases. Tympanostomy tubes allow the prompt return of normal hearing in individuals with middle ear effusions. Hearing aids are effective and well tolerated in patients with conductive hearing losses.

Patients with mild, moderate, and severe sensorineural hearing losses are regularly rehabilitated with hearing aids of varying configuration and strength. Hearing aids have been improved to provide greater fidelity and have been miniaturized. The current generation of hearing aids can be placed entirely within the ear canal, thus reducing any stigma associated with their use. In general, the more severe the hearing impairment, the larger the hearing aid required for auditory rehabilitation. Digital hearing aids lend themselves to individual programming, and multiple and directional microphones at the ear level may be helpful in noisy surroundings. Since all hearing aids amplify noise as well as speech, the only absolute solution to the problem of noise is to place the microphone closer to the speaker than the noise source. This arrangement is not possible with a self-contained, cosmetically acceptable device. A significant limitation of rehabilitation with a hearing aid is that while it is able to enhance detection of sound with amplification, it cannot restore clarity of hearing that is lost with presbycusis.

Patients with unilateral deafness have difficulty with sound localization and reduced clarity of hearing in background noise. They may benefit from a CROS (contralateral routing of signal) hearing aid in which a microphone is placed on the hearing-impaired side and the sound is transmitted to the receiver placed on the contralateral ear. The same result may be obtained with a bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA), in which a hearing aid clamps to a screw osseointegrated into the skull on the hearing-impaired side. Like the CROS hearing aid, the BAHA transfers the acoustic signal to the contralateral hearing ear, but it does so by vibrating the skull. Patients with profound deafness on one side and some hearing loss in the better ear are candidates for a BICROS hearing aid; it differs from the CROS hearing aid in that the patient wears a hearing aid, and not simply a receiver, in the better ear. Unfortunately, CROS and BAHA devices are often judged by patients to be unsatisfactory.

In many situations, including lectures and the theater, hearing-impaired persons benefit from assistive devices that are based on the principle of having the speaker closer to the microphone than any source of noise. Assistive devices include infrared and frequency-modulated (FM) transmission as well as an electromagnetic loop around the room for transmission to the individual's hearing aid. Hearing aids with telecoils can also be used with properly equipped telephones in the same way.

In the event that the hearing aid provides inadequate rehabilitation, cochlear implants may be appropriate. Criteria for implantation include severe to profound hearing loss with open-set sentence cognition of 40% under best aided conditions. Worldwide, nearly 200,000 hearing impaired children and adults have received cochlear implants. Cochlear implants are neural prostheses that convert sound energy to electrical energy and can be used to stimulate the auditory division of the eighth nerve directly. In most cases of profound hearing impairment, the auditory hair cells are lost but the ganglionic cells of the auditory division of the eighth nerve are preserved. Cochlear implants consist of electrodes that are inserted into the cochlea through the round window, speech processors that extract acoustical elements of speech for conversion to electrical currents, and a means of transmitting the electrical energy through the skin. Patients with implants experience sound that helps with speech reading, allows open-set word recognition, and helps in modulating the person's own voice. Usually, within the first 3每6 months after implantation, adult patients can understand speech without visual cues. With the current generation of multichannel cochlear implants, nearly 75% of patients are able to converse on the telephone. For individuals who have had both eighth nerves destroyed by trauma or bilateral vestibular schwannomas (e.g., neurofibromatosis type 2), brainstem auditory implants placed near the cochlear nucleus may provide auditory rehabilitation.

Tinnitus often accompanies hearing loss. As for background noise, tinnitus can degrade speech comprehension in individuals with hearing impairment. Therapy for tinnitus is usually directed toward minimizing the appreciation of tinnitus. Relief of the tinnitus may be obtained by masking it with background music. Hearing aids are also helpful in tinnitus suppression, as are tinnitus maskers, devices that present a sound to the affected ear that is more pleasant to listen to than the tinnitus. The use of a tinnitus masker is often followed by several hours of inhibition of the tinnitus. Antidepressants have been shown to be beneficial in helping patients cope with tinnitus.

Hard-of-hearing individuals often benefit from a reduction in unnecessary noise in the environment (e.g., radio or television) to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. Speech comprehension is aided by lip reading; therefore, the impaired listener should be seated so that the face of the speaker is well illuminated and easily seen. Although speech should be in a loud, clear voice, one should be aware that in sensorineural hearing losses in general and in hard-of-hearing elderly in particular, recruitment (abnormal perception of loud sounds) may be troublesome. Above all, optimal communication cannot take place without both parties giving it their full and undivided attention.

Prevention

Conductive hearing losses may be prevented by prompt antibiotic therapy of adequate duration for AOM and by ventilation of the middle ear with tympanostomy tubes in middle-ear effusions lasting 12 weeks. Loss of vestibular function and deafness due to aminoglycoside antibiotics can largely be prevented by careful monitoring of serum peak and trough levels.

Some 10 million Americans have noise-induced hearing loss, and 20 million are exposed to hazardous noise in their employment. Noise-induced hearing loss can be prevented by avoidance of exposure to loud noise or by regular use of ear plugs or fluid-filled ear muffs to attenuate intense sound. High-risk activities for noise-induced hearing loss include wood and metal working with electrical equipment and target practice and hunting with small firearms. All internal-combustion and electric engines, including snow and leaf blowers, snowmobiles, outboard motors, and chain saws, require protection of the user with hearing protectors. Virtually all noise-induced hearing loss is preventable through education, which should begin before the teenage years. Programs of industrial conservation of hearing are required by Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) when the exposure over an 8-h period averages 85 dB. OSHA mandates that workers in such noisy environments have hearing monitoring and protection programs that include a pre-employment screen, annual audiologic assessment, as well as the mandatory use of hearing protectors. Exposure to loud sounds above 85 dB in the work environment is restricted by OSHA, with halving of allowed exposure time for each increment of 5 dB above this threshold: for example 90 dB exposure is permitted for 8 h; 95 dB for 4 h, and 100 dB for 2 h.
 
Further Readings

Bishop CE, Eby TL: The current status of audiologic rehabilitation for profound unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Laryngoscope 120:552, 2010 [PMID: 20014322] 

 
Hilgert N et al: Function and expression pattern of nonsyndromic deafness genes. Curr Mol Med 9:546, 2009 [PMID: 19601806] 

 
Lalwani AK (ed): Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Otolaryngology〞Head & Neck Surgery, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2011 

 
Merchant SN, Rosowski JJ: Conductive hearing loss caused by third-window lesions of the inner ear. Otol Neurotol 29:282, 2008 [PMID: 18223508] 

 
Sprinzl GM, Riechelmann H: Current trends in treating hearing loss in elderly people: A review of the technology and treatment options〞a mini-review. Gerontology 56:351, 2010 [PMID: 20090297] 
 
 

^^
Pharyngitis, Sinusitis, Otitis, and Other Upper Respiratory Tract Infections: Introduction

Infections of the upper respiratory tract (URIs) have a tremendous impact on public health. They are among the most common reasons for visits to primary care providers, and although the illnesses are typically mild, their high incidence and transmission rates place them among the leading causes of time lost from work or school. Even though a minority (25%) of cases are caused by bacteria, URIs are the leading diagnoses for which antibiotics are prescribed on an outpatient basis in the United States. The enormous consumption of antibiotics for these illnesses has contributed to the rise in antibiotic resistance among common community-acquired pathogens such as Streptococcus pneumoniae〞a trend that in itself has had an enormous influence on public health.

Although most URIs are caused by viruses, distinguishing patients with primary viral infection from those with primary bacterial infection is difficult. Signs and symptoms of bacterial and viral URIs are typically indistinguishable. Until consistent, inexpensive, and rapid testing becomes available and is used widely, acute infections will be diagnosed largely on clinical grounds. The judicious use and potential for misuse of antibiotics in this setting pose definite challenges.
 
Nonspecific Infections of the Upper Respiratory Tract

Nonspecific URIs are a broadly defined group of disorders that collectively constitute the leading cause of ambulatory care visits in the United States. By definition, nonspecific URIs have no prominent localizing features. They are identified by a variety of descriptive names, including acute infective rhinitis, acute rhinopharyngitis/nasopharyngitis, acute coryza, and acute nasal catarrh, as well as by the inclusive label common cold.

Etiology

The large assortment of URI classifications reflects the wide variety of causative infectious agents and the varied manifestations of common pathogens. Nearly all nonspecific URIs are caused by viruses spanning multiple virus families and many antigenic types. For instance, there are at least 100 immunotypes of rhinovirus (Chap. 186), the most common cause of URI (30每40% of cases); other causes include influenza virus (three immunotypes; Chap. 187) as well as parainfluenza virus (four immunotypes), coronavirus (at least three immunotypes), and adenovirus (47 immunotypes) (Chap. 186). Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a well-established pathogen in pediatric populations, is also a recognized cause of significant disease in elderly and immunocompromised individuals. A host of additional viruses, including some viruses not typically associated with URIs (e.g., enteroviruses, rubella virus, and varicella-zoster virus), account for a small percentage of cases in adults each year. Although new diagnostic modalities [e.g., nasopharyngeal swab for polymerase chain reaction (PCR)] can assign a viral etiology, there are few specific treatment options, and no pathogen is identified in a substantial proportion of cases. A specific diagnostic workup beyond a clinical diagnosis is generally unnecessary in an otherwise healthy adult.

Clinical Manifestations

The signs and symptoms of nonspecific URI are similar to those of other URIs but lack a pronounced localization to one particular anatomic location, such as the sinuses, pharynx, or lower airway. Nonspecific URI commonly presents as an acute, mild, and self-limited catarrhal syndrome with a median duration of 1 week (range, 2每10 days). Signs and symptoms are diverse and frequently variable across patients. The principal signs and symptoms of nonspecific URI include rhinorrhea (with or without purulence), nasal congestion, cough, and sore throat. Other manifestations, such as fever, malaise, sneezing, lymphadenopathy, and hoarseness, are more variable, with fever more common among infants and young children. This varying presentation may reflect differences in host response as well as in infecting organisms; myalgias and fatigue, for example, sometimes are seen with influenza and parainfluenza infections, whereas conjunctivitis may suggest infection with adenovirus or enterovirus. Findings on physical examination are frequently nonspecific and unimpressive. Between 0.5% and 2% of colds are complicated by secondary bacterial infections (e.g., rhinosinusitis, otitis media, and pneumonia), particularly in higher-risk populations such as infants, elderly persons, and chronically ill individuals. Secondary bacterial infections usually are associated with a prolonged course of illness, increased severity of illness, and localization of signs and symptoms, often as a rebound after initial clinical improvement. Purulent secretions from the nares or throat often are misinterpreted as an indication of bacterial sinusitis or pharyngitis. These secretions, however, are also seen in nonspecific URI and, in the absence of other clinical features, are poor predictors of bacterial infection.

Treatment: Upper Respiratory Infections

Antibiotics have no role in the treatment of uncomplicated nonspecific URI, and their misuse probably facilitates the emergence of antimicrobial resistance; even in healthy volunteers, a single course of azithromycin or clarithromycin can lead to macrolide resistance among oral streptococci months later. In the absence of clinical evidence of bacterial infection, treatment remains entirely symptom-based, with use of decongestants and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Other therapies directed at specific symptoms are often useful, including dextromethorphan for cough and lozenges with topical anesthetic for sore throat. Clinical trials of zinc, vitamin C, echinacea, and other alternative remedies have revealed no consistent benefit for the treatment of nonspecific URI.
 
Infections of the Sinus

Rhinosinusitis refers to an inflammatory condition involving the four paired structures surrounding the nasal cavities. Although most cases of sinusitis involve more than one sinus, the maxillary sinus is most commonly involved; next, in order of frequency, are the ethmoid, frontal, and sphenoid sinuses. Each sinus is lined with a respiratory epithelium that produces mucus, which is transported out by ciliary action through the sinus ostium and into the nasal cavity. Normally, mucus does not accumulate in the sinuses, which remain mostly sterile despite their adjacency to the bacterium-filled nasal passages. When the sinus ostia are obstructed, however, or when ciliary clearance is impaired or absent, the secretions can be retained, producing the typical signs and symptoms of sinusitis. As these secretions accumulate with obstruction, they become more susceptible to infection with a variety of pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. Sinusitis affects a tremendous proportion of the population, accounts for millions of visits to primary care physicians each year, and is the fifth leading diagnosis for which antibiotics are prescribed. It typically is classified by duration of illness (acute vs. chronic); by etiology (infectious vs. noninfectious); and, when infectious, by the offending pathogen type (viral, bacterial, or fungal).

Acute Rhinosinusitis

Acute rhinosinusitis〞defined as sinusitis of <4 weeks' duration〞constitutes the vast majority of sinusitis cases. Most cases are diagnosed in the ambulatory care setting and occur primarily as a consequence of a preceding viral URI. Differentiating acute bacterial from viral sinusitis on clinical grounds is difficult. Therefore, it is perhaps not surprising that antibiotics are prescribed frequently (in 85每98% of all cases) for this condition.

Etiology

The ostial obstruction that results in rhinosinusitis can arise from both infectious and noninfectious causes. Noninfectious causes include allergic rhinitis (with either mucosal edema or polyp obstruction), barotrauma (e.g., from deep-sea diving or air travel), and exposure to chemical irritants. Obstruction also can occur with nasal and sinus tumors (e.g., squamous cell carcinoma) or granulomatous diseases (e.g., granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) or rhinoscleroma), and conditions leading to altered mucus content (e.g., cystic fibrosis) can cause sinusitis through impaired mucus clearance. In ICUs, nasotracheal intubation and nasogastric tubes are major risk factors for nosocomial sinusitis.

Viral rhinosinusitis is far more common than bacterial sinusitis, although relatively few studies have sampled sinus aspirates for the presence of different viruses. In the studies that have done so, the viruses most commonly isolated〞both alone and with bacteria〞have been rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, and influenza virus. Bacterial causes of sinusitis have been better described. Among community-acquired cases, S. pneumoniae and nontypable Haemophilus influenzae are the most common pathogens, accounting for 50每60% of cases. Moraxella catarrhalis causes disease in a significant percentage (20%) of children but a lesser percentage in adults. Other streptococcal species and Staphylococcus aureus cause only a small percentage of cases, although there is increasing concern about community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) as an emerging cause. It is difficult to assess whether a cultured bacterium represents a true infecting organism, an insufficiently deep sample (which would not be expected to be sterile), or〞especially in the case of previous sinus surgeries〞a colonizing organism. Anaerobes occasionally are found in association with infections of the roots of premolar teeth that spread into the adjacent maxillary sinuses. The role of Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the pathogenesis of acute sinusitis is unclear. Nosocomial cases commonly are associated with bacteria found in the hospital environment, includingS. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Enterobacter species. Often, these infections are polymicrobial and involve organisms that are highly resistant to numerous antibiotics. Fungi are also established causes of sinusitis, although most acute cases are in immunocompromised patients and represent invasive, life-threatening infections. The best-known example is rhinocerebral mucormycosis caused by fungi of the order Mucorales, which includes Rhizopus, Rhizomucor, Mucor, Mycocladus (formerly Absidia), and Cunninghamella (Chap. 205). These infections classically occur in diabetic patients with ketoacidosis but also can develop in transplant recipients, patients with hematologicmalignancies, and patients receiving chronic glucocorticoid or deferoxamine therapy. Other hyaline molds, such as Aspergillus and Fusarium species, are also occasional causes of this disease.

Clinical Manifestations

Most cases of acute sinusitis present after or in conjunction with a viral URI, and it can be difficult to discriminate the clinical features of one from the other. A large proportion of patients with colds have sinus inflammation, although, as previously stated, true bacterial sinusitis complicates only 0.2每2% of these viral infections. Common presenting symptoms of sinusitis include nasal drainage and congestion, facial pain or pressure, and headache. Thick, purulent or discolored nasal discharge is often thought to indicate bacterial sinusitis but also occurs early in viral infections such as the common cold and is not specific to bacterial infection. Other nonspecific manifestations include cough, sneezing, and fever. Tooth pain, most often involving the upper molars, as well as halitosis can be associated with bacterial sinusitis.

In acute sinusitis, sinus pain or pressure often localizes to the involved sinus (particularly the maxillary sinus) and can be worse when the patient bends over or is supine. Although rare, manifestations of advanced sphenoid or ethmoid sinus infection can be profound, including severe frontal or retroorbital pain radiating to the occiput, thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, and signs of orbital cellulitis. Acute focal sinusitis is uncommon but should be considered over the maxillary sinus and fever in patients with severe symptoms, regardless of illness duration. Similarly, patients with advanced frontal sinusitis can present with a condition known as Pott's puffy tumor, with soft tissue swelling and pitting edema over the frontal bone from a communicating subperiosteal abscess. Life-threatening complications of sinusitis include meningitis, epidural abscess, and cerebral abscess.

Patients with acute fungal rhinosinusitis (such as mucormycosis; Chap. 205) often present with symptoms related to pressure effects, particularly when the infection has spread to the orbits and cavernous sinus. Signs such as orbital swelling and cellulitis, proptosis, ptosis, and decreased extraocular movement are common, as is retroorbital or periorbital pain. Nasopharyngeal ulcerations, epistaxis, and headaches are also common, and involvement of cranial nerves V and VII has been described in more advanced cases. Bony erosion may be evident on examination. Often the patient does not appear seriously ill despite the rapidly progressive nature of these infections.

Patients with acute nosocomial sinusitis are often critically ill and thus do not manifest the typical clinical features of sinus disease. This diagnosis should be suspected, however, when hospitalized patients who have appropriate risk factors (e.g., nasotracheal intubation) develop fever without another apparent cause.

Diagnosis

Distinguishing viral from bacterial rhinosinusitis in the ambulatory setting is usually difficult because of the relatively low sensitivity and specificity of the common clinical features. One clinical feature that has been used to help guide diagnostic and therapeutic decision making is illness duration. Because acute bacterial sinusitis is uncommon in patients whose symptoms have lasted <10 days, expert panels now recommend reserving this diagnosis for patients with "persistent" symptoms (i.e., symptoms lasting >10 days in adults or >10每14 days in children) accompanied by the three cardinal signs of purulent nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, and facial pain (Table 31-1). Even among patients who meet these criteria, only 40每50% have true bacterial sinusitis. The use of CT or sinus radiography is not recommended for acute disease, particularly early in the course of illness (i.e., at <10 days) in light of the high prevalence of similar abnormalities among patients with acute viral rhinosinusitis. In the evaluation of persistent, recurrent, or chronic sinusitis, CT of the sinuses is the radiographic study of choice.

Table 31-1 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Sinusitis

 
 
Age Group Diagnostic Criteria Treatment Recommendationsa 
Adults Moderate symptoms (e.g., nasal purulence/congestion or cough) for >10 d or

Severe symptoms of any duration, including unilateral/focal facial swelling or tooth pain
 Initial therapy:

Amoxicillin, 500 mg PO tid or 875 mg PO bid

Penicillin allergy:

TMP-SMX, 1 DS tablet PO bid for 10每14 d

Exposure to antibiotics within 30 d or >30% prevalence of penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae:

Amoxicillin/clavulanate (extended release), 2000 mg PO bid; or

Antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone (e.g., levofloxacin, 500 mg PO qd)

Recent treatment failure:

Amoxicillin/clavulanate (extended release), 2000 mg PO bid; or

Amoxicillin, 1500 mg bid, plus clindamycin, 300 mg PO qid; or

Antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone (e.g., levofloxacin, 500 mg PO qd)
 
Children Moderate symptoms (e.g., nasal purulence/congestion or cough) for >10每14 d or

Severe symptoms of any duration, including fever (>102∼F), unilateral/focal facial swelling or pain
 Initial therapy:

Amoxicillin, 45每90 mg/kg qd (up to 2 g) PO in divided doses (bid or tid); or

Cefuroxime axetil, 30 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Cefdinir, 14 mg/kg PO qd

Exposure to antibiotics within 30 d, recent treatment failure, or >30% prevalence of penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae:

Amoxicillin, 90 mg/kg qd (up to 2 g) PO in divided doses (bid), plus clavulanate, 6.4 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid) (extra-strength suspension); or

Cefuroxime axetil, 30 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Cefdinir, 14 mg/kg PO qd
 
 


a Unless otherwise specified, the duration of therapy is generally 10 days, with appropriate follow-up.

Abbreviations: DS, double-strength; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

Sources: American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Management of Sinusitis and Committee on Quality Improvement, 2001; Rosenfeld et al., 2007.
 

The clinical history and/or setting often can identify cases of acute anaerobic bacterial sinusitis, acute fungal sinusitis, or sinusitis from noninfectious causes (e.g., allergic rhinosinusitis). In the case of an immunocompromised patient with acute fungal sinus infection, immediate examination by an otolaryngologist is required. Biopsy specimens from involved areas should be examined by a pathologist for evidence of fungal hyphal elements and tissue invasion. Cases of suspected acute nosocomial sinusitis should be confirmed by sinus CT. Because therapy should target the offending organism, a sinus aspirate for culture and susceptibility testing should be obtained, if possible, before the initiation of antimicrobial therapy.

Treatment: Acute Sinusitis

Most patients with a clinical diagnosis of acute rhinosinusitis improve without antibiotic therapy. The preferred initial approach in patients with mild to moderate symptoms of short duration is therapy aimed at symptom relief and facilitation of sinus drainage, such as with oral and topical decongestants, nasal saline lavage, and〞at least in patients with a history of chronic sinusitis or allergies〞nasal glucocorticoids. Newer studies have cast doubt on the role of antibiotics and inhaled glucocorticoids in acute rhinosinusitis. In one notable double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, neither antibiotics nor topical glucocorticoids had a significant impact on cure in the study population of patients, the majority of whom had had symptoms for <7 days. Adult patients whose condition does not improve after 7 days, children whose condition does not improve after 10每14 days, and patients with more severe symptoms (regardless of duration) should be treated with antibiotics (Table 31-1). Empirical therapy for adults with community-acquired sinusitis should consist of the narrowest-spectrum agent active against the most common bacterial pathogens, including S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae, e.g., amoxicillin. No clinical trials support the use of broad-spectrum agents for routine cases of bacterial sinusitis, even in the current era of drug-resistant S. pneumoniae. Up to 10% of patients do not respond to initial antimicrobial therapy; sinus aspiration and/or lavage by an otolaryngologist should be considered in these cases. Antibiotic prophylaxis to prevent episodes of recurrent acute bacterial sinusitis is not recommended.

Surgical intervention and IV antibiotic administration usually are reserved for patients with severe disease or those with intracranial complications such as abscess and orbital involvement. Immunocompromised patients with acute invasive fungal sinusitis usually require extensive surgical debridement and treatment with IV antifungal agents active against fungal hyphal forms, such as amphotericin B. Specific therapy should be individualized according to the fungal species and its susceptibilities as well as the individual patient's characteristics.

Treatment of nosocomial sinusitis should begin with broad-spectrum antibiotics to cover common and often resistant pathogens such as S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli. Therapy then should be tailored to the results of culture and susceptibility testing of sinus aspirates.

Chronic Sinusitis

Chronic sinusitis is characterized by symptoms of sinus inflammation lasting >12 weeks. This illness is most commonly associated with either bacteria or fungi, and clinical cure in most cases is very difficult. Many patients have undergone treatment with repeated courses of antibacterial agents and multiple sinus surgeries, increasing their risk of colonization with antibiotic-resistant pathogens and of surgical complications. These patients often have high rates of morbidity, sometimes over many years.

In chronic bacterial sinusitis, infection is thought to be due to the impairment of mucociliary clearance from repeated infections rather than to persistent bacterial infection. The pathogenesis of this condition, however, is poorly understood. Although certain conditions (e.g., cystic fibrosis) can predispose patients to chronic bacterial sinusitis, most patients with chronic rhinosinusitis do not have obvious underlying conditions that result in the obstruction of sinus drainage, the impairment of ciliary action, or immune dysfunction. Patients experience constant nasal congestion and sinus pressure, with intermittent periods of greater severity, which may persist for years. CT can be helpful in determining the extent of disease, detecting an underlying anatomic defect or obstructing process (e.g., a polyp), and assessing the response to therapy. The management team should include an otolaryngologist to conduct endoscopic examinations and obtain tissue samples for histologic examination and culture. An endoscopy-derived culture not only has a higher yield but also allows direct visualization for abnormal anatomy.

Chronic fungal sinusitis is a disease of immunocompetent hosts and is usually noninvasive, although slowly progressive invasive disease sometimes is seen. Noninvasive disease, which typically is associated with hyaline molds such as Aspergillus species and dematiaceous molds such as Curvularia or Bipolaris species, can present as a number of different scenarios. In mild, indolent disease, which usually occurs in the setting of repeated failures of antibacterial therapy, only nonspecific mucosal changes may be seen on sinus CT. Although there is some controversy on this point, endoscopic surgery is usually curative in these cases, with no need for antifungal therapy. Another form of disease presents as long-standing, often unilateral symptoms and opacification of a single sinus on imaging studies as a result of a mycetoma (fungus ball) within the sinus. Treatment for this condition is also surgical, although systemic antifungal therapy may be warranted in the rare case in which bony erosion occurs. A third form of disease, known as allergic fungal sinusitis, is seen in patients with a history of nasal polyposis and asthma, who often have had multiple sinus surgeries. Patients with this condition produce a thick, eosinophil-laden mucus with the consistency of peanut butter that contains sparse fungal hyphae on histologic examination. These patients often present with pansinusitis.

Treatment: Chronic Sinusitis

Treatment of chronic bacterial sinusitis can be challenging and consists primarily of repeated culture-guided courses of antibiotics, sometimes for 3每4 weeks at a time; administration of intranasal glucocorticoids; and mechanical irrigation of the sinus with sterile saline solution. When this management approach fails, sinus surgery may be indicated and sometimes provides significant, albeit short-term, alleviation. Treatment of chronic fungal sinusitis consists of surgical removal of impacted mucus. Recurrence, unfortunately, is common.
 
Infections of the Ear and Mastoid

Infections of the ear and associated structures can involve both the middle and the external ear, including the skin, cartilage, periosteum, ear canal, and tympanic and mastoid cavities. Both viruses and bacteria are known causes of these infections, some of which result in significant morbidity if not treated appropriately.

Infections of the External Ear Structures

Infections involving the structures of the external ear are often difficult to differentiate from noninfectious inflammatory conditions with similar clinical manifestations. Clinicians should consider inflammatory disorders as possible causes of external ear irritation, particularly in the absence of local or regional adenopathy. Aside from the more salient causes of inflammation, such as trauma, insect bite, and overexposure to sunlight or extreme cold, the differential diagnosis should include less common conditions such as autoimmune disorders (e.g., lupus or relapsing polychondritis) and vasculitides (e.g., granulomatosis with polyangiitis [Wegener's]).

Auricular Cellulitis

Auricular cellulitis is an infection of the skin overlying the external ear and typically follows minor local trauma. It presents as the typical signs and symptoms of cellulitis, with tenderness, erythema, swelling, and warmth of the external ear (particularly the lobule) but without apparent involvement of the ear canal or inner structures. Treatment consists of warm compresses and oral antibiotics such as dicloxacillin that are active against typical skin and soft tissue pathogens (specifically, S. aureus and streptococci). IV antibiotics such as a first-generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin) or a penicillinase-resistant penicillin (e.g., nafcillin) occasionally are needed for more severe cases, with consideration of MRSA if either risk factors or failure of therapy point to this organism.

Perichondritis

Perichondritis, an infection of the perichondrium of the auricular cartilage, typically follows local trauma (e.g., ear piercing, burns, or lacerations). Occasionally, when the infection spreads down to the cartilage of the pinna itself, patients may develop chondritis. The infection may closely resemble auricular cellulitis, with erythema, swelling, and extreme tenderness of the pinna, although the lobule is less often involved in perichondritis. The most common pathogens are P. aeruginosa and S. aureus, although other gram-negative and gram-positive organisms occasionally are involved. Treatment consists of systemic antibiotics active against both P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. An antipseudomonal penicillin (e.g., piperacillin) or a combination of a penicillinase-resistant penicillin and an antipseudomonal quinolone (e.g., nafcillin plus ciprofloxacin) is typically used. Incision and drainage may be helpful for culture and for resolution of infection, which often takes weeks. When perichondritis fails to respond to adequate antimicrobial therapy, clinicians should consider a noninfectious inflammatory etiology such as relapsing polychondritis.

Otitis Externa

The term otitis externa refers to a collection of diseases involving primarily the auditory meatus. Otitis externa usually results from a combination of heat and retained moisture, with desquamation and maceration of the epithelium of the outer ear canal. The disease exists in several forms: localized, diffuse, chronic, and invasive. All forms are predominantly bacterial in origin, with P. aeruginosa and S. aureus the most common pathogens.

Acute localized otitis externa (furunculosis) can develop in the outer third of the ear canal, where skin overlies cartilage and hair follicles are numerous. As in furunculosis elsewhere on the body, S. aureus is the usual pathogen, and treatment typically consists of an oral antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g., dicloxacillin), with incision and drainage in cases of abscess formation.

Acute diffuse otitis externa is also known as swimmer's ear, although it can develop in patients who have not recently been swimming. Heat, humidity, and the loss of protective cerumen lead to excessive moisture and elevation of the pH in the ear canal, which in turn lead to skin maceration and irritation. Infection may then occur; the predominant pathogen is P. aeruginosa, although other gram-negative and gram-positive organisms〞and rarely yeasts〞have been recovered from patients with this condition. The illness often starts with itching and progresses to severe pain, which usually is elicited by manipulation of the pinna or tragus. The onset of pain generally is accompanied by the development of an erythematous, swollen ear canal, often with scant white, clumpy discharge. Treatment consists of cleansing the canal to remove debris and enhance the activity of topical therapeutic agents〞usually hypertonic saline or mixtures of alcohol and acetic acid. Inflammation also can be decreased by adding glucocorticoids to the treatment regimen or by using Burow's solution (aluminum acetate in water). Antibiotics are most effective when given topically. Otic mixtures provide adequate pathogen coverage; these preparations usually combine neomycin with polymyxin, with or without glucocorticoids. Systemic antimicrobial agents typically are reserved for severe disease or infections in immunocompromised hosts.

Chronic otitis externa is caused primarily by repeated local irritation, most commonly arising from persistent drainage from a chronic middle-ear infection. Other causes of repeated irritation, such as insertion of cotton swabs or other foreign objects into the ear canal, can lead to this condition, as can rare chronic infections such as syphilis, tuberculosis, and leprosy. Chronic otitis externa typically presents as erythematous, scaling dermatitis in which the predominant symptom is pruritus rather than pain; this condition must be differentiated from several others that produce a similar clinical picture, such as atopic dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, and dermatomycosis. Therapy consists of identifying and treating or removing the offending process, although successful resolution is frequently difficult.

Invasive otitis externa, also known as malignant or necrotizing otitis externa, is an aggressive and potentially life-threatening disease that occurs predominantly in elderly diabetic patients and other immunocompromised persons. The disease begins in the external canal as a soft tissue infection that progresses slowly over weeks to months and often is difficult to distinguish from a severe case of chronic otitis externa because of the presence of purulent otorrhea and an erythematous swollen ear and external canal. Severe, deep-seated otalgia, frequently out of proportion to findings on examination, is often noted and can help differentiate invasive from chronic otitis externa. The characteristic finding on examination is granulation tissue in the posteroinferior wall of the external canal, near the junction of bone and cartilage. If left unchecked, the infection can migrate to the base of the skull (resulting in skull-base osteomyelitis) and onto the meninges and brain, with a high-associated mortality rate. Cranial nerve involvement is seen occasionally, with the facial nerve usually affected first and most often. Thrombosis of the sigmoid sinus can occur if the infection extends to that area. CT, which can reveal osseous erosion of the temporal bone and skull base, can be used to help determine the extent of disease, as can gallium and technetium-99 scintigraphy studies. P. aeruginosa is by far the most common pathogen, although S. aureus, S. epidermidis, Aspergillus, Actinomyces, and some gram-negative bacteria have also been associated with this disease. In all cases, the external ear canal should be cleansed and a biopsy specimen of the granulation tissue within the canal (or of deeper tissues) obtained for culture of the offending organism. IV antibiotic therapy should be given for a prolonged course (6每8 weeks) and directed specifically toward the recovered pathogen. For P. aeruginosa, the regimen typically includes an antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin (e.g., piperacillin or ceftazidime) with an aminoglycoside. A fluoroquinolone antibiotic is frequently used in place of the aminoglycoside and can even be administered orally because of the excellent bioavailability of this drug class. In addition, antibiotic drops containing an agent active against Pseudomonas (e.g., ciprofloxacin) usually are prescribed and are combined with glucocorticoids to reduce inflammation. Cases of invasive Pseudomonas otitis externa recognized in the early stages sometimes can be treated with oral and otic fluoroquinolones alone, albeit with close follow-up. Extensive surgical debridement, once an important component of the treatment approach, is now rarely indicated.

In necrotizing otitis externa, recurrence is documented up to 20% of the time. Aggressive glycemic control in diabetics is important not only for effective treatment but also for prevention of recurrence. The role of hyperbaric oxygen has not been clearly established.

Infections of Middle-Ear Structures

Otitis media is an inflammatory condition of the middle ear that results from dysfunction of the eustachian tube in association with a number of illnesses, including URIs and chronic rhinosinusitis. The inflammatory response to these conditions leads to the development of a sterile transudate within the middle ear and mastoid cavities. Infection may occur if bacteria or viruses from the nasopharynx contaminate this fluid, producing an acute (or sometimes chronic) illness.

Acute Otitis Media

Acute otitis media results when pathogens from the nasopharynx are introduced into the inflammatory fluid collected in the middle ear (e.g., by nose blowing during a URI). The proliferation of these pathogens in this space leads to the development of the typical signs and symptoms of acute middle-ear infection. The diagnosis of acute otitis media requires the demonstration of fluid in the middle ear [with tympanic membrane (TM) immobility] and the accompanying signs or symptoms of local or systemic illness (Table 31-2).

Table 31-2 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Otitis Media

 
 
Illness Severity Diagnostic Criteria Treatment Recommendations 
Mild to moderate >2 yrs or 6 mo to 2 yrs without middle-ear effusion  Observation alone (deferring antibiotic therapy for 48每72 h and limiting management to symptom relief)  
  <6 mo; or

6 mo to 2 yrs with middle-ear effusion (fluid in the middle ear, evidenced by decreased TM mobility, air/fluid level behind TM, bulging TM, purulent otorrhea) and acute onset of signs and symptoms of middle-ear inflammation, including fever, otalgia, decreased hearing, tinnitus, vertigo, erythematous TM; or

>2 yrs with bilateral disease, TM perforation, high fever, immunocompromise, emesis
 Initial therapy a 

Amoxicillin, 80每90 mg/kg qd (up to 2 g) PO in divided doses (bid or tid); or

Cefdinir, 14 mg/kg qd PO in 1 dose or divided doses (bid); or

Cefuroxime, 30 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Azithromycin, 10 mg/kg qd PO on day 1 followed by 5 mg/kg qd PO for 4 d

Exposure to antibiotics within 30 d or recent treatment failure a,b:

Amoxicillin, 90 mg/kg qd (up to 2 g) PO in divided doses (bid), plus clavulanate, 6.4 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Ceftriaxone, 50 mg/kg IV/IM qd for 3 d; or

Clindamycin, 30每40 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (tid)
 
Severe As above, with temperature 39.0∼C (102∼F) or

Moderate to severe otalgia
 Initial therapy a 

Amoxicillin, 90 mg/kg qd (up to 2 g) PO in divided doses (bid), plus clavulanate, 6.4 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Ceftriaxone, 50 mg/kg IV/IM qd for 3 d

Exposure to antibiotics within 30 d or recent treatment failure a,b 

Ceftriaxone, 50 mg/kg IV/IM qd for 3 d; or

Clindamycin, 30每40 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (tid); or

Consider tympanocentesis with culture
 
 


a Duration (unless otherwise specified): 10 days for patients <6 years old and patients with severe disease; 5每7 days (with consideration of observation only in previously healthy individuals with mild disease) for patients 6 years old.

b Failure to improve and/or clinical worsening after 48每72 h of observation or treatment.

Abbreviation: TM, tympanic membrane.

Source: American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Management of Acute Otitis Media, 2004.
 

Etiology

Acute otitis media typically follows a viral URI. The causative viruses (most commonly RSV, influenza virus, rhinovirus, and enterovirus) can themselves cause subsequent acute otitis media; more often, they predispose the patient to bacterial otitis media. Studies using tympanocentesis have consistently found S. pneumoniae to be the most important bacterial cause, isolated in up to 35% of cases. H. influenzae (nontypable strains) and M. catarrhalis are also common bacterial causes of acute otitis media, and concern is increasing about community strains of MRSA as an emerging etiologic agent. Viruses, such as those mentioned above, have been recovered either alone or with bacteria in 17每40% of cases.

Clinical Manifestations

Fluid in the middle ear is typically demonstrated or confirmed with pneumatic otoscopy. In the absence of fluid, the tympanic membrane moves visibly with the application of positive and negative pressure, but this movement is dampened when fluid is present. With bacterial infection, the tympanic membrane can also be erythematous, bulging, or retracted and occasionally can perforate spontaneously. The signs and symptoms accompanying infection can be local or systemic, including otalgia, otorrhea, diminished hearing, fever, and irritability. Erythema of the tympanic membrane is often evident but is nonspecific as it frequently is seen in association with inflammation of the upper respiratory mucosa (e.g., during examination of young children). Other signs and symptoms that are occasionally reported include vertigo, nystagmus, and tinnitus.

Treatment: Acute Otitis Media

There has been considerable debate on the usefulness of antibiotics for the treatment of acute otitis media. A higher proportion of treated than untreated patients are free of illness 3每5 days after diagnosis. The difficulty of predicting which patients will benefit from antibiotic therapy has led to different approaches. In the Netherlands, for instance, physicians typically manage acute otitis media with initial observation, administering anti-inflammatory agents for aggressive pain management and reserving antibiotics for high-risk patients, patients with complicated disease, or patients whose condition does not improve after 48每72 h. In contrast, many experts in the United States continue to recommend antibiotic therapy for children <6 months old in light of the higher frequency of secondary complications in this young and functionally immunocompromised population. However, observation without antimicrobial therapy is now the recommended option in the United States for acute otitis media in children 2 years of age and for mild to moderate disease without middle-ear effusion in children 6 months to 2 years of age. Treatment is typically indicated for patients <6 months old; for children 6 months to 2 years old who have middle-ear effusion and signs/symptoms of middle-ear inflammation; for all patients >2 years old who have bilateral disease, tympanic membrane perforation, immunocompromise, or emesis; and for any patient who has severe symptoms, including a fever 39∼C or moderate to severe otalgia (Table 31-2).

Because most studies of the etiologic agents of acute otitis media consistently document similar pathogen profiles, therapy is generally empirical except in those few cases in which tympanocentesis is warranted〞e.g., cases in newborns, cases refractory to therapy, and cases in patients who are severely ill or immunodeficient. Despite resistance to penicillin and amoxicillin in roughly one-quarter of S. pneumoniae isolates, one-third of H. influenzae isolates, and nearly all M. catarrhalis isolates, outcome studies continue to find that amoxicillin is as successful as any other agent, and it remains the drug of first choice in recommendations from multiple sources (Table 31-2). Therapy for uncomplicated acute otitis media typically is administered for 5每7 days to patients 6 years old; longer courses (e.g., 10 days) should be reserved for children <6 years old and patients with severe disease, in whom short-course therapy may be inadequate.

A switch in regimen is recommended if there is no clinical improvement by the third day of therapy in light of the possibility of infection with a -lactamase-producing strain of H. influenzae or M. catarrhalis or with a strain of penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae. Decongestants and antihistamines are frequently used as adjunctive agents to reduce congestion and relieve obstruction of the eustachian tube, but clinical trials have yielded no significant evidence of benefit with either class of agents.

Recurrent Acute Otitis Media

Recurrent acute otitis media (more than three episodes within 6 months or four episodes within 12 months) generally is due to relapse or reinfection, although data indicate that the majority of early recurrences are new infections. In general, the same pathogens responsible for acute otitis media cause recurrent disease; even so, the recommended treatment consists of antibiotics active against -lactamase-producing organisms. Antibiotic prophylaxis [e.g., with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) or amoxicillin] can reduce recurrences in patients with recurrent acute otitis media by an average of one episode per year, but this benefit is small compared with the cost of the drug and the high likelihood of colonization with antibiotic-resistant pathogens. Other approaches, including placement of tympanostomy tubes, adenoidectomy, and tonsillectomy plus adenoidectomy, are of questionable overall value in light of the relatively small benefit compared with the potential for complications.

Serous Otitis Media

In serous otitis media (otitis media with effusion), fluid is present in the middle ear for an extended period in the absence of signs and symptoms of infection. In general, acute effusions are self-limited; most resolve in 2每4 weeks. In some cases, however (in particular after an episode of acute otitis media), effusions can persist for months. These chronic effusions are often associated with significant hearing loss in the affected ear. In younger children, persistent effusions and decreased hearing can be associated with impairment of language acquisition skills. The great majority of cases of otitis media with effusion resolve spontaneously within 3 months without antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic therapy or myringotomy with insertion of tympanostomy tubes typically is reserved for patients in whom bilateral effusion (1) has persisted for at least 3 months and (2) is associated with significant bilateral hearing loss. With this conservative approach and the application of strict diagnostic criteria for acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion, it is estimated that 6每8 million courses of antibiotics could be avoided each year in the United States.

Chronic Otitis Media

Chronic suppurative otitis media is characterized by persistent or recurrent purulent otorrhea in the setting of tympanic membrane perforation. Usually, there is also some degree of conductive hearing loss. This condition can be categorized as active or inactive. Inactive disease is characterized by a central perforation of the tympanic membrane, which allows drainage of purulent fluid from the middle ear. When the perforation is more peripheral, squamous epithelium from the auditory canal may invade the middle ear through the perforation, forming a mass of keratinaceous debris (cholesteatoma) at the site of invasion. This mass can enlarge and has the potential to erode bone and promote further infection, which can lead to meningitis, brain abscess, or paralysis of cranial nerve VII. Treatment of chronic active otitis media is surgical; mastoidectomy, myringoplasty, and tympanoplasty can be performed as outpatient surgical procedures, with an overall success rate of 80%. Chronic inactive otitis media is more difficult to cure, usually requiring repeated courses of topical antibiotic drops during periods of drainage. Systemic antibiotics may offer better cure rates, but their role in the treatment of this condition remains unclear.

Mastoiditis

Acute mastoiditis was relatively common among children before the introduction of antibiotics. Because the mastoid air cells connect with the middle ear, the process of fluid collection and infection is usually the same in the mastoid as in the middle ear. Early and frequent treatment of acute otitis media is most likely the reason that the incidence of acute mastoiditis has declined to only 1.2每2.0 cases per 100,000 person-years in countries with high prescribing rates for acute otitis media.

In countries such as the Netherlands, where antibiotics are used sparingly for acute otitis media, the incidence rate of acute mastoiditis is roughly twice that in countries like the United States. However, neighboring Denmark has a rate of acute mastoiditis similar to that in the Netherlands but an antibiotic-prescribing rate for acute otitis media more similar to that in the United States.

In typical acute mastoiditis, purulent exudate collects in the mastoid air cells (Fig. 31-1), producing pressure that may result in erosion of the surrounding bone and formation of abscess-like cavities that are usually evident on CT. Patients typically present with pain, erythema, and swelling of the mastoid process along with displacement of the pinna, usually in conjunction with the typical signs and symptoms of acute middle-ear infection. Rarely, patients can develop severe complications if the infection tracks under the periosteum of the temporal bone to cause a subperiosteal abscess, erodes through the mastoid tip to cause a deep neck abscess, or extends posteriorly to cause septic thrombosis of the lateral sinus.

Figure 31-1

 
 
 
Acute mastoiditis. Axial CT image shows an acute fluid collection within the mastoid air cells on the left.
 
 

Purulent fluid should be cultured whenever possible to help guide antimicrobial therapy. Initial empirical therapy usually is directed against the typical organisms associated with acute otitis media, such as S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, and M. catarrhalis. Some patients with more severe or prolonged courses of illness should be treated for infection with S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli (including Pseudomonas). Broad empirical therapy is usually narrowed once culture results become available. Most patients can be treated conservatively with IV antibiotics; surgery (cortical mastoidectomy) can be reserved for complicated cases and those in which conservative treatment has failed.
 
Infections of the Pharynx and Oral Cavity

Oropharyngeal infections range from mild, self-limited viral illnesses to serious, life-threatening bacterial infections. The most common presenting symptom is sore throat〞one of the most common reasons for ambulatory care visits by both adults and children. Although sore throat is a symptom in many noninfectious illnesses as well, the overwhelming majority of patients with a new sore throat have acute pharyngitis of viral or bacterial etiology.

Acute Pharyngitis

Millions of visits to primary care providers each year are for sore throat; the majority of cases of acute pharyngitis are caused by typical respiratory viruses. The most important source of concern is infection with group A -hemolytic Streptococcus (S. pyogenes) that is associated with acute glomerulonephritis and acute rheumatic fever. The risk of rheumatic fever can be reduced by timely penicillin therapy.

Etiology

A wide variety of organisms cause acute pharyngitis. The relative importance of the different pathogens can only be estimated, since a significant proportion of cases (30%) have no identified cause. Together, respiratory viruses are the most common identifiable cause of acute pharyngitis, with rhinoviruses and coronaviruses accounting for large proportions of cases (20% and at least 5%, respectively). Influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, and adenovirus also account for a measurable share of cases, the latter as part of the more clinically severe syndrome of pharyngoconjunctival fever. Other important but less common viral causes include herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2, coxsackievirus A, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Acute HIV infection can present as acute pharyngitis and should be considered in at-risk populations.

Acute bacterial pharyngitis is typically caused by S. pyogenes, which accounts for 5每15% of all cases of acute pharyngitis in adults; rates vary with the season and with utilization of the health care system. Group A streptococcal pharyngitis is primarily a disease of children 5每15 years of age; it is uncommon among children <3 years old, as is rheumatic fever. Streptococci of groups C and G account for a minority of cases, although these serogroups are nonrheumatogenic. Fusobacterium necrophorum has been increasingly recognized as a cause of pharyngitis in adolescents and young adults and is isolated nearly as often as group A streptococci. This information is important because of the rare but life-threatening Lemierre's disease, which is generally associated with F. necrophorum and is usually preceded by pharyngitis (see "Oral Infections," below). The remaining bacterial causes of acute pharyngitis are seen infrequently (<1% of cases each) but should be considered in appropriate exposure groups because of the severity of illness if left untreated; these etiologic agents include Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Corynebacterium ulcerans, Yersinia enterocolitica, and Treponema pallidum (in secondary syphilis). Anaerobic bacteria can also cause acute pharyngitis (Vincent's angina) and can contribute to more serious polymicrobial infections, such as peritonsillar or retropharyngeal abscess (see below). Atypical organisms such as M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae have been recovered from patients with acute pharyngitis; whether these agents are commensals or causes of acute infection is debatable.

Clinical Manifestations

Although the signs and symptoms accompanying acute pharyngitis are not reliable predictors of the etiologic agent, the clinical presentation occasionally suggests that one etiology is more likely than another. Acute pharyngitis due to respiratory viruses such as rhinovirus or coronavirus is usually not severe and typically is associated with a constellation of coryzal symptoms better characterized as nonspecific URI. Findings on physical examination are uncommon; fever is rare, and tender cervical adenopathy and pharyngeal exudates are not seen. In contrast, acute pharyngitis from influenza virus can be severe and is much more likely to be associated with fever as well as with myalgias, headache, and cough. The presentation of pharyngoconjunctival fever due to adenovirus infection is similar. Since pharyngeal exudate may be present on examination, this condition can be difficult to differentiate from streptococcal pharyngitis. However, adenoviral pharyngitis is distinguished by the presence of conjunctivitis in one-third to one-half of patients. Acute pharyngitis from primary HSV infection can also mimic streptococcal pharyngitis in some cases, with pharyngeal inflammation and exudate, but the presence of vesicles and shallow ulcers on the palate can help differentiate the two diseases. This HSV syndrome is distinct from pharyngitis caused by coxsackievirus (herpangina), which is associated with small vesicles that develop on the soft palate and uvula and then rupture to form shallow white ulcers. Acute exudative pharyngitis coupled with fever, fatigue, generalized lymphadenopathy, and (on occasion) splenomegaly is characteristic of infectious mononucleosis due to EBV or CMV. Acute primary infection with HIV is frequently associated with fever and acute pharyngitis as well as with myalgias, arthralgias, malaise, and occasionally a nonpruritic maculopapular rash, which may be followed by lymphadenopathy and mucosal ulcerations without exudate.

The clinical features of acute pharyngitis caused by streptococci of groups A, C, and G are all similar, ranging from a relatively mild illness without many accompanying symptoms to clinically severe cases with profound pharyngeal pain, fever, chills, and abdominal pain. A hyperemic pharyngeal membrane with tonsillar hypertrophy and exudate is usually seen, along with tender anterior cervical adenopathy. Coryzal manifestations, including cough, are typically absent; when present, they suggest a viral etiology. Strains of S. pyogenes that generate erythrogenic toxin can also produce scarlet fever characterized by an erythematous rash and strawberry tongue. The other types of acute bacterial pharyngitis (e.g., gonococcal, diphtherial, and yersinial) often present as exudative pharyngitis with or without other clinical features. Their etiologies are often suggested only by the clinical history.

Diagnosis

The primary goal of diagnostic testing is to separate acute streptococcal pharyngitis from pharyngitis of other etiologies (particularly viral) so that antibiotics can be prescribed more efficiently for patients to whom they may be beneficial. The most appropriate standard for the diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis, however, has not been established definitively. Throat swab culture is generally regarded as the most appropriate but cannot distinguish between infection and colonization and requires 24每48 h to yield results that vary with technique and culture conditions. Rapid antigen-detection tests offer good specificity (>90%) but lower sensitivity when implemented in routine practice. The sensitivity has also been shown to vary across the clinical spectrum of disease (65每90%). Several clinical prediction systems (Table 31-3) can increase the sensitivity of rapid antigen-detection tests to >90% in controlled settings. Since the sensitivities achieved in routine clinical practice are often lower, several medical and professional societies continue to recommend that all negative rapid antigen-detection tests in children be confirmed by a throat culture to limit transmission and complications of illness caused by group A streptococci. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Infectious Diseases Society of America, and the American Academy of Family Physicians do not recommend backup culture when adults have negative results in a highly sensitive rapid antigen-detection test, however, because of the lower prevalence and smaller benefit in this age group.

Table 31-3 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Pharyngitis

 
 
Age Group Diagnostic Criteria Treatment Recommendationsa
  
Adults Clinical suspicion of streptococcal pharyngitis (e.g., fever, tonsillar swelling, exudate, enlarged/tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, absence of cough or coryza)b

with:

History of rheumatic fever or

Documented household exposure or

Positive rapid strep screen
 Penicillin VK, 500 mg PO tid; or

Amoxicillin, 500 mg PO bid; or

Erythromycin, 250 mg PO qid; or

Benzathine penicillin G, single dose of 1.2 million units IM
 
Children Clinical suspicion of streptococcal pharyngitis (e.g., tonsillar swelling, exudate, enlarged/tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, absence of coryza)

with:

History of rheumatic fever or

Documented household exposure or

Positive rapid strep screen or

Positive throat culture (for patients with negative rapid strep screen)
 Amoxicillin, 45 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid or tid); or

Penicillin VK, 50 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (bid); or

Cephalexin, 50 mg/kg qd PO in divided doses (qid); or

Benzathine penicillin G, single dose of 25,000 units/kg IM
 
 


a Unless otherwise specified, the duration of therapy is generally 10 days, with appropriate follow-up.

b Some organizations support treating adults who have these symptoms and signs without administering a rapid streptococcal antigen test.

Sources: Cooper et al, 2001; Schwartz et al, 1998.
 

Cultures and rapid diagnostic tests for other causes of acute pharyngitis, such as influenza virus, adenovirus, HSV, EBV, CMV, and M. pneumoniae, are available in some locations and can be used when these infections are suspected. The diagnosis of acute EBV infection depends primarily on the detection of antibodies to the virus with a heterophile agglutination assay (monospot slide test) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Testing for HIV RNA or antigen (p24) should be performed when acute primary HIV infection is suspected. If other bacterial causes are suspected (particularly N. gonorrhoeae, C. diphtheriae, or Y. enterocolitica), specific cultures should be requested since these organisms may be missed on routine throat swab culture.

Treatment: Pharyngitis

Antibiotic treatment of pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes confers numerous benefits, including a decrease in the risk of rheumatic fever. The magnitude of this benefit is fairly small, since rheumatic fever is now a rare disease, even among untreated patients. Nevertheless, when therapy is started within 48 h of illness onset, symptom duration is decreased. An additional benefit of therapy is the potential to reduce the transmission of streptococcal pharyngitis, particularly in areas of overcrowding or close contact. Antibiotic therapy for acute pharyngitis is therefore recommended in cases in which S. pyogenes is confirmed as the etiologic agent by rapid antigen-detection test or throat swab culture. Otherwise, antibiotics should be given in routine cases only when another bacterial cause has been identified. Effective therapy for streptococcal pharyngitis consists of either a single dose of IM benzathine penicillin or a full 10-day course of oral penicillin (Table 31-3).

Erythromycin can be used in place of penicillin, although resistance to erythromycin among S. pyogenes strains in some parts of the world (particularly Europe) can prohibit the use of this drug. Newer (and more expensive) antibiotics are also active against streptococci but offer no greater efficacy than the agents mentioned above. Testing for cure is unnecessary and may reveal only chronic colonization. There is no evidence to support antibiotic treatment of group C or G streptococcal pharyngitis or pharyngitis in which mycoplasmas or chlamydiae have been recovered. Penicillin prophylaxis (benzathine penicillin G, 1.2 million units IM every 3每4 weeks) is indicated for patients at risk of recurrent rheumatic fever.

Treatment of viral pharyngitis is entirely symptom-based except in infection with influenza virus or HSV. For influenza, the repertoire of therapeutic agents includes the adamantanes amantadine and rimantadine and the neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir. Administration of all these agents needs to be started within 36每48 h of symptom onset to reduce illness duration meaningfully. Among these agents, only oseltamivir and zanamivir are active against both influenza A and influenza B and therefore can be used when local patterns of infection and antiviral resistance are unknown. Oropharyngeal HSV infection sometimes responds to treatment with antiviral agents such as acyclovir, although these drugs are often reserved for immunosuppressed patients.

Complications

Although rheumatic fever is the best-known complication of acute streptococcal pharyngitis, the risk of its following acute infection remains quite low. Other complications include acute glomerulonephritis and numerous suppurative conditions, such as peritonsillar abscess (quinsy), otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis, bacteremia, and pneumonia〞all of which occur at low rates. Although antibiotic treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis can prevent the development of rheumatic fever, there is no evidence that it can prevent acute glomerulonephritis. Some evidence supports antibiotic use to prevent the suppurative complications of streptococcal pharyngitis, particularly peritonsillar abscess, which can also involve oral anaerobes such as Fusobacterium. Abscesses usually are accompanied by severe pharyngeal pain, dysphagia, fever, and dehydration; in addition, medial displacement of the tonsil and lateral displacement of the uvula are often evident on examination. Although early use of IV antibiotics (e.g., clindamycin, penicillin G with metronidazole) may obviate the need for surgical drainage in some cases, treatment typically involves needle aspiration or incision and drainage.

Oral Infections

Aside from periodontal disease such as gingivitis, infections of the oral cavity most commonly involve HSV or Candida species. In addition to causing painful cold sores on the lips, HSV can infect the tongue and buccal mucosa, causing the formation of irritating vesicles. Although topical antiviral agents (e.g., acyclovir and penciclovir) can be used externally for cold sores, oral or IV acyclovir is often needed for primary infections, extensive oral infections, and infections in immunocompromised patients. Oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush) is caused by a variety of Candida species, most often C. albicans. Thrush occurs predominantly in neonates, immunocompromised patients (especially those with AIDS), and recipients of prolonged antibiotic or glucocorticoid therapy. In addition to sore throat, patients often report a burning tongue, and physical examination reveals friable white or gray plaques on the gingiva, tongue, and oral mucosa. Treatment that usually consists of an oral antifungal suspension (nystatin or clotrimazole) or oral fluconazole, is frequently successful. In the uncommon cases of fluconazole-refractory thrush that are seen in some patients with AIDS, other therapeutic options include oral formulations of itraconazole, amphotericin B, posaconazole, or voriconazole as well as an IV echinocandin (caspofungin, micafungin, or anidulafungin) or amphotericin B deoxycholate, if needed. In these cases, therapy based on culture and susceptibility test results is ideal.

Vincent's angina, also known as acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or trench mouth, is a unique and dramatic form of gingivitis characterized by painful, inflamed gingiva with ulcerations of the interdental papillae that bleed easily. Since oral anaerobes are the cause, patients typically have halitosis and frequently present with fever, malaise, and lymphadenopathy. Treatment consists of debridement and oral administration of penicillin plus metronidazole, with clindamycin alone as an alternative.

Ludwig's angina is a rapidly progressive, potentially fulminant form of cellulitis that involves the bilateral sublingual andsubmandibular spaces and that typically originates from an infected or recently extracted tooth, most commonly the lower second and third molars. Improved dental care has reduced the incidence of this disorder substantially. Infection in these areas leads to dysphagia, odynophagia, and "woody" edema in the sublingual region, forcing the tongue up and back with the potential for airway obstruction. Fever, dysarthria, and drooling also may be noted, and patients may speak in a "hot potato" voice. Intubation or tracheostomy may be necessary to secure the airway, as asphyxiation is the most common cause of death. Patients should be monitored closely and treated promptly with IV antibiotics directed against streptococci and oral anaerobes. Recommended agents include ampicillin/sulbactam and high-dose penicillin plus metronidazole.

Postanginal septicemia (Lemierre's disease) is a rare anaerobic oropharyngeal infection caused predominantly by F. necrophorum. The illness typically starts as a sore throat (most commonly in adolescents and young adults), which may present as exudative tonsillitis or peritonsillar abscess. Infection of the deep pharyngeal tissue allows organisms to drain into the lateral pharyngeal space, which contains the carotid artery and internal jugular vein. Septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein can result, with associated pain, dysphagia, and neck swelling and stiffness. Sepsis usually occurs 3每10 days after the onset of sore throat and is often coupled with metastatic infection to the lung and other distant sites. Occasionally, the infection can extend along the carotid sheath and into the posterior mediastinum, resulting in mediastinitis, or it can erode into the carotid artery, with the early sign of repeated small bleeds into the mouth. The mortality rate from these invasive infections can be as high as 50%. Treatment consists of IV antibiotics (penicillin G or clindamycin) and surgical drainage of any purulent collections. The concomitant use of anticoagulants to prevent embolization remains controversial but is often advised, with careful consideration of both the risks and the benefits.
 
Infections of the Larynx and Epiglottis

Laryngitis

Laryngitis is defined as any inflammatory process involving the larynx and can be caused by a variety of infectious and noninfectious processes. The vast majority of laryngitis cases seen in clinical practice in developed countries are acute. Acute laryngitis is a common syndrome caused predominantly by the same viruses responsible for many other URIs. In fact, most cases of acute laryngitis occur in the setting of a viral URI.

Etiology

Nearly all major respiratory viruses have been implicated in acute viral laryngitis, including rhinovirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, coxsackievirus, coronavirus, and RSV. Acute laryngitis can also be associated with acute bacterial respiratory infections such as those caused by group A Streptococcus or C. diphtheriae (although diphtheria has been virtually eliminated in the United States). Another bacterial pathogen thought to play a role (albeit unclear) in the pathogenesis of acute laryngitis is M. catarrhalis, which has been recovered on nasopharyngeal culture in a significant percentage of cases.

Chronic laryngitis of infectious etiology is much less common in developed than in developing countries. Laryngitis due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis is often difficult to distinguish from laryngeal cancer, in part because of the frequent absence of signs, symptoms, and radiographic findings typical of pulmonary disease. Histoplasma and Blastomyces may cause laryngitis, often as a complication of systemic infection. Candida species can cause laryngitis as well, often in association with thrush or esophagitis and particularly in immunosuppressed patients. Rare cases of chronic laryngitis are due to Coccidioides and Cryptococcus.

Clinical Manifestations

Laryngitis is characterized by hoarseness and also can be associated with reduced vocal pitch or aphonia. As acute laryngitis is caused predominantly by respiratory viruses, these symptoms usually occur in association with other symptoms and signs of URI, including rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, cough, and sore throat. Direct laryngoscopy often reveals diffuse laryngeal erythema and edema, along with vascular engorgement of the vocal folds. In addition, chronic disease (e.g., tuberculous laryngitis) often includes mucosal nodules and ulcerations visible on laryngoscopy; these lesions sometimes are mistaken for laryngeal cancer.

Treatment: Laryngitis

Acute laryngitis usually is treated with humidification and voice rest alone. Antibiotics are not recommended except when group A Streptococcus is cultured, in which case penicillin is the drug of choice. The choice of therapy for chronic laryngitis depends on the pathogen, whose identification usually requires biopsy with culture. Patients with laryngeal tuberculosis are highly contagious because of the large number of organisms that are easily aerosolized. These patients should be managed in the same way as patients with active pulmonary disease.

Croup

The term croup actually denotes a group of diseases collectively referred to as "croup syndrome," all of which are acute and predominantly viral respiratory illnesses characterized by marked swelling of the subglottic region of the larynx. Croup primarily affects children <6 years old. For a detailed discussion of this entity, the reader should consult a textbook of pediatric medicine.

Epiglottitis

Acute epiglottitis (supraglottitis) is an acute, rapidly progressive form of cellulitis of the epiglottis and adjacent structures that can result in complete〞and potentially fatal〞airway obstruction in both children and adults. Before the widespread use of H. influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine, this entity was much more common among children, with a peak incidence at 3.5 years of age. In some countries, mass vaccination against Hib has reduced the annual incidence of acute epiglottitis in children by >90%; in contrast, the annual incidence in adults has changed little since the introduction of Hib vaccine. Because of the danger of airway obstruction, acute epiglottitis constitutes a medical emergency, particularly in children, and prompt diagnosis and airway protection are of the utmost importance.

Etiology

After the introduction of the Hib vaccine in the mid-1980s, disease incidence among children in the United States declined dramatically. Nevertheless, lack of vaccination or vaccine failure has meant that many pediatric cases seen today are still due to Hib. In adults and (more recently) in children, a variety of other bacterial pathogens have been associated with epiglottitis, the most common being group A Streptococcus. Other pathogens seen less frequently include S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, and S. aureus (including MRSA). Viruses have not been established as causes of acute epiglottitis.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

Epiglottitis typically presents more acutely in young children than in adolescents or adults. On presentation, most children have had symptoms for <24 h, including high fever, severe sore throat, tachycardia, systemic toxicity, and (in many cases) drooling while sitting forward. Symptoms and signs of respiratory obstruction may also be present and may progress rapidly. The somewhat milder illness in adolescents and adults often follows 1每2 days of severe sore throat and is commonly accompanied by dyspnea, drooling, and stridor. Physical examination of patients with acute epiglottitis may reveal moderate or severe respiratory distress, with inspiratory stridor and retractions of the chest wall. These findings diminish as the disease progresses and the patient tires. Conversely, oropharyngeal examination reveals infection that is much less severe than would be predicted from the symptoms〞a finding that should alert the clinician to a cause of symptoms and obstruction that lies beyond the tonsils. The diagnosis often is made on clinical grounds, although direct fiberoptic laryngoscopy is frequently performed in a controlled environment (e.g., an operating room) to visualize and culture the typical edematous "cherry-red" epiglottis and facilitate placement of an endotracheal tube. Direct visualization in an examination room (i.e., with a tongue blade and indirect laryngoscopy) is not recommended because of the risk of immediate laryngospasm and complete airway obstruction. Lateral neck radiographs and laboratory tests can assist in the diagnosis but may delay the critical securing of the airway and cause the patient to be moved or repositioned more than is necessary, thereby increasing the risk of further airway compromise. Neck radiographs typically reveal an enlarged edematous epiglottis (the "thumbprint sign," Fig. 31-2), usually with a dilated hypopharynx and normal subglottic structures. Laboratory tests characteristically document mild to moderate leukocytosis with a predominance of neutrophils. Blood cultures are positive in a significant proportion of cases.

Figure 31-2

 
 
 
Acute epiglottitis. In this lateral soft tissue radiograph of the neck, the arrow indicates the enlarged edematous epiglottis (the "thumbprint sign").
 
 

Treatment: Epiglottitis

Security of the airway is always of primary concern in acute epiglottitis, even if the diagnosis is only suspected. Mere observation for signs of impending airway obstruction is not routinely recommended, particularly in children. Many adults have been managed with observation only since the illness is perceived to be milder in this age group, but some data suggest that this approach may be risky and probably should be reserved only for adult patients who have yet to develop dyspnea or stridor. Once the airway has been secured and specimens of blood and epiglottis tissue have been obtained for culture, treatment with IV antibiotics should be given to cover the most likely organisms, particularly H. influenzae. Because rates of ampicillin resistance in this organism have risen significantly in recent years, therapy with a -lactam/-lactamase inhibitor combination or a second- or third-generation cephalosporin is recommended. Typically, ampicillin/sulbactam, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, or ceftriaxone is given, with clindamycin and TMP-SMX reserved for patients allergic to -lactams. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 7每10 days and should be tailored to the organism recovered in culture. If the household contacts of a patient with H. influenzae epiglottitis include an unvaccinated child under age 4, all members of the household (including the patient) should receive prophylactic rifampin for 4 days to eradicate carriage of H. influenzae.
 
Infections of the Deep Neck Structures

Deep neck infections are usually extensions of infection from other primary sites, most often within the pharynx or oral cavity. Many of these infections are life threatening but are difficult to detect at early stages, when they may be more easily managed. Three of the most clinically relevant spaces in the neck are the submandibular (and sublingual) space, the lateral pharyngeal (or parapharyngeal) space, and the retropharyngeal space. These spaces communicate with one another and with other important structures in the head, neck, and thorax, providing pathogens with easy access to areas that include the mediastinum, carotid sheath, skull base, and meninges. Once infection reaches these sensitive areas, mortality rates can be as high as 20每50%.

Infection of the submandibular and/or sublingual space typically originates from an infected or recently extracted lower tooth. The result is the severe, life-threatening infection referred to as Ludwig's angina (see "Oral Infections," above). Infection of the lateral pharyngeal (or parapharyngeal) space is most often a complication of common infections of the oral cavity and upper respiratory tract, including tonsillitis, peritonsillar abscess, pharyngitis, mastoiditis, and periodontal infection. This space, situated deep in the lateral wall of the pharynx, contains a number of sensitive structures, including the carotid artery, internal jugular vein, cervical sympathetic chain, and portions of cranial nerves IX through XII; at its distal end, it opens into the posterior mediastinum. Involvement of this space with infection can therefore be rapidly fatal. Examination may reveal some tonsillar displacement, trismus, and neck rigidity, but swelling of the lateral pharyngeal wall can easily be missed. The diagnosis can be confirmed by CT. Treatment consists of airway management, operative drainage of fluid collections, and at least 10 days of IV therapy with an antibiotic active against streptococci and oral anaerobes (e.g., ampicillin/sulbactam). A particularly severe form of this infection involving the components of the carotid sheath (postanginal septicemia, Lemierre's disease) is described above (see "Oral Infections"). Infection of the retropharyngeal space can also be extremely dangerous, as this space runs posterior to the pharynx from the skull base to the superior mediastinum. Infections in this space are more common among children <5 years old because of the presence of several small retropharyngeal lymph nodes that typically atrophy by age 4 years. Infection is usually a consequence of extension from another site of infection, most commonly, acute pharyngitis. Other sources include otitis media, tonsillitis, dental infections, Ludwig's angina, and anterior extension of vertebral osteomyelitis. Retropharyngeal space infection also can follow penetrating trauma to the posterior pharynx (e.g., from an endoscopic procedure). Infections are commonly polymicrobial, involving a mixture of aerobes and anaerobes; group A -hemolytic streptococci and S. aureus are the most common pathogens. M. tuberculosis was a common cause in the past but now is rarely involved in the United States.

Patients with retropharyngeal abscess typically present with sore throat, fever, dysphagia, and neck pain and are often drooling because of difficulty and pain with swallowing. Examination may reveal tender cervical adenopathy, neck swelling, and diffuse erythema and edema of the posterior pharynx as well as a bulge in the posterior pharyngeal wall that may not be obvious on routine inspection. A soft tissue mass is usually demonstrable by lateral neck radiography or CT. Because of the risk of airway obstruction, treatment begins with securing of the airway, followed by a combination of surgical drainage and IV antibiotic administration. Initial empirical therapy should cover streptococci, oral anaerobes, and S. aureus; ampicillin/sulbactam, clindamycin alone, or clindamycin plus ceftriaxone is usually effective. Complications result primarily from extension to other areas (e.g., rupture into the posterior pharynx may lead to aspiration pneumonia and empyema). Extension may also occur to the lateral pharyngeal space and mediastinum, resulting in mediastinitis and pericarditis, or into nearby major blood vessels. All these events are associated with a high mortality rate.
 
Further Readings

American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Management of Acute Otitis Media: Diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics 113:1451, 2004 

 
American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Management of Sinusitis and Committee on Quality Improvement: Clinical practice guideline: Management of sinusitis. Pediatrics 108:798, 2001 

 
Centor RM: Expand the pharyngitis paradigm for adolescents and young adults. Ann Intern Med 151:812, 2009 [PMID: 19949147] 

 
Cooper RJ et al: Principles of appropriate antibiotic use for acute pharyngitis in adults: Background. Ann Intern Med 134:509, 2001 [PMID: 11255530] 

 
Gonzales R et al: Principles of appropriate antibiotic use for treatment of nonspecific upper respiratory tract infections in adults: Background. Ann Intern Med 134:490, 2001 [PMID: 11255526] 

 
Grijalva CG et al: Antibiotic prescription rates for acute respiratory tract infections in US ambulatory settings. JAMA 302:758, 2009 [PMID: 19690308] 

 
Meropol SB: Valuing reduced antibiotic use for pediatric acute otitis media. Pediatrics 122:669, 2008 

 
Rafei K et al: Airway infectious disease emergencies. Pediatr Clin North Am 53:215, 2006 [PMID: 16574523] 

 
Rosenfeld RM et al: Clinical practice guideline: Adult sinusitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 137(3 Suppl):S1, 2007 

 
Schwartz B et al: Pharyngitis〞principles of judicious use of antimicrobial agents. Pediatrics 101:171, 1998 

 
Thompson P et al: Effect of antibiotics for otitis media on mastoiditis in children: A retrospective cohort study using the United Kingdom general practice research database. Pediatrics 123:424, 2009 [PMID: 19171605] 

 
Williamson IG et al: Antibiotics and topical nasal steroid for treatment of acute maxillary sinusitis. JAMA 298:2487, 2007 [PMID: 18056902] 

 
Young J et al: Antibiotics for adults with clinically diagnosed acute rhinosinusitis: A meta-analysis of individual patient data. Lancet 371:908, 2008 [PMID: 18342685] 
 
 

^^
Oral Manifestations of Disease: Introduction

As primary care physicians and consultants, internists are often asked to evaluate patients with disease of the oral soft tissues, teeth, and pharynx. Knowledge of the oral milieu and its unique structures is necessary to guide preventive services and recognize oral manifestations of local or systemic disease (Chap. e12). Furthermore, internists frequently collaborate with dentists in the care of patients who have a variety of medical conditions that affect oral health or who undergo dental procedures that increase their risk of medical complications.
 
Diseases of the Teeth and Periodontal Structures

Tooth and Periodontal Structure

Tooth formation begins during the sixth week of embryonic life and continues through the first 17 years of age. Tooth development begins in utero and continues until after the tooth erupts. Normally, all 20 deciduous teeth have erupted by age 3 and have been shed by age 13. Permanent teeth, eventually totaling 32, begin to erupt by age 6 and have completely erupted by age 14, though third molars (wisdom teeth) may erupt later.

The erupted tooth consists of the visible crown covered with enamel and the root submerged below the gum line and covered with bonelike cementum. Dentin, a material that is denser than bone and exquisitely sensitive to pain, forms the majority of the tooth substance. Dentin surrounds a core of myxomatous pulp containing the vascular and nerve supply. The tooth is held firmly in the alveolar socket by the periodontium, supporting structures that consist of the gingivae, alveolar bone, cementum, and periodontal ligament. The periodontal ligament tenaciously binds the tooth's cementum to the alveolar bone. Above this ligament is a collar of attached gingiva just below the crown. A few millimeters of unattached or free gingiva (1每3 mm) overlap the base of the crown, forming a shallow sulcus along the gum-tooth margin.

Dental Caries, Pulpal and Periapical Disease, and Complications

Dental caries begin asymptomatically as a destructive process of the hard surface of the tooth. Streptococcus mutans, principally, along with other bacteria colonize the organic buffering film on the tooth surface to produce plaque. If not removed by brushing or the natural cleaning action of saliva and oral soft tissues, bacterial acids demineralize the enamel. Fissures and pits on the occlusion surfaces are the most frequent sites of decay. Surfaces adjacent to tooth restorations and exposed roots are also vulnerable, particularly as teeth are retained in an aging population. Over time, dental caries extend to the underlying dentin, leading to cavitation of the enamel and, ultimately, penetration to the tooth pulp, producing acute pulpitis. At this early stage, when the pulp infection is limited, the tooth becomes sensitive to percussion and hot or cold, and pain resolves immediately when the irritating stimulus is removed. Should the infection spread throughout the pulp, irreversible pulpitis occurs, leading to pulp necrosis. At this late stage, pain is severe and has a sharp or throbbing visceral quality that may be worse when the patient lies down. Once pulp necrosis is complete, pain may be constant or intermittent, but cold sensitivity is lost.

Treatment of caries involves removal of the softened and infected hard tissue; sealing the exposed dentin; and restoration of the tooth structure with silver amalgam, composite resin, gold, or porcelain. Once irreversible pulpitis occurs, root canal therapy is necessary, and the contents of the pulp chamber and root canals are removed, followed by thorough cleaning, antisepsis, and filling with an inert material. Alternatively, the tooth may be extracted.

Pulpal infection, if it does not egress through the decayed enamel, leads to periapical abscess formation, which produces pain on chewing. If the infection is mild and chronic, a periapical granuloma or eventually a periapical cyst forms, either of which produces radiolucency at the root apex. When unchecked, a periapical abscess can erode into the alveolar bone producing osteomyelitis, penetrate and drain through the gingivae (parulis or gumboil), or track along deep fascial planes, producing a virulent cellulitis (Ludwig's angina) involving the submandibular space and floor of the mouth (Chap. 164). Elderly patients, those with diabetes mellitus, and patients taking glucocorticoids may experience little or no pain and fever as these complications develop.

Periodontal Disease

Periodontal disease accounts for more tooth loss than caries, particularly in the elderly. Like dental caries, chronic infection of the gingiva and anchoring structures of the tooth begins with formation of bacterial plaque. The process begins invisibly above the gum line and in the gingival sulcus. Plaque, including mineralized plaque (calculus), is preventable by appropriate dental hygiene, including periodic professional cleaning. Left undisturbed, chronic inflammation ensues and produces a painless hyperemia of the free and attached gingivae (gingivitis) that typically bleeds with brushing. If ignored, severe periodontitis occurs, leading to deepening of the physiologic sulcus and destruction of the periodontal ligament. Pockets develop around the teeth and become filled with pus and debris. As the periodontium is destroyed, teeth loosen and exfoliate. Eventually, there is resorption of the alveolar bone. A role for the chronic inflammation resulting from chronic periodontal disease in promoting coronary heart disease and stroke has been proposed. Epidemiologic studies demonstrate a moderate but significant association between chronic periodontal inflammation and atherogenesis, though a causal role remains unproven.

Acute and aggressive forms of periodontal disease are less common than the chronic forms described above. However, if the host is stressed or exposed to a new pathogen, rapidly progressive and destructive disease of the periodontal tissue can occur. A virulent example is acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) or Vincent's infection. Stress, poor oral hygiene, and tobacco and alcohol use are risk factors. The presentation includes sudden gingival inflammation, ulceration, bleeding, interdental gingival necrosis, and fetid halitosis. Localized juvenile periodontitis, seen in adolescents, is particularly destructive and appears to be associated with impaired neutrophil chemotaxis. AIDS-related periodontitis resembles ANUG in some patients or a more destructive form of adult chronic periodontitis in others. It may also produce a gangrene-like destructive process of the oral soft tissues and bone that resembles noma, seen in severely malnourished children in developing nations.

Prevention of Tooth Decay and Periodontal Infection

Despite the reduced prevalence of dental caries and periodontal disease in the United States due in large part to water fluoridation and improved dental care, respectively, both diseases constitute a major public health problem worldwide and for certain groups. The internist should promote preventive dental care and hygiene as part of health maintenance. Special populations at high risk for dental caries and periodontal disease include those with xerostomia, diabetics, alcoholics, tobacco users, those with Down's syndrome, and those with gingival hyperplasia. Furthermore, patients lacking dental-care access (low socioeconomic status) and those with reduced ability to provide self-care (e.g., nursing home residents and those with dementia or upper-extremity disability) suffer at a disproportionate rate. It is important to provide counseling regarding regular dental hygiene and professional cleaning, use of fluoride-containing toothpaste, professional fluoride treatments, and use of electric toothbrushes for patients with limited dexterity and to give instruction to caregivers for those unable to perform self-care. Internists caring for international students studying in the United States should be aware of the high prevalence of dental decay in this population. Cost, fear of dental care, and language and cultural differences may create barriers that prevent some from seeking preventive dental services.

Developmental and Systemic Disease Affecting the Teethand Periodontium

Malocclusion is the most common developmental problem, which, in addition to a problem with cosmesis, can interfere with mastication unless corrected through orthodontic techniques. Impacted third molars are common and occasionally become infected. Acquired prognathism due to acromegaly may also lead to malocclusion, as may deformity of the maxilla and mandible due to Paget's disease of the bone. Delayed tooth eruption, receding chin, and a protruding tongue are occasional features of cretinism and hypopituitarism. Congenital syphilis produces tapering, notched (Hutchinson's) incisors and finely nodular (mulberry) molar crowns.

Enamel hypoplasia results in crown defects ranging from pits to deep fissures of primary or permanent teeth. Intrauterine infection (syphilis, rubella), vitamin deficiency (A, C, or D), disorders of calcium metabolism (malabsorption, vitamin D每resistant rickets, hypoparathyroidism), prematurity, high fever, or rare inherited defects (amelogenesis imperfecta) are all causes. Tetracycline, given in sufficiently high doses during the first eight years, may produce enamel hypoplasia and discoloration. Exposure to endogenous pigments can discolor developing teeth: erythroblastosis fetalis (green or bluish-black), congenital liver disease (green or yellow-brown), and porphyria (red or brown that fluoresces with ultraviolet light). Mottled enamel occurs if excessive fluoride is ingested during development. Worn enamel is seen with age, bruxism, or excessive acid exposure (e.g., chronic gastric reflux or bulimia).

Premature tooth loss resulting from periodontitis is seen with cyclic neutropenia, Papillon-Lef豕vre syndrome, Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome, and leukemia. Rapid focal tooth loosening is most often due to infection, but rarer causes include Langerhans cell histiocytosis, Ewing's sarcoma, osteosarcoma, or Burkitt's lymphoma. Early loss of primary teeth is a feature of hypophosphatasia, a rare inborn error of metabolism.

Pregnancy may produce severe gingivitis and localized pyogenic granulomas. Severe periodontal disease occurs with Down's syndrome and diabetes mellitus. Gingival hyperplasia may be caused by phenytoin, calcium channel blockers (e.g., nifedipine), and cyclosporine. Idiopathic familial gingival fibromatosis and several syndrome-related disorders appear similar. Removal of the medication often reverses the drug-induced form, though surgery may be needed to control both. Linear gingival erythema is variably seen in patients with advanced HIV infection and probably represents immune deficiency and decreased neutrophil activity. Diffuse or focal gingival swelling may be a feature of early or late acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML) as well as of other lymphoproliferative disorders. A rare, but pathognomonic, sign of Wegener's granulomatosis is a red-purplish, granular gingivitis (strawberry gums).
 
Diseases of the Oral Mucosa

Infection

Most oral mucosal diseases involve microorganisms (Table 32-1).

Table 32-1 Vesicular, Bullous, or Ulcerative Lesions of the Oral Mucosa

 
 
Condition Usual Location Clinical Features Course 
Viral Diseases  
Primary acute herpetic gingivostomatitis [herpes simplex virus (HSV ) type 1, rarely type 2] Lip and oral mucosa (buccal, gingival, lingual mucosa) Labial vesicles that rupture and crust, and intraoral vesicles that quickly ulcerate; extremely painful; acute gingivitis, fever, malaise, foul odor, and cervical lymphadenopathy; occurs primarily in infants, children, and young adults Heals spontaneously in 10每14 days. Unless secondarily infected, lesions lasting >3 weeks are not due to primary HSV infection 
Recurrent herpes labialis Mucocutaneous junction of lip, perioral skin Eruption of groups of vesicles that may coalesce, then rupture and crust; painful to pressure or spicy foods Lasts about 1 week, but condition may be prolonged if secondarily infected. If severe, topical or oral antiviral may reduce healing time 
Recurrent intraoral herpes simplex Palate and gingiva Small vesicles on keratinizedepithelium that rupture and coalesce; painful Heals spontaneously in about 1 week. If severe, topical or oral antiviral may reduce healing time. 
Chickenpox (varicella-zoster virus) Gingiva and oral mucosa Skin lesions may be accompanied by small vesicles on oral mucosa that rupture to form shallow ulcers; may coalesce to form large bullous lesions that ulcerate; mucosa may have generalized erythema Lesions heal spontaneously within 2 weeks 
Herpes zoster (reactivation of varicella-zoster virus) Cheek, tongue, gingiva, or palate Unilateral vesicular eruptions and ulceration in linear pattern following sensory distribution of trigeminal nerve or one of its branches Gradual healing without scarring unless secondarily infected; postherpetic neuralgia is common. Oral acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir reduce healing time and postherpetic neuralgia 
Infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus) Oral mucosa Fatigue, sore throat, malaise, fever, and cervical lymphadenopathy; numerous small ulcers usually appear several days before lymphadenopathy; gingival bleeding and multiple petechiae at junction of hard and soft palates Oral lesions disappear during convalescence; no treatment though glucocorticoids indicated if tonsillar swelling compromises airway 
Herpangina (coxsackievirus A; also possibly coxsackie B and echovirus) Oral mucosa, pharynx, tongue Sudden onset of fever, sore throat, and oropharyngeal vesicles, usually in children under 4 years, during summer months; diffuse pharyngeal congestion and vesicles (1每2 mm), grayish-white surrounded by red areola; vesicles enlarge and ulcerate Incubation period 2每9 days; fever for 1每4 days; recovery uneventful 
Hand, foot, and mouth disease (coxsackievirus A16 most common) Oral mucosa, pharynx, palms, and soles Fever, malaise, headache with oropharyngeal vesicles that become painful, shallow ulcers; highly infectious; usually affects children under age 10 Incubation period 2每18 days; lesions heal spontaneously in 2每4 weeks 
Primary HIV infection Gingiva, palate, and pharynx Acute gingivitis and oropharyngeal ulceration, associated with febrile illness resembling mononucleosis and including lymphadenopathy Followed by HIV seroconversion, asymptomatic HIV infection, and usually ultimately by HIV disease 
Bacterial or Fungal Diseases  
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis ("trench mouth," Vincent's infection) Gingiva Painful, bleeding gingiva characterized by necrosis and ulceration of gingival papillae and margins plus lymphadenopathy and foul odor Debridement and diluted (1:3) peroxide lavage provide relief within 24 h; antibiotics in acutely ill patients; relapse may occur 
Prenatal (congenital) syphilis Palate, jaws, tongue, and teeth Gummatous involvement of palate, jaws, and facial bones; Hutchinson's incisors, mulberry molars, glossitis, mucous patches, and fissures on corner of mouth Tooth deformities in permanent dentition irreversible 
Primary syphilis (chancre) Lesion appears where organism enters body; may occur on lips, tongue, or tonsillar area Small papule developing rapidly into a large, painless ulcer with indurated border; unilateral lymphadenopathy; chancre and lymph nodes containing spirochetes; serologic tests positive by third to fourth weeks Healing of chancre in 1每2 months, followed by secondary syphilis in 6每8 weeks 
Secondary syphilis Oral mucosa frequently involved with mucous patches, primarily on palate, also at commissures of mouth Maculopapular lesions of oral mucosa, 5每10 mm in diameter with central ulceration covered by grayish membrane; eruptions occurring on various mucosal surfaces and skin accompanied by fever, malaise, and sore throat Lesions may persist from several weeks to a year 
Tertiary syphilis Palate and tongue Gummatous infiltration of palate or tongue followed by ulceration and fibrosis; atrophy of tongue papillae produces characteristic bald tongue and glossitis Gumma may destroy palate, causing complete perforation 
Gonorrhea Lesions may occur in mouth at site of inoculation or secondarily by hematogenous spread from a primary focus elsewhere Most pharyngeal infection is asymptomatic; may produce burning or itching sensation; oropharynx and tonsils may be ulcerated and erythematous; saliva viscous and fetid More difficult to eradicate than urogenital infection, though pharyngitis usually resolves with appropriate antimicrobial treatment 
Tuberculosis Tongue, tonsillar area, soft palate A painless, solitary, 1每5 cm, irregular ulcer covered with a persistent exudate; ulcer has a firm undermined border Autoinoculation from pulmonary infection usual; lesions resolve with appropriate antimicrobial therapy 
Cervicofacial actinomycosis Swellings in region of face, neck, and floor of mouth Infection may be associated with an extraction, jaw fracture, or eruption of molar tooth; in acute form resembles an acute pyogenic abscess, but contains yellow "sulfur granules" (gram-positive mycelia and their hyphae) Typically, swelling is hard and grows painlessly; multiple abscesses with draining tracts develop; penicillin first choice; surgery usually necessary 
Histoplasmosis Any area of the mouth, particularly tongue, gingiva, or palate Nodular, verrucous, or granulomatous lesions; ulcers are indurated and painful; usual source hematogenous or pulmonary, but may be primary Systemic antifungal therapy necessary to treat 
Candidiasis (Table 32-3)       
Dermatologic Diseases  
Mucous membrane pemphigoid Typically produces marked gingival erythema and ulceration; other areas of oral cavity, esophagus, and vagina may be affected Painful, grayish-white collapsed vesicles or bullae of full-thickness epithelium with peripheral erythematous zone; gingival lesions desquamate, leaving ulcerated area Protracted course with remissions and exacerbations; involvement of different sites occurs slowly; glucocorticoids may temporarily reduce symptoms but do not control the disease 
Erythema multiforme minor and major (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) Primarily the oral mucosa and the skin of hands and feet Intraoral ruptured bullae surrounded by an inflammatory area; lips may show hemorrhagic crusts; the "iris," or "target," lesion on the skin is pathognomonic; patient may have severe signs of toxicity Onset very rapid; usually idiopathic, but may be associated with trigger such as drug reaction; condition may last 3每6 weeks; mortality with EM major 5每15% if untreated 
Pemphigus vulgaris Oral mucosa and skin; sites of mechanical trauma (soft/hard palate, frenulum, lips, buccal mucosa) Usually (>70%) presents with oral lesions; fragile, ruptured bullae and ulcerated oral areas; mostly in older adults With repeated occurrence of bullae, toxicity may lead to cachexia, infection, and death within 2 years; often controllable with oral glucocorticoids 
Lichen planus Oral mucosa and skin White striae in mouth; purplish nodules on skin at sites of friction; occasionally causes oral mucosal ulcers and erosive gingivitis White striae alone usually asymptomatic; erosive lesions often difficult to treat, but may respond to glucocorticoids 
Other Conditions  
Recurrent aphthous ulcers Usually on nonkeratinized oral mucosa (buccal and labial mucosa, floor of mouth, soft palate, lateral and ventral tongue) Single or clusters of painful ulcers with surrounding erythematous border; lesions may be 1每2 mm in diameter in crops (herpetiform), 1每5 mm (minor), or 5每15 mm (major) Lesions heal in 1每2 weeks but may recur monthly or several times a year; protective barrier with orabase and topical steroids give symptomatic relief; systemic glucocorticoids may be needed in severe cases 
Beh?et's syndrome Oral mucosa, eyes, genitalia, gut, and CNS Multiple aphthous ulcers in mouth; inflammatory ocular changes, ulcerative lesions on genitalia; inflammatory bowel disease and CNS disease Oral lesions often first manifestation; persist several weeks and heal without scarring 
Traumatic ulcers Anywhere on oral mucosa; dentures frequently responsible for ulcers in vestibule Localized, discrete ulcerated lesions with red border; produced by accidental biting of mucosa, penetration by a foreign object, or chronic irritation by a denture Lesions usually heal in 7每10 days whenirritant is removed, unless secondarily infected 
Squamous cell carcinoma Any area in the mouth, most commonly on lower lip, tongue, and floor of mouth Ulcer with elevated, indurated border; failure to heal, pain not prominent; lesions tend to arise in areas of erythro/leukoplakia or in smooth atrophic tongue Invades and destroys underlying tissues; frequently metastasizes to regional lymph nodes 
Acute myeloid leukemia (usually monocytic) Gingiva Gingival swelling and superficial ulceration followed by hyperplasia of gingiva with extensive necrosis and hemorrhage; deep ulcers may occur elsewhere on the mucosa complicated by secondary infection Usually responds to systemic treatmentof leukemia; occasionally requires local radiation therapy 
Lymphoma Gingiva, tongue, palate and tonsillar area Elevated, ulcerated area that may proliferate rapidly, giving the appearance of traumatic inflammation Fatal if untreated; may indicate underlying HIV infection 
Chemical or thermal burns Any area in mouth White slough due to contact with corrosive agents (e.g., aspirin, hot cheese) applied locally; removal of slough leaves raw, painful surface Lesion heals in several weeks if not secondarily infected 
 


Note: CNS, central nervous system.
 

Pigmented Lesions

See Table 32-2.

Table 32-2 Pigmented Lesions of the Oral Mucosa

 
 
Condition Usual Location Clinical Features Course 
Oral melanotic macule Any area of the mouth Discrete or diffuse localized, brown to black macule Remains indefinitely; no growth 
Diffuse melanin pigmentation Any area of the mouth Diffuse pale to dark-brown pigmentation; may be physiologic ("racial") or due to smoking Remains indefinitely 
Nevi Any area of the mouth Discrete, localized, brown to black pigmentation Remains indefinitely 
Malignant melanoma Any area of the mouth Can be flat and diffuse, painless, brown to black, or can be raised and nodular Expands and invades early; metastasis leads to death 
Addison's disease Any area of the mouth, but mostly buccal mucosa Blotches or spots of bluish-black to dark-brownpigmentation occurring early in the disease, accompanied by diffuse pigmentation of skin; other symptoms of adrenal insufficiency Condition controlled by adrenal steroid replacement 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome Any area of the mouth Dark-brown spots on lips, buccal mucosa, with characteristic distribution of pigment around lips, nose, eyes, and on hands; concomitant intestinal polyposis Oral pigmented lesions remain indefinitely; gastrointestinal polyps may become malignant 
Drug ingestion (neuroleptics, oral contraceptives, minocycline, zidovudine, quinine derivatives) Any area of the mouth Brown, black, or gray areas of pigmentation Gradually disappears following cessation of drug 
Amalgam tattoo Gingiva and alveolar mucosa Small blue-black pigmented areas associated with embedded amalgam particles in soft tissues; these may show up on radiographs as radiopaque particles in some cases Remains indefinitely 
Heavy metal pigmentation (bismuth, mercury, lead) Gingival margin Thin blue-black pigmented line along gingivalmargin; rarely seen except for children exposedto lead-based paint Indicative of systemic absorption; no significance for oral health 
Black hairy tongue Dorsum of tongue Elongation of filiform papillae of tongue, which become stained by coffee, tea, tobacco, or pigmented bacteria Improves within 1每2 weeks with gentle brushing of tongue or discontinuation of antibiotic if due to bacterial overgrowth 
Fordyce "spots" Buccal and labial mucosa Numerous small yellowish spots just beneath mucosal surface; no symptoms; due to hyperplasia of sebaceous glands Benign; remains without apparent change 
Kaposi's sarcoma Palate most common, but may occur in any other site Red or blue plaques of variable size and shape; often enlarge, become nodular and may ulcerate Usually indicative of HIV infection or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; rarely fatal, but may require treatment for comfort or cosmesis 
Mucous retention cysts Buccal and labial mucosa Bluish-clear fluid-filled cyst due to extravasated mucous from injured minor salivary gland Benign; painless unless traumatized; may be removed surgically 
 

 

Dermatologic Diseases

See Tables 32-1, 32-2, and 32-3 and Chaps. 51, 52, 53, 54, and 55.

Table 32-3 White Lesions of Oral Mucosa

 
 
Condition Usual Location Clinical Features Course 
Lichen planus Buccal mucosa, tongue, gingiva, and lips; skin Striae, white plaques, red areas, ulcers in mouth;purplish papules on skin; may be asymptomatic, sore, or painful; lichenoid drug reactions may look similar Protracted; responds to topicalglucocorticoids 
White sponge nevus Oral mucosa, vagina, anal mucosa Painless white thickening of epithelium; adolescent/early adult onset; familial Benign and permanent 
Smoker's leukoplakia and smokeless tobacco lesions Any area of oral mucosa, sometimes related to location of habit White patch that may become firm, rough, orred-fissured and ulcerated; may become sore andpainful but usually painless May or may not resolve with cessation of habit; 2% develop squamous cell carcinoma; early biopsy essential 
Erythroplakia with or without white patches Floor of mouth common in men; tongue and buccal mucosa in women Velvety, reddish plaque; occasionally mixed with white patches or smooth red areas High risk of squamous cell cancer; early biopsy essential 
Candidiasis Any area in mouth Pseudomembranous type ("thrush"): creamy white curdlike patches that reveal a raw, bleeding surface when scraped; found in sick infants, debilitated elderly patients receiving high doses of glucocorticoids or broad-spectrum antibiotics, or in patients with AIDS Responds favorably to antifungal therapy and correction of predisposing causes where possible 
    Erythematous type: flat, red, sometimes sore areas in same groups of patients  Course same as for pseudomembranous type 
    Candidal leukoplakia: nonremovable white thickening of epithelium due to Candida  Responds to prolonged antifungal therapy 
    Angular cheilitis: sore fissures at corner of mouth  Responds to topical antifungal therapy 
Hairy leukoplakia Usually lateral tongue, rarely elsewhere on oral mucosa White areas ranging from small and flat to extensive accentuation of vertical folds; found in HIV carriers in all risk groups for AIDS Due to EBV; responds to high-dose acyclovir but recurs; rarely causes discomfort unless secondarily infected with Candida  
Warts (papillomavirus) Anywhere on skin and oral mucosa Single or multiple papillary lesions, with thick, white keratinized surfaces containing many pointed projections; cauliflower lesions covered with normal-colored mucosa or multiple pink or pale bumps (focal epithelial hyperplasia) Lesions grow rapidly and spread; consider squamous cell carcinoma and rule out with biopsy; excision or laser therapy; may regress in HIV infected patients on antiretroviral therapy 
 


Note: EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.
 

Diseases of the Tongue

See Table 32-4.

Table 32-4 Alterations of the Tongue

 
 
Type of Change Clinical Features 
Size or Morphology Changes  
Macroglossia Enlarged tongue that may be part of a syndrome found in developmental conditions such as Down syndrome, Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome, or Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be due to tumor (hemangioma or lymphangioma), metabolic disease (such as primary amyloidosis), or endocrine disturbance (such as acromegaly or cretinism) 
Fissured ("scrotal") tongue Dorsal surface and sides of tongue covered by painless shallow or deep fissures that may collect debris and become irritated 
Median rhomboid glossitis Congenital abnormality of tongue with ovoid, denuded area in median posterior portion of the tongue; may be associated with candidiasis and may respond to antifungals 
Color Changes  
"Geographic" tongue (benign migratory glossitis) Asymptomatic inflammatory condition of the tongue, with rapid loss and regrowth of filiform papillae, leading to appearance of denuded red patches "wandering" across the surface of the tongue 
Hairy tongue Elongation of filiform papillae of the medial dorsal surface area due to failure of keratin layer of the papillae to desquamate normally; brownish-black coloration may be due to staining by tobacco, food, or chromogenic organisms 
"Strawberry" and "raspberry" tongue Appearance of tongue during scarlet fever due to the hypertrophy of fungiform papillae plus changes in the filiform papillae 
"Bald" tongue Atrophy may be associated with xerostomia, pernicious anemia, iron-deficiency anemia, pellagra, or syphilis; may be accompanied by painful burning sensation; may be an expression of erythematous candidiasis and respond to antifungals 
 

 

HIV Disease and AIDS

See Tables 32-1, 32-2, 32-3, and 32-5; Chap. 189; and Figures 181-1 and 203-1.

Table 32-5 Oral Lesions Associated with HIV Infection

 
 
Lesion Morphology Etiologies 
Papules, nodules, plaques Candidiasis (hyperplastic and pseudomembranous)a

Condyloma acuminatum (human papillomavirus infection)

Squamous cell carcinoma (preinvasive and invasive)

Non-Hodgkin's lymphomaa

Hairy leukoplakiaa
 
Ulcers Recurrent aphthous ulcersa

Angular cheilitis

Squamous cell carcinoma

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitisa

Necrotizing ulcerative periodontitisa

Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis

Non-Hodgkin's lymphomaa

Viral infection (herpes simplex, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus)

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare

Fungal infection (histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, candidiasis, geotrichosis, aspergillosis)

Bacterial infection (Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, Klebsiellapneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa)

Drug reactions (single or multiple ulcers)
 
Pigmented lesions Kaposi's sarcomaa

Bacillary angiomatosis (skin and visceral lesions more common than oral)

Zidovudine pigmentation (skin, nails, and occasionally oral mucosa)

Addison's disease
 
Miscellaneous Linear gingival erythemaa
  
 


a Strongly associated with HIV infection.
 

Ulcers

Ulceration is the most common oral mucosal lesion. Although there are many causes, the host and pattern of lesions, including the presence of systemic features, narrow the differential diagnosis (Table 32-1). Most acute ulcers are painful and self-limited. Recurrent aphthous ulcers and herpes simplex infection constitute the majority. Persistent and deep aphthous ulcers can be idiopathic or seen with HIV/AIDS. Aphthous lesions are often the presenting symptom in Beh?et's syndrome (Chap. 327). Similar-appearing, though less painful, lesions may occur with reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome), and aphthous ulcers are occasionally present during phases of discoid or systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 323). Aphthous-like ulcers are seen in Crohn's disease (Chap. 295), but unlike the common aphthous variety, they may exhibit granulomatous inflammation histologically. Recurrent aphthae in some patients with celiac disease have been reported to remit with elimination of gluten.

Of major concern are chronic, relatively painless ulcers and mixed red/white patches (erythroplakia and leukoplakia) of more than two weeks' duration. Squamous cell carcinoma and premalignant dysplasia should be considered early and a diagnostic biopsy obtained. The importance is underscored because early-stage malignancy is vastly more treatable than late-stage disease. High-risk sites include the lower lip, floor of the mouth, ventral and lateral tongue, and soft palate每tonsillar pillar complex. Significant risk factors for oral cancer in Western countries include sun exposure (lower lip) and tobacco and alcohol use. In India and some other Asian countries, smokeless tobacco mixed with betel nut, slaked lime, and spices is a common cause of oral cancer. Less common etiologies include syphilis and Plummer-Vinson syndrome (iron deficiency).

Rarer causes of chronic oral ulcer such as tuberculosis, fungal infection, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), and midline granuloma may look identical to carcinoma. Making the correct diagnosis depends on recognizing other clinical features and biopsy of the lesion. The syphilitic chancre is typically painless and therefore easily missed. Regional lymphadenopathy is invariably present. Confirmation is achieved using appropriate bacterial and serologic tests.

Disorders of mucosal fragility often produce painful oral ulcers that fail to heal within two weeks. Mucous membrane pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris are the major acquired disorders. While clinical features are often distinctive, immunohistochemical examination should be performed for diagnosis and to distinguish these entities from lichen planus and drug reactions.

Hematologic and Nutritional Disease

Internists are more likely to encounter patients with acquired, rather than congenital, bleeding disorders. Bleeding after minor trauma should stop after 15 min and within an hour of tooth extraction if local pressure is applied. More prolonged bleeding, if not due to continued injury or rupture of a large vessel, should lead to investigation for a clotting abnormality. In addition to bleeding, petechiae and ecchymoses are prone to occur at the line of vibration between the soft and hard palates in patients with platelet dysfunction or thrombocytopenia.

All forms of leukemia, but particularly acute myelomonocyticleukemia, can produce gingival bleeding, ulcers, and gingival enlargement. Oral ulcers are a feature of agranulocytosis, and ulcers and mucositis are often severe complications of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for hematologic and other malignancies. Plummer-Vinson syndrome (iron deficiency, angular stomatitis, glossitis, and dysphagia) raises the risk of oral squamous cell cancer and esophageal cancer at the postcricoidal tissue web. Atrophic papillae and a red, burning tongue may occur with pernicious anemia. B-group vitamin deficiencies produce many of these same symptoms as well as oral ulceration and cheilosis. Swollen, bleeding gums, ulcers, and loosening of the teeth are a consequence of scurvy.
 
Nondental Causes of Oral Pain

Most, but not all, oral pain emanates from inflamed or injured tooth pulp or periodontal tissues. Nonodontogenic causes may be overlooked. In most instances, toothache is predictable and proportional to the stimulus applied, and an identifiable condition (e.g., caries, abscess) is found. Local anesthesia eliminates pain originating from dental or periodontal structures, but not referred pains. The most common nondental origin is myofascial pain referred from muscles of mastication, which become tender and ache with increased use. Many sufferers exhibit bruxism (the grinding of teeth, often during sleep) that is secondary to stress and anxiety. Temporomandibular disorder is closely related. It affects both sexes with a higher prevalence in women. Features include pain, limited mandibular movement, and temporomandibular joint sounds. The etiologies are complex, and malocclusion does not play the primary role once attributed to it. Osteoarthritis is a common cause of masticatory pain. Anti-inflammatory medication, jaw rest, soft foods, and heat provide relief. The temporomandibular joint is involved in 50% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and is usually a late feature of severe disease. Bilateral preauricular pain, particularly in the morning, limits range of motion.

Migrainous neuralgia may be localized to the mouth. Episodes of pain and remission without identifiable cause and absence of relief with local anesthesia are important clues. Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux) may involve the entire branch or part of the mandibular or maxillary branches of the fifth cranial nerve and produce pain in one or a few teeth. Pain may occur spontaneously or may be triggered by touching the lip or gingiva, brushing the teeth, or chewing. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia produces similar acute neuropathic symptoms in the distribution of the ninth cranial nerve. Swallowing, sneezing, coughing, or pressure on the tragus of the ear triggers pain that is felt in the base of the tongue, pharynx, and soft palate and may be referred to the temporomandibular joint. Neuritis involving the maxillary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve (e.g., maxillary sinusitis, neuroma, and leukemic infiltrate) is distinguished from ordinary toothache by the neuropathic quality of the pain. Occasionally, phantom pain follows tooth extraction. Often the earliest symptom of Bell's palsy in the day or so before facial weakness develops is pain and hyperalgesia behind the ear and side of the face. Likewise, similar symptoms may precede visible lesions of herpes zoster infecting the seventh nerve (Ramsey-Hunt syndrome) or trigeminal nerve. Postherpetic neuralgia may follow either condition. Coronary ischemia may produce pain exclusively in the face and jaw and, like typical angina pectoris, is usually reproducible with increased myocardial demand. Aching in several upper molar or premolar teeth that is unrelieved by anesthetizing the teeth may point to maxillary sinusitis.

Giant cell arteritis is notorious for producing headache, but it may also produce facial pain or sore throat without headache. Jaw and tongue claudication with chewing or talking is relatively common. Tongue infarction is rare. Patients with subacute thyroiditis often experience pain referred to the face or jaw before the tender thyroid gland and transient hyperthyroidism are appreciated.

Burning mouth syndrome (glossodynia) is present in the absence of an identifiable cause (e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency, iron deficiency, diabetes mellitus, low-grade Candida infection, food sensitivity, or subtle xerostomia) and predominantly affects postmenopausal women. The etiology may be neuropathic. Clonazepam, alpha-lipoic acid, and cognitive behavioral therapy have benefited some. Some cases associated with ACE inhibitors have remitted when the drug was discontinued.
 
Diseases of the Salivary Glands

Saliva is essential to oral health. Its absence leads to tooth decay and loss. Its major components, water and mucin, serve as a cleansing solvent and lubricating fluid. In addition, it contains antimicrobial factors (e.g., lysozyme, lactoperoxidase, secretory IgA), epidermal growth factor, minerals, and buffering systems. The major salivary glands secrete intermittently in response to autonomic stimulation, which is high during a meal but low otherwise. Hundreds of minor glands in the lips and cheeks secrete mucus continuously. Consequently, oral function becomes impaired when salivary function is reduced. Dry mouth (xerostomia) is perceived when salivary flow is reduced by 50%. The most common etiology is medication, especially drugs with anticholinergic properties, but also alpha and beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and diuretics. Other causes include Sj?gren's syndrome, chronic parotitis, salivary duct obstruction, diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, and radiation therapy that includes the salivary glands in the field (Hodgkin's disease and head and neck cancer). Management involves eliminating or limiting drying medications, preventive dental care, and supplementing oral liquid. Sugarless mints or chewing gum may stimulate salivary secretion if dysfunction is mild. When sufficient exocrine tissue remains, pilocarpine or cevimeline has been shown to increase secretions. Commercial saliva substitutes or gels relieve dryness but must be supplemented with fluoride applications to prevent caries.

Sialolithiasis presents most often as painful swelling but in some instances as just swelling or pain. Conservative therapy consists of local heat, massage, and hydration. Promotion of salivary secretion with mints or lemon drops may flush out small stones. Antibiotic treatment is necessary when bacterial infection in suspected. In adults, acute bacterial parotitis is typically unilateral and most commonly affects postoperative, dehydrated, and debilitated patients. Staphylococcus aureus including methicillin-resistant forms and anaerobic bacteria are the most common pathogens. Chronic bacterial sialadenitis results from lowered salivary secretion and recurrent bacterial infection. When suspected bacterial infection is not responsive to therapy, the differential diagnosis should be expanded to include benign and malignantneoplasms, lymphoproliferative disorders, Sj?gren's syndrome, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, lymphadenitis, actinomycosis, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Bilateral nontender parotid enlargement occurs with diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, bulimia, HIV/AIDS, and drugs (e.g., iodide, propylthiouracil).

Pleomorphic adenoma comprises two-thirds of all salivary neoplasms. The parotid is the principal salivary gland affected, and the tumor presents as a firm, slow-growing mass. Though benign, recurrence is common if resection is incomplete. Malignant tumors such as mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma tend to grow relatively fast, depending upon grade. They may ulcerate and invade nerves, producing numbness and facial paralysis. Surgical resection is the primary treatment. Radiation therapy (particularly neutron-beam therapy) is used when surgery is not feasible and it is used post-resection for certain histological types with a high risk of recurrence. Malignant salivary gland tumors have a 5-year survival rate of about 68%.
 
Dental Care of Medically Complex Patients

Routine dental care (e.g., extraction, scaling and cleaning, tooth restoration, and root canal) is remarkably safe. The most common concerns regarding care of dental patients with medical disease are fear of excessive bleeding for patients on anticoagulants, infection of the heart valves and prosthetic devices from hematogenous seeding of oral flora, and cardiovascular complications resulting from vasopressors used with local anesthetics during dental treatment. Experience confirms that the risks of any of these complications are very low.

Patients undergoing tooth extraction or alveolar and gingival surgery rarely experience uncontrolled bleeding when warfarin anticoagulation is maintained within the therapeutic range currently recommended for prevention of venous thrombosis, atrial fibrillation, or mechanical heart valve. Embolic complications and death, however, have been reported during subtherapeutic anticoagulation. Therapeutic anticoagulation should be confirmed before and continued through the procedure. Likewise, low-dose aspirin (e.g., 81每325 mg) can be safely continued. For patients on aspirin and another antiplatelet medication (e.g., clopidogrel), the decision to continue the second antiplatelet medication should be based on individual consideration of the risks of thrombosis and bleeding.

Patients at risk for bacterial endocarditis (Chap. 124) should maintain optimal oral hygiene, including flossing, and have regular professional cleaning. Currently, guidelines recommend that prophylactic antibiotics be restricted to those patients at high risk of bacterial endocarditis who undergo dental and oral procedures that involve significant manipulation of gingival or periapical tissue or penetration of the oral mucosa. If unexpected bleeding occurs, antibiotics given within 2 h following the procedure provide effective prophylaxis.

Hematogenous bacterial seeding from oral infection can undoubtedly produce late prosthetic joint infection and therefore requires removal of the infected tissue (e.g., drainage, extraction, root canal) and appropriate antibiotic therapy. However, evidence that late prosthetic joint infection occurs following routine dental procedures is lacking. For this reason, antibiotic prophylaxis is not recommended before dental surgery in patients with orthopedic pins, screws, and plates. It is, however, advised within the first2 years after joint replacement for patients who have inflammatory arthropathies, immunosuppression, type 1 diabetes mellitus, previous prosthetic joint infection, hemophilia, or malnourishment.

Concern often arises regarding the use of vasoconstrictors in patients with hypertension and heart disease. Vasoconstrictors enhance the depth and duration of local anesthesia, thus reducing the anesthetic dose and potential toxicity. If intravascular injection is avoided, 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine (limited to a total of 0.036 mg epinephrine) can be used safely in those with controlled hypertension and stable coronary heart disease, arrhythmia, or congestive heart failure. Precaution should be taken with patients taking tricyclic antidepressants and nonselective beta blockers because these drugs may potentiate the effect of epinephrine.

Elective dental treatments should be postponed for at least one month after myocardial infarction, after which the risk of reinfarction is low provided the patient is medically stable (e.g., stable rhythm, stable angina, and free of heart failure). Patients who have suffered a stroke should have elective dental care deferred for six months. In both situations, effective stress reduction requires good pain control, including the use of the minimal amount of vasoconstrictor necessary to provide good hemostasis and local anesthesia.

Bisphosphonate therapy is associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw. However, the risk with oral bisphosphonate therapy is very low. Most patients affected have received high-dose aminobisphosphonate therapy for multiple myeloma or metastatic breast cancer and have undergone tooth extraction or dental surgery. Intra-oral lesions appear as exposed yellow-white hard bone involving the mandible or maxilla. Two-thirds are painful. Screening tests for determining risk of osteonecrosis are unreliable. Patients slated for aminobisphosphonate therapy should receive preventive dental care that reduces the risk of infection and need for future dentoalveolar surgery.
 
Halitosis

Halitosis typically emanates from the oral cavity or nasal passages. Volatile sulfur compounds resulting from bacterial decay of food and cellular debris account for the malodor. Periodontal disease, caries, acute forms of gingivitis, poorly fitting dentures, oral abscess, and tongue coating are usual causes. Treatment includes correcting poor hygiene, treating infection, and tongue brushing. Xerostomia can produce and exacerbate halitosis. Pockets of decay in the tonsillar crypts, esophageal diverticulum, esophageal stasis (e.g., achalasia, stricture), sinusitis, and lung abscess account for some instances. A few systemic diseases produce distinctive odors: renal failure (ammoniacal), hepatic (fishy), and ketoacidosis (fruity). Helicobacter pylori gastritis can also produce ammoniac breath. If no odor is detectable, then pseudohalitosis or even halitophobia must be considered. These conditions represent varying degrees of psychiatric illness.
 
Aging and Oral Health

While tooth loss and dental disease are not normal consequences of aging, a complex array of structural and functional changes occurs with age that can affect oral health. Subtle changes in tooth structure (e.g., diminished pulp space and volume, sclerosis of dentinal tubules, and altered proportions of nerve and vascular pulp content) result in diminished or altered pain sensitivity, reduced reparative capacity, and increased tooth brittleness. In addition, age-associated fatty replacement of salivary acini may reduce physiologic reserve, thus increasing the risk of xerostomia.

Poor oral hygiene often results when vision fails or when patients lose manual dexterity and upper-extremity flexibility. This is particularly common for nursing home residents and must be emphasized because regular oral cleaning and dental care have been shown to reduce the incidence of pneumonia and mortality in this population. Other risks for dental decay include limited lifetime fluoride exposure and preference by some older adults for intensely sweet foods when taste and olfaction wane. These factors occur in an increasing proportion of persons over age 75 who retain teeth that have extensive restorations and exposed roots. Without assiduous care, decay can become quite advanced yet remain asymptomatic. Consequently, much or the entire tooth can be destroyed before the process is detected.

Periodontal disease, a leading cause of tooth loss, is indicated by loss of alveolar bone height. Over 90% of Americans have some degree of periodontal disease by age 50. Healthy adults who have not experienced significant alveolar bone loss by the sixth decade do not typically develop significant worsening with advancing age.

Complete edentulousness with advanced age, though less common than in previous decades, is still present in approximately 50% of Americans age 85. Speech, mastication, and facial contours are dramatically affected. Edentulousness may also worsen obstructive sleep apnea, particularly in those without symptoms while wearing dentures. Dentures can improve speech articulation and restore diminished facial contours. Mastication is restored less predictably, and those expecting dentures to improve oral intake are often disappointed. Dentures require periodic adjustment to accommodate inevitable remodeling that leads to a diminished volume of the alveolar ridge. Pain can result from friction or traumatic lesions produced by loose dentures. Poor fit and poor oral hygiene may permit candidiasis to develop. This may be asymptomatic or painful and is indicated by erythematous smooth or granular tissue conforming to an area covered by the appliance.
 
Further Readings

Durso SC: Interaction with other health team members in caring for elderly patients. Dent Clin N Am 49:377, 2005 [PMID: 15755411] 

 
Edwards EJ et al: Updated recommendations for managing the care of patients receiving oral bisphosphonate therapy: an advisory statement from the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. J Am Dent Assoc 139: 1674, 2008 [PMID: 19047674] 

 
Little JW. Periodontal disease and heart disease: Are they related? Gen Dent. 56:733, 2008 [PMID: 19014036] 

 
〞〞〞 et al (eds): Dental Management of the Medically Compromised Patient, 7th ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2008 

 
Logan RM: Links between oral and gastrointestinal health. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care 4:31, 2010 [PMID: 19952929] 
 
 

^^
Dyspnea

The American Thoracic Society defines dyspnea as a "subjective experience of breathing discomfort that consists of qualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity. The experience derives from interactions among multiple physiological, psychological, social, and environmental factors and may induce secondary physiological and behavioral responses." Dyspnea, a symptom, must be distinguished from the signs of increased work of breathing.

Mechanisms of Dyspnea

Respiratory sensations are the consequence of interactions between the efferent, or outgoing, motor output from the brain to the ventilatory muscles (feed-forward) and the afferent, or incoming, sensory input from receptors throughout the body (feedback), as well as the integrative processing of this information that we infer must be occurring in the brain (Fig. 33-1). In contrast to painful sensations, which can often be attributed to the stimulation of a single nerve ending, dyspnea sensations are more commonly viewed as holistic, more akin to hunger or thirst. A given disease state may lead to dyspnea by one or more mechanisms, some of which may be operative under some circumstances, e.g., exercise, but not others, e.g., a change in position.

Figure 33-1

 
 
 
Hypothetical model for integration of sensory inputs in the production of dyspnea. Afferent information from the receptors throughout the respiratory system projects directly to the sensory cortex to contribute to primary qualitative sensory experiences and provide feedback on the action of the ventilatory pump. Afferents also project to the areas of the brain responsible for control of ventilation. The motor cortex, responding to input from the control centers, sends neural messages to the ventilatory muscles and a corollary discharge to the sensory cortex (feed-forward with respect to the instructions sent to the muscles). If the feed-forward and feedback messages do not match, an error signal is generated and the intensity of dyspnea increases. (Adapted from Gillette and Schwartzstein, 2005.)
 
 

Motor Efferents

Disorders of the ventilatory pump, most commonly increase airway resistance or stiffness (decreased compliance) of the respiratory system, are associated with increased work of breathing or a sense of an increased effort to breathe. When the muscles are weak or fatigued, greater effort is required, even though the mechanics of the system are normal. The increased neural output from the motor cortex is sensed via a corollary discharge, a neural signal that is sent to the sensory cortex at the same time that motor output is directed to the ventilatory muscles.

Sensory Afferents

Chemoreceptors in the carotid bodies and medulla are activated by hypoxemia, acute hypercapnia, and acidemia. Stimulation of these receptors, as well as others that lead to an increase in ventilation, produce a sensation of air hunger. Mechanoreceptors in the lungs, when stimulated by bronchospasm, lead to a sensation of chest tightness. J-receptors, sensitive to interstitial edema, and pulmonary vascular receptors, activated by acute changes in pulmonary artery pressure, appear to contribute to air hunger. Hyperinflation is associated with the sensation of increased work of breathing and an inability to get a deep breath or of an unsatisfying breath. Metaboreceptors, located in skeletal muscle, are believed to be activated by changes in the local biochemical milieu of the tissue active during exercise and, when stimulated, contribute to the breathing discomfort.

Integration: Efferent-Reafferent Mismatch

A discrepancy or mismatch between the feed-forward message to the ventilatory muscles and the feedback from receptors that monitor the response of the ventilatory pump increases the intensity of dyspnea. This is particularly important when there is a mechanical derangement of the ventilatory pump, such as in asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Anxiety

Acute anxiety may increase the severity of dyspnea either by altering the interpretation of sensory data or by leading to patterns of breathing that heighten physiologic abnormalities in the respiratory system. In patients with expiratory flow limitation, for example, the increased respiratory rate that accompanies acute anxiety leads to hyperinflation, increased work and effort of breathing, and a sense of an unsatisfying breath.

Assessing Dyspnea

Quality of Sensation

As with pain, dyspnea assessment begins with a determination of the quality of the discomfort (Table 33-1). Dyspnea questionnaires, or lists of phrases commonly used by patients, assist those who have difficulty describing their breathing sensations.

Table 33-1 Association of Qualitative Descriptors and Pathophysiologic Mechanisms of Shortness of Breath

 
 
Descriptor Pathophysiology 
Chest tightness or constriction Bronchoconstriction, interstitial edema (asthma, myocardial ischemia) 
Increased work or effort of breathing Airway obstruction, neuromuscular disease (COPD, moderate to severe asthma, myopathy, kyphoscoliosis) 
Air hunger, need to breathe, urge to breathe Increased drive to breathe (CHF, pulmonary embolism, moderate to severe airflow obstruction) 
Cannot get a deep breath, unsatisfying breath Hyperinflation (asthma, COPD) and restricted tidal volume (pulmonary fibrosis, chest wall restriction) 
Heavy breathing, rapid breathing, breathing more Deconditioning 
 


Abbreviations: CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Source: From Schwartzstein and Feller-Kopman.
 

Sensory Intensity

A modified Borg scale or visual analogue scale can be utilized to measure dyspnea at rest, immediately following exercise, or on recall of a reproducible physical task, e.g., climbing the stairs at home. An alternative approach is to inquire about the activities a patient can do, i.e., to gain a sense of the patient's disability. The Baseline Dyspnea Index and the Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire are commonly used tools for this purpose.

Affective Dimension

For a sensation to be reported as a symptom, it must be perceived as unpleasant and interpreted as abnormal. Laboratory studies have demonstrated that air hunger evokes a stronger affective response than does increased effort or work of breathing. Some therapies for dyspnea, such as pulmonary rehabilitation, may reduce breathing discomfort, in part, by altering this dimension.

Differential Diagnosis

Dyspnea is the consequence of deviations from normal function in the cardiopulmonary systems. These deviations produce breathlessness as a consequence of increased drive to breathe; increased effort or work of breathing; and/or stimulation of receptors in the heart, lungs, or vascular system. Most diseases of the respiratory system are associated with alterations in the mechanical properties of the lungs and/or chest wall, frequently as a consequence of disease of the airways or lung parenchyma. In contrast, disorders of the cardiovascular system more commonly lead to dyspnea by causing gas exchange abnormalities or stimulating pulmonary and/or vascular receptors (Table 33-2).

Table 33-2 Mechanisms of Dyspnea in Common Diseases

 
 
Disease  Work of breathing  Drive to breathe Hypoxemiaa
  Acute Hypercapniaa Stimulation of pulmonary receptors Stimulation of vascular receptors Metaboreceptors 
COPD            
Asthma          
ILD          
PVD            
CPE         
NCPE           
Anemia              
Decond              
 


a Hypoxemia and hypercapnia are not always present in these conditions. When hypoxemia is present, dyspnea usually persists, albeit at a reduced intensity, with correction of hypoxemia by the administration of supplemental oxygen.

Abbreviations: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPE, cardiogenic pulmonary edema; Decond, deconditioning; ILD, interstitial lung disease; NCPE, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; PVD, pulmonary vascular disease.
 

Respiratory System Dyspnea

Diseases of the Airways

Asthma and COPD, the most common obstructive lung diseases, are characterized by expiratory airflow obstruction, which typically leads to dynamic hyperinflation of the lungs and chest wall. Patients with moderate to severe disease have increased resistive and elastic loads (a term that relates to the stiffness of the system) on the ventilatory muscles and increased work of breathing. Patients with acute bronchoconstriction also complain of a sense of tightness, which can exist even when lung function is still within the normal range. These patients commonly hyperventilate. Both the chest tightness and hyperventilation are probably due to stimulation of pulmonary receptors. Both asthma and COPD may lead to hypoxemia and hypercapnia from ventilation-perfusion (/Q) mismatch (and diffusion limitation during exercise with emphysema); hypoxemia is much more common than hypercapnia as a consequence of the different ways in which oxygen and carbon dioxide bind to hemoglobin.

Diseases of the Chest Wall

Conditions that stiffen the chest wall, such as kyphoscoliosis, or that weaken ventilatory muscles, such as myasthenia gravis or the Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome, are also associated with an increased effort to breathe. Large pleural effusions may contribute to dyspnea, both by increasing the work of breathing and by stimulating pulmonary receptors if there is associated atelectasis.

Diseases of the Lung Parenchyma

Interstitial lung diseases, which may arise from infections, occupational exposures, or autoimmune disorders, are associated with increased stiffness (decreased compliance) of the lungs and increased work of breathing. In addition, /Q mismatch, and destruction and/or thickening of the alveolar-capillary interface may lead to hypoxemia and an increased drive to breathe. Stimulation of pulmonary receptors may further enhance the hyperventilation characteristic of mild to moderate interstitial disease.

Cardiovascular System Dyspnea

Diseases of the Left Heart

Diseases of the myocardium resulting from coronary artery disease and nonischemic cardiomyopathies result in a greater left-ventricular end-diastolic volume and an elevation of the left-ventricular end-diastolic, as well as pulmonary capillary pressures. These elevated pressures lead to interstitial edema and stimulation of pulmonary receptors, thereby causing dyspnea; hypoxemia due to /Q mismatch may also contribute to breathlessness. Diastolic dysfunction, characterized by a very stiff left ventricle, may lead to severe dyspnea with relatively mild degrees of physical activity, particularly if it is associated with mitral regurgitation.

Diseases of the Pulmonary Vasculature

Pulmonary thromboemoblic disease and primary diseases of the pulmonary circulation (primary pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary vasculitis) cause dyspnea via increased pulmonary-artery pressure and stimulation of pulmonary receptors. Hyperventilation is common, and hypoxemia may be present. However, in most cases, use of supplemental oxygen has minimal effect on the severity of dyspnea and hyperventilation.

Diseases of the Pericardium

Constrictive pericarditis and cardiac tamponade are both associated with increased intracardiac and pulmonary vascular pressures, which are the likely cause of dyspnea in these conditions. To the extent that cardiac output is limited, at rest or with exercise, stimulation of metaboreceptors and chemoreceptors (if lactic acidosis develops) contribute as well.

Dyspnea with Normal Respiratory and Cardiovascular Systems

Mild to moderate anemia is associated with breathing discomfort during exercise. This is thought to be related to stimulation of metaboreceptors; oxygen saturation is normal in patients with anemia. The breathlessness associated with obesity is probably due to multiple mechanisms, including high cardiac output and impaired ventilatory pump function (decreased compliance of the chest wall). Cardiovascular deconditioning (poor fitness) is characterized by the early development of anaerobic metabolism and the stimulation of chemoreceptors and metaboreceptors.

Approach to the Patient: Dyspnea

(Fig. 33-2) In obtaining a history, the patient should be asked to describe in his/her own words what the discomfort feels like, as well as the effect of position, infections, and environmental stimuli on the dyspnea. Orthopnea is a common indicator of congestive heart failure (CHF), mechanical impairment of the diaphragm associated with obesity, or asthma triggered by esophageal reflux. Nocturnal dyspnea suggests CHF or asthma. Acute, intermittent episodes of dyspnea are more likely to reflect episodes of myocardial ischemia, bronchospasm, or pulmonary embolism, while chronic persistent dyspnea is typical of COPD, interstitial lung disease, and chronic thromboembolic disease. Risk factors for occupational lung disease and for coronary artery disease should be elicited. Left atrial myxoma or hepatopulmonary syndrome should be considered when the patient complains of platypnea, defined as dyspnea in the upright position with relief in the supine position.

Figure 33-2

 
 
 
An algorithm for the evaluation of the patient with dyspnea. JVP, jugular venous pulse; CHF, congestive heart failure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CT, computed tomography. (Adapted from Schwartzstein and Feller-Kopman, 2003.)
 
 

The physical examination should begin during the interview of the patient. Inability of the patient to speak in full sentences before stopping to get a deep breath suggests a condition that leads to stimulation of the controller or an impairment of the ventilatory pump with reduced vital capacity. Evidence for increased work of breathing (supraclavicular retractions, use of accessory muscles of ventilation, and the tripod position, characterized by sitting with one's hands braced on the knees) is indicative of increased airway resistance or stiff lungs and chest wall. When measuring the vital signs, one should accurately assess the respiratory rate and measure the pulsus paradoxus (Chap. 239); if it is >10 mmHg, consider the presence of COPD or acute asthma. During the general examination, signs of anemia (pale conjunctivae), cyanosis, and cirrhosis (spider angiomata, gynecomastia) should be sought. Examination of the chest should focus on symmetry of movement; percussion (dullness indicative of pleural effusion, hyperresonance a sign of emphysema); and auscultation (wheezes, rales, rhonchi, prolonged expiratory phase, diminished breath sounds, which are clues to disorders of the airways, and interstitial edema or fibrosis). The cardiac examination should focus on signs of elevated right heart pressures (jugular venous distention, edema, accentuated pulmonic component to the second heart sound); left ventricular dysfunction (S3 and S4 gallops); and valvular disease (murmurs). When examining the abdomen with the patient in the supine position, it should be noted whether there is paradoxical movement of the abdomen (inward motion during inspiration), a sign of diaphragmatic weakness; rounding of the abdomen during exhalation is suggestive of pulmonary edema. Clubbing of the digits may be an indication of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, and the presence of joint swelling or deformation as well as changes consistent with Raynaud's disease may be indicative of a collagen-vascular process that can be associated with pulmonary disease.

Patients with exertional dyspnea should be asked to walk under observation in order to reproduce the symptoms. The patient should be examined for new findings that were not present at rest and for oxygen saturation.

Following the history and physical examination, a chest radiograph should be obtained. The lung volumes should be assessed (hyperinflation indicates obstructive lung disease; low lung volumes suggest interstitial edema or fibrosis, diaphragmatic dysfunction, or impaired chest wall motion). The pulmonary parenchyma should be examined for evidence of interstitial disease and emphysema. Prominent pulmonary vasculature in the upper zones indicates pulmonary venous hypertension, while enlarged central pulmonary arteries suggest pulmonary artery hypertension. An enlarged cardiac silhouette suggests a dilated cardiomyopathy or valvular disease. Bilateral pleural effusions are typical of CHF and some forms of collagen vascular disease. Unilateral effusions raise the specter of carcinoma and pulmonary embolism but may also occur in heart failure. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is generally reserved for further evaluation of the lung parenchyma (interstitial lung disease) and possible pulmonary embolism.

Laboratory studies should include an electrocardiogram to look for evidence of ventricular hypertrophy and prior myocardial infarction. Echocardiography is indicated in patients in whom systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, or valvular heart disease is suspected. Bronchoprovocation testing is useful in patients with intermittent symptoms suggestive of asthma but normal physical examination and lung function; up to one-third of patients with the clinical diagnosis of asthma do not have reactive airways disease when formally tested.

Distinguishing Cardiovascular from Respiratory System Dyspnea

If a patient has evidence of both pulmonary and cardiac disease, a cardiopulmonary exercise test should be carried out to determine which system is responsible for the exercise limitation. If, at peak exercise, the patient achieves predicted maximal ventilation, demonstrates an increase in dead space or hypoxemia, or develops bronchospasm, the respiratory system is probably the cause of the problem. Alternatively, if the heart rate is >85% of the predicted maximum, if anaerobic threshold occurs early, if the blood pressure becomes excessively high or decreases during exercise, if the O2 pulse (O2 consumption/heart rate, an indicator of stroke volume) falls, or if there are ischemic changes on the electrocardiogram, an abnormality of the cardiovascular system is likely the explanation for the breathing discomfort.

Treatment: Dyspnea

The first goal is to correct the underlying problem responsible for the symptom. If this is not possible, one attempts to lessen the intensity of the symptom and its effect on the patient's quality of life. Supplemental O2 should be administered if the resting O2 saturation is 89% or if the patient's saturation drops to these levels with activity. For patients with COPD, pulmonary rehabilitation programs have demonstrated positive effects on dyspnea, exercise capacity, and rates of hospitalization. Studies of anxiolytics and antidepressants have not demonstrated consistent benefit. Experimental interventions〞e.g., cold air on the face, chest-wall vibration, and inhaled furosemide〞to modulate the afferent information from receptors throughout the respiratory system are being studied.
 
Pulmonary Edema

Mechanisms of Fluid Accumulation

The extent to which fluid accumulates in the interstitium of the lung depends on the balance of hydrostatic and oncotic forces within the pulmonary capillaries and in the surrounding tissue. Hydrostatic pressure favors movement of fluid from the capillary into the interstitium. The oncotic pressure, which is determined by the protein concentration in the blood, favors movement of fluid into the vessel. Albumin, the primary protein in the plasma, may be low in conditions such as cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome. While hypoalbuminemia favors movement of fluid into the tissue for any given hydrostatic pressure in the capillary, it is usually not sufficient by itself to cause interstitial edema. In a healthy individual, the tight junctions of the capillary endothelium are impermeable to proteins, and the lymphatics in the tissue carry away the small amounts of protein that may leak out; together, these factors result in an oncotic force that maintains fluid in the capillary. Disruption of the endothelial barrier, however, allows protein to escape the capillary bed and enhances the movement of fluid into the tissue of the lung.

Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema

(See also Chap. 272) Cardiac abnormalities that lead to an increase in pulmonary venous pressure shift the balance of forces between the capillary and the interstitium. Hydrostatic pressure is increased and fluid exits the capillary at an increased rate, resulting in interstitial and, in more severe cases, alveolar edema. The development of pleural effusions may further compromise respiratory system function and contribute to breathing discomfort.

Early signs of pulmonary edema include exertional dyspnea and orthopnea. Chest radiographs show peribronchial thickening, prominent vascular markings in the upper lung zones, and Kerley B lines. As the pulmonary edema worsens, alveoli fill with fluid; the chest radiograph shows patchy alveolar filling, typically in a perihilar distribution, which then progresses to diffuse alveolar infiltrates. Increasing airway edema is associated with rhonchi and wheezes.

Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema

In noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, lung water increases due to damage of the pulmonary capillary lining with leakage of proteins and other macromolecules into the tissue; fluid follows the protein as oncotic forces are shifted from the vessel to the surrounding lung tissue. This process is associated with dysfunction of the surfactant lining the alveoli, increased surface forces, and a propensity for the alveoli to collapse at low lung volumes. Physiologically, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is characterized by intrapulmonary shunt with hypoxemia and decreased pulmonary compliance. Pathologically, hyaline membranes are evident in the alveoli, and inflammation leading to pulmonary fibrosis may be seen. Clinically, the picture ranges from mild dyspnea to respiratory failure. Auscultation of the lungs may be relatively normal despite chest radiographs that show diffuse alveolar infiltrates. CT scans demonstrate that the distribution of alveolar edema is more heterogeneous than was once thought. Although normal intracardiac pressures are considered by many to be part of the definition of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, the pathology of the process, as described above, is distinctly different, and one can observe a combination of cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in some patients.

It is useful to categorize the causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in terms of whether the injury to the lung is likely to result from direct, indirect, or pulmonary vascular causes (Table 33-3). Direct injuries are mediated via the airways (e.g., aspiration) or as the consequence of blunt chest trauma. Indirect injury is the consequence of mediators that reach the lung via the blood stream. The third category includes conditions that may be the consequence of acute changes in pulmonary vascular pressures, possibly the result of sudden autonomic discharge in the case of neurogenic and high-altitude pulmonary edema, or sudden swings of pleural pressure, as well as transient damage to the pulmonary capillaries in the case of reexpansion pulmonary edema.

Table 33-3 Common Causes of Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema

 
 
Direct injury to lung  
Chest trauma, pulmonary contusion

Aspiration

Smoke inhalation

Pneumonia

Oxygen toxicity

Pulmonary embolism, reperfusion
 
Hematogenous injury to lung  
Sepsis

Pancreatitis

Nonthoracic trauma

Leukoagglutination reactions

Multiple transfusions

Intravenous drug use, e.g., heroin

Cardiopulmonary bypass
 
Possible lung injury plus elevated hydrostatic pressures  
High-altitude pulmonary edema

Neurogenic pulmonary edema

Reexpansion pulmonary edema
 
 

 

Distinguishing Cardiogenic from Noncardiogenic Pulmonary Edema

The history is essential for assessing the likelihood of underlying cardiac disease as well as for identification of one of the conditions associated with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. The physical examination in cardiogenic pulmonary edema is notable for evidence of increased intracardiac pressures (S3 gallop, elevated jugular venous pulse, peripheral edema), and rales and/or wheezes on auscultation of the chest. In contrast, the physical examination in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is dominated by the findings of the precipitating condition; pulmonary findings may be relatively normal in the early stages. The chest radiograph in cardiogenic pulmonary edema typically shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette, vascular redistribution, interstitial thickening, and perihilar alveolar infiltrates; pleural effusions are common. In noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, heart size is normal, alveolar infiltrates are distributed more uniformly throughout the lungs, and pleural effusions are uncommon. Finally, the hypoxemia of cardiogenic pulmonary edema is due largely to /Q mismatch and responds to the administration of supplemental oxygen. In contrast, hypoxemia in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is due primarily to intrapulmonary shunting and typically persists despite high concentrations of inhaled O2.
 
Further Readings

Aaron SD et al: Overdiagnosis of asthma in obese and nonobese adults. CMAJ 179:1121, 2008 [PMID: 19015563] 

 
Abidov A et al: Prognostic significance of dyspnea in patients referred for cardiac stress testing. N Engl J Med 353:1889, 2005 [PMID: 16267320] 

 
Banzett RB et al: The affective dimension of laboratory dyspnea: Air hunger is more unpleasant than work/effort. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 177:1384, 2008 [PMID: 18369200] 

 
Dyspnea mechanisms, assessment, and management: A consensus statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 159:321, 1999 

 
Gillette MA, Schwartzstein RM: Mechanisms of dyspnea, in Supportive Care in Respiratory Disease, SH Ahmedzai and MF Muer (eds). Oxford, U.K., Oxford University Press, 2005 

 
Mahler DA et al: Descriptors of breathlessness in cardiorespiratory diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 154:1357, 1996 [PMID: 8912748] 

 
〞〞〞, O'Donnell de (eds): Dyspnea: Mechanisms, Measurement, and Management. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2005 

 
Schwartzstein RM: The language of dyspnea, in Dyspnea: Mechanisms, Measurement, and Management, DA Mahler and De O'Donnell (eds). New York, Marcel Dekker, 2005 

 
〞〞〞 Feller-Kopman D: Shortness of breath, in Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald and L Goldman (eds). Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2003 
 
 

^^
Cough

Cough provides an essential protective function for human airways and lungs. Without an effective cough reflex, we are at risk for retained airway secretions and aspirated material, predisposing to infection, atelectasis, and respiratory compromise. At the other extreme, excessive coughing can be exhausting; can be complicated by emesis, syncope, muscular pain, or rib fractures; and can aggravate abdominal or inguinal hernias and urinary incontinence. Cough is often a clue to the presence of respiratory disease. In many instances, cough is an expected and accepted manifestation of disease, such as during an acute respiratory tract infection. However, persistent cough in the absence of other respiratory symptoms commonly causes patients to seek medical attention, accounting for as many as 10每30% of referrals to pulmonary specialists.

Cough Mechanism

Spontaneous cough is triggered by stimulation of sensory nerve endings that are thought to be primarily rapidly adapting receptors and C-fibers. Both chemical (e.g., capsaicin) and mechanical (e.g., particulates in air pollution) stimuli may initiate the cough reflex. A cationic ion channel, called the type-1 vanilloid receptor, is found on rapidly adapting receptors and C-fibers; it is the receptor for capsaicin, and its expression is increased in patients with chronic cough. Afferent nerve endings richly innervate the pharynx, larynx, and airways to the level of terminal bronchioles and into the lung parenchyma. They may also be found in the external auditory meatus (the auricular branch of the vagus nerve, called the Arnold nerve) and in the esophagus. Sensory signals travel via the vagus and superior laryngeal nerves to a region of the brainstem in the nucleus tractus solitarius, vaguely identified as the "cough center." Mechanical stimulation of bronchial mucosa in a transplanted lung (in which the vagus nerve has been severed) does not produce cough.

The cough reflex involves a highly orchestrated series of involuntary muscular actions, with the potential for input from cortical pathways as well. The vocal cords adduct, leading to transient upper-airway occlusion. Expiratory muscles contract, generating positive intrathoracic pressures as high as 300 mm Hg. With sudden release of the laryngeal contraction, rapid expiratory flows are generated, exceeding the normal "envelope" of maximal expiratory flow seen on the flow-volume curve (Fig. 34-1). Bronchial smooth muscle contraction together with dynamic compression of airways narrows airway lumens and maximizes the velocity of exhalation (as fast as 50 miles per hour). The kinetic energy available to dislodge mucus from the inside of airway walls is directly proportional to the square of the velocity of expiratory airflow. A deep breath preceding a cough optimizes the function of the expiratory muscles; a series of repetitive coughs at successively lower lung volumes sweeps the point of maximal expiratory velocity progressively further into the lung periphery.

Figure 34-1

 
 
 
Flow-Volume Loop. Flow-volume curve with spikes of high expiratory flow achieved with cough.
 
 

Impaired Cough

Weak or ineffective cough compromises the ability to clear lower respiratory tract infections, predisposing to more serious infections and their sequelae. Weakness, paralysis, or pain of the expiratory (abdominal and intercostal) muscles is foremost on the list of causes of impaired cough (Table 34-1). Cough strength is generally assessed qualitatively; peak expiratory flow or maximal expiratory pressure at the mouth can be used as a surrogate marker for cough strength. A variety of assistive devices and techniques have been developed to improve cough strength, spanning the gamut from simple (splinting the abdominal muscles with a tightly-held pillow to reduce post-operative pain while coughing) to complex (a mechanical cough-assist device applied via face mask or tracheal tube that applies a cycle of positive pressure followed rapidly by negative pressure). Cough may fail to clear secretions despite a preserved ability to generate normal expiratory velocities, either due to abnormal airway secretions (e.g., bronchiectasis due to cystic fibrosis) or structural abnormalities of the airways (e.g., tracheomalacia with expiratory collapse during cough).

Table 34-1 Causes of Impaired Cough

 
 
Decreased expiratory-muscle strength 
Decreased inspiratory-muscle strength 
Chest-wall deformity 
Impaired glottic closure or tracheostomy 
Tracheomalacia 
Abnormal airway secretions 
Central respiratory depression (e.g., anesthesia, sedation, or coma) 
 

 

Symptomatic Cough

The cough of chronic bronchitis in long-term cigarette smokers rarely leads the patient to seek medical advice. It lasts only seconds to a few minutes, is productive of benign-appearing mucoid sputum, and is not discomforting. Similarly, cough may occur in the context of other respiratory symptoms that, together, point to a diagnosis, such as when cough is accompanied by wheezing, shortness of breath, and chest tightness after exposure to a cat or other sources of allergens. At times, however, cough is the dominant or sole symptom of disease, and it may be of sufficient duration and severity that relief is sought. The duration of cough is a clue to its etiology. Acute cough (<3 weeks) is most commonly due to a respiratory tract infection, aspiration event, or inhalation of noxious chemicals or smoke. Subacute cough (3每8 weeks duration) is frequently the residuum from a tracheobronchitis, such as in pertussis or "post-viral tussive syndrome." Chronic cough (>8 weeks) may be caused by a wide variety of cardiopulmonary diseases, including those of inflammatory, infectious, neoplastic, and cardiovascular etiologies. When initial assessment with chest examination and radiograph is normal, cough-variant asthma, gastroesophageal reflux, nasopharyngeal drainage, and medications (angiotensin converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors) are the most common causes of chronic cough. Cough of less than 8 weeks' duration may be the early manifestation of a disease causing chronic cough.

Assessment of Chronic Cough

Details as to the sound, time of occurrence during the day, and pattern of coughing infrequently provide useful etiology clues. Regardless of cause, cough often worsens when one first lies down at night or with talking or in association with the hyperpnea of exercise; it frequently improves with sleep. Exceptions might include the characteristic inspiratory whoop after a paroxysm of coughing that suggests pertussis or the cough that occurs only with certain allergic exposures or exercise in cold air, as in asthma. Useful historical questions include the circumstances surrounding the onset of cough, what makes the cough better or worse, and whether or not the cough produces sputum.

The physical examination seeks clues to the presence of cardiopulmonary disease, including findings such as wheezing or crackles on chest examination. Examination of the auditory canals and tympanic membranes (for irritation of the tympanic membrane resulting in stimulation of Arnold's nerve), the nasal passageways (for rhinitis), and nails (for clubbing) may also provide etiologic clues. Because cough can be a manifestation of a systemic disease, such as sarcoidosis or vasculitis, a thorough general examination is equally important.

In virtually all instances, evaluation of chronic cough merits a chest radiograph. The list of diseases that can cause persistent coughing without other symptoms and without detectable abnormality on physical examination is long. It includes serious illnesses such as Hodgkin's disease in young adults and lung cancer in an older population. An abnormal chest film leads to evaluation of the radiographic abnormality to explain the symptom of cough. A normal chest image provides valuable reassurance to the patient and the patient's family, who may have imagined the direst explanation for the cough.

In a patient with chronic productive cough, examination of expectorated sputum is warranted. Purulent-appearing sputum should be sent for routine bacterial culture and, in certain circumstances, mycobacterial culture as well. Cytologic examination of mucoid sputum may be useful to assess for malignancy and to distinguish neutrophilic from eosinophilic bronchitis. Expectoration of blood〞whether streaks of blood, blood mixed with airway secretions, or pure blood〞deserves a special approach to assessment and management, as discussed below.

Chronic Cough with a Normal Chest Radiograph

It is commonly held that use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; post-nasal drainage; gastroesophageal reflux; and asthma, alone or in combination, account for more than 90% of patients who have chronic cough and a normal or noncontributory chest radiograph. However, clinical experience does not support this contention, and strict adherence to this concept discourages the search for alternative explanations by both clinicians and researchers. On the one hand, chronic idiopathic cough is common and its management deserves study and discussion. On the other hand, serious pulmonary diseases, including inflammatory lung diseases, chronic infections, and neoplasms, may remain occult on plain chest imaging and require additional testing for detection.

ACE inhibitor-induced cough occurs in 5每30% of patients taking ACE inhibitors and is not dose-dependent. Any patient with chronic unexplained cough who is taking an ACE inhibitor should be given a trial period off the medication, regardless of the timing of the onset of cough relative to the initiation of ACE inhibitor therapy. In most instances, a safe alternative is available; angiotensin-receptor blockers do not cause cough. Failure to observe a decrease in cough after one month off medication argues strongly against this diagnosis. ACE metabolizes bradykinin and other tachykinins, such as substance P. The mechanism of ACE inhibitor cough may involve sensitization of sensory nerve endings due to accumulation of bradykinin. In support of this hypothesis, polymorphisms in the neurokinin-2 receptor gene are associated with ACE inhibitor每induced cough.

Post-nasal drainage of any etiology can cause cough as a response to stimulation of sensory receptors of the cough-reflex pathway in the hypopharynx or aspiration of draining secretions into the trachea. Clues to this etiology include symptoms of post-nasal drip, frequent throat clearing, and sneezing and rhinorrhea. On speculum examination of the nose, one may see excess mucoid or purulent secretions, inflamed and edematous nasal mucosa, and/or nasal polyps; in addition, one might visualize secretions or a cobblestoned appearance of the mucosa along the posterior pharyngeal wall. Unfortunately, there is no means by which to quantitate post-nasal drainage. In many instances, one is left to rely on a qualitative judgment based on subjective information provided by the patient. This assessment must also be counterbalanced by the fact that many people who have chronic post-nasal drainage do not experience cough.

Linking gastroesophageal reflux to chronic cough poses similar challenges. It is thought that reflux of gastric contents into the lower esophagus may trigger cough via reflex pathways initiated in the esophageal mucosa. Reflux to the level of the pharynx with consequent aspiration of gastric contents causes a chemical bronchitis and possible pneumonitis that can elicit cough for days after the aspiration event. Retrosternal burning after meals or on recumbency, frequent eructation, hoarseness, and throat pain are potential clues to gastroesophageal reflux. Reflux may also elicit no or minimal symptoms. Glottic inflammation may be a clue to recurrent reflux to the level of the throat, but it is a nonspecific finding and requires direct or indirect laryngoscopy for detection. Quantification of the frequency and level of reflux requires a somewhat invasive procedure to measure esophageal pH directly (a catheter with pH probe placed nasopharyngeally in the esophagus for 24 h, or pH monitoring using a radiotransmitter capsule placed endoscopically into the esophagus). Precise interpretation of test results enabling one to link reflux and cough in a causative way remains debated. Again, assigning the cause of cough to gastroesophageal reflux must be weighed against the observation that many people with chronic reflux (such as frequently occurs during pregnancy) do not experience chronic cough.

Cough alone as a manifestation of asthma is common in children but not in adults. Cough due to asthma in the absence of wheezing, shortness of breath, and chest tightness is referred to as "cough-variant asthma." A history suggestive of cough-variant asthma ties the onset of cough to typical triggers for asthma and resolution of cough upon withdrawal from exposure to them. Objective testing can establish the diagnosis of asthma (airflow obstruction on spirometry that varies over time or reverses in response to bronchodilator) or exclude it with certainty (negative response to bronchoprovocation challenge, such as with methacholine). In a patient capable of making reliable measurements, home expiratory peak flow monitoring can be used as a cost-effective method to support or discount a diagnosis of asthma.

Chronic eosinophilic bronchitis causes chronic cough with a normal chest radiograph. This condition is characterized by sputum eosinophilia in excess of 3% without airflow obstruction or bronchial hyperresponsiveness and is successfully treated with inhaled glucocorticoids.

Treatment of chronic cough in a patient with a normal chest radiograph is often empiric and is targeted at the most likely cause or causes of cough as determined by history, physical examination, and possibly pulmonary-function testing. Therapy for post-nasal drainage depends on the presumed etiology (infection, allergy, or vasomotor rhinitis) and may include systemic antihistamines; antibiotics; nasal saline irrigation; and nasal pump sprays with corticosteroids, antihistamines, or anticholinergics. Antacids, histamine type-2 (H2) receptor antagonists, and proton-pump inhibitors are used to neutralize or decrease production of gastric acid in gastroesophageal reflux disease; dietary changes, elevation of the head and torso during sleep, and medications to improve gastric emptying are additional therapies. Cough-variant asthma typically responds well to inhaled glucocorticoids and intermittent use of inhaled beta-agonist bronchodilators.

Patients who fail to respond to treatment of the common causes of cough or who have had these causes excluded by appropriate diagnostic testing should undergo chest CT. Examples of diseases causing cough that may be missed on chest x-ray include carcinoid tumor, early interstitial lung disease, bronchiectasis, and atypical mycobacterial pulmonary infection. On the other hand, patients with chronic cough who have normal chest examination, lung function, oxygenation, and chest CT imaging can be reassured as to the absence of serious pulmonary pathology.

Symptomatic Treatment of Cough

Chronic idiopathic cough is distressingly common. It is often experienced as a tickle or sensitivity in the throat area, occurs more often in women, and is typically "dry" or at most productive of scant amounts of mucoid sputum. It can be exhausting, interfere with work, and cause social embarrassment. Once serious underlying cardiopulmonary pathology has been excluded, an attempt at cough suppression is appropriate. Most effective are narcotic cough suppressants, such as codeine or hydrocodone, which are thought to act in the "cough center" in the brainstem. The tendency of narcotic cough suppressants to cause drowsiness and constipation and their potential for addictive dependence limit their appeal for long-term use. Dextromethorphan is an over-the-counter, centrally acting cough suppressant with fewer side effects and less efficacy compared to the narcotic cough suppressants. It is thought to have a different site of action than narcotic cough suppressants and can be used in combination with them if necessary. Benzonatate is thought to inhibit neural activity of sensory nerves in the cough-reflex pathway. It is generally free of side effects; however, its effectiveness in suppressing cough is variable and unpredictable. Novel cough suppressants without the limitations of currently available therapies are greatly needed. Approaches that are being explored include development of neurokinin receptor antagonists, type-1 vanilloid receptor antagonists, and novel opioid and opioidlike receptor agonists.
 
Hemoptysis

Hemoptysis is the expectoration of blood from the respiratory tract. It can arise from any part of the respiratory tract, from the alveoli to the glottis. It is important, however, to distinguish hemoptysis from epistaxis (i.e., bleeding from the nasopharynx) and hematemesis (i.e., bleeding from the upper gastrointestinal tract). Hemoptysis can range from blood-tinged sputum to life-threatening large volumes of bright red blood. For most patients, any degree of hemoptysis can be anxiety-producing and often prompts medical evaluation.

While precise epidemiologic data are lacking, the most common etiology of hemoptysis is infection of the medium-sized airways. In the United States, this is usually due to a viral or bacterial bronchitis. Hemoptysis can arise in the setting of either acute bronchitis or during an exacerbation of chronic bronchitis. Worldwide, the most common cause of hemoptysis is tuberculous infection presumably owing to the high prevalence of the disease and its predilection for cavity formation. While these are the most common causes, there is an extensive differential diagnosis for hemoptysis, and a step-wise approach to the evaluation of this symptom is appropriate.

Etiology

One way to approach the source of hemoptysis is systematically to assess for potential sites of bleeding from the alveolus to the mouth. Diffuse bleeding in the alveolar space, often referred to as diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH), may present with hemoptysis, although this is not always the case. Causes of DAH can be divided into inflammatory and noninflammatory types. Inflammatory DAH is due to small vessel vasculitis/capillaritis from a variety of diseases, including granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) and microscopic polyangiitis. Similarly, systemic autoimmune disease, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), can manifest as pulmonary capillaritis and result in DAH. Antibodies to the alveolar basement membrane, as are seen in Goodpasture's disease, can also result in alveolar hemorrhage. In the early time period after a bone marrow transplant (BMT), patients can also develop a form of inflammatory DAH, which can be catastrophic and life-threatening. The exact pathophysiology of this process is not well understood, but DAH should be suspected in patients with sudden-onset dyspnea and hypoxemia in the first 100 days after a BMT.

Alveoli can also bleed due to noninflammatory causes, most commonly due to direct inhalational injury. This category includes thermal injury from fires, inhalation of illicit substances (e.g., cocaine), and inhalation of toxic chemicals. If alveoli are irritated from any process, patients with thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, or antiplatelet or anticoagulant use will have an increased risk of developing hemoptysis.

As already noted, the most common site of hemoptysis is bleeding from the small- to medium-sized airways. Irritation and injury of the bronchial mucosal can lead to small-volume bleeding. More significant hemoptysis can also occur because of the proximity of the bronchial artery and vein to the airway, running together in what is often referred to as the "bronchovascular bundle." In the smaller airways, these blood vessels are close to the airspace and, therefore, lesser degrees of inflammation or injury can result in rupture of these vessels into the airways. Of note, while alveolar hemorrhage arises from capillaries that are part of the low-pressure pulmonary circulation, bronchial bleeding is generally from bronchial arteries, which are under systemic pressure and, therefore, predisposed to larger-volume bleeding.

Any infection of the airways can result in hemoptysis, although, most commonly, acute bronchitis is caused by viral infection. In patients with a history of chronic bronchitis, bacterial super infection with organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Hemophilus influenzae, or Moraxella catarrhalis can also result in hemoptysis. Patients with bronchiectasis, a permanent dilation and irregularity of the airways, are particularly prone to hemoptysis due to anatomic abnormalities that bring the bronchial arteries closer to the mucosal surface and the associated chronic inflammatory state. One common presentation of patients with advanced cystic fibrosis, the prototypical bronchiectatic lung disease, is hemoptysis, which, at times, can be life-threatening.

Pneumonias of any sort can cause hemoptysis. Tuberculous infection, which can lead to bronchiectasis or cavitary pneumonia, is a very common cause of hemoptysis worldwide. Community-acquired pneumonia and lung abscess can also result in bleeding. Once again, if the infection results in cavitation, there is a greater likelihood of bleeding due to erosion into blood vessels. Infections with Staphylococcus aureus and gram-negative rods (e.g., Klebsiella pneumoniae) are more likely to cause necrotizing lung infections and, thus, are more often associated with hemoptysis. Previous severe pneumonias can cause scarring and abnormal lung architecture, which may predispose a patient to hemoptysis with subsequent infections.

While it is not commonly seen in North America, pulmonary paragonimiasis (i.e., infection with the lung fluke Paragonimus westermani) often presents with fever, cough, and hemoptysis. This infection is a public health issue in Southeast Asia and China and is commonly confused with active tuberculosis, because the clinical pictures can be similar. Paragonimiasis should be considered in recent immigrants from endemic areas with new or recurrent hemoptysis. In addition, there are reports of pulmonary paragonimiasis in the United States secondary to ingestion of crayfish or small crabs.

Other causes of irritation of the airways resulting in hemoptysis include inhalation of toxic chemicals, thermal injury, direct trauma from suctioning of the airways (particularly in intubated patients), and irritation from inhalation of foreign bodies. All of these etiologies should be suggested by the individual patient's history and exposures.

Perhaps the most feared cause of hemoptysis is bronchogenic lung cancer, although hemoptysis is not a particularly common presenting symptom of this disease with only approximately 10% of patients having frank hemoptysis on initial assessment. Cancers arising in the proximal airways are much more likely to cause hemoptysis, although any malignancy in the chest can do so. Because both squamous cell carcinoma and small cell carcinoma are more commonly central and large at presentation, they are more often a cause of hemoptysis. These cancers can present with large-volume and life-threatening hemoptysis because of erosion into the hilar vessels. Carcinoid tumors, which are almost exclusively found as endobronchial lesions with friable mucosa, can also present with hemoptysis.

In addition to cancers arising in the lung, metastatic disease in the pulmonary parenchyma can also bleed. Malignancies that commonly metastasize to the lungs include renal cell, breast, colon, testicular, and thyroid cancers as well as melanoma. While they are not a common way for metastatic disease to present, multiple pulmonary nodules and hemoptysis should raise the suspicion for this etiology.

Finally, disease of the pulmonary vasculature can cause hemoptysis. Perhaps most commonly, congestive heart failure with transmission of elevated left atrial pressures, if severe enough, can lead to rupture of small alveolar capillaries. These patients rarely present with bright red blood but more commonly have pink, frothy sputum or blood-tinged secretions. Patients with a focal jet of mitral regurgitation can present with an upper-lobe infiltrate on chest radiograph together with hemoptysis. This is thought to be due to focal increases in pulmonary capillary pressure due to the regurgitant jet. Pulmonary arterio-venous malformations are prone to bleeding. Pulmonary embolism can also lead to the development of hemoptysis, which is generally associated with pulmonary infarction. Pulmonary arterial hypertension from other causes rarely results in hemoptysis.

Evaluation

As with most symptoms, the initial step in the evaluation of hemoptysis is a thorough history and physical examination (Fig. 34-2). As already mentioned, questioning should begin with determining if the bleeding is truly from the respiratory tract and not the nasopharynx or gastrointestinal tract, because these sources of bleeding require different evaluation and treatment approaches.

Figure 34-2

 
 
 
Flowchart〞evaluation of hemoptysis. Decision tree for evaluation of hemoptysis. CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; UA, urinalysis.
 
 

History and Physical Exam

The nature of the hemoptysis, whether they are blood-tinged, purulent secretions; pink, frothy sputum; or frank blood, may be helpful in determining an etiology. Specific triggers of the bleeding, such as recent inhalation exposures as well as any previous episodes of hemoptysis, should be elicited during history-taking. Monthly hemoptysis in a woman suggests catamenial hemoptysis from pulmonary endometriosis. The volume of the hemoptysis is also important not only in determining the cause, but in gauging the urgency for further diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers. Patients rarely exsanguinate from hemoptysis but can effectively "drown" in aspirated blood. Large-volume hemoptysis, referred to as massive hemoptysis, is variably defined as hemoptysis of greater than 200每600 cc in 24 h. Massive hemoptysis should be considered a medical emergency. The medical urgency related to hemoptysis depends on both the amount of bleeding and the severity of underlying pulmonary disease.

All patients should be asked about current or former cigarette smoking; this behavior predisposes to both chronic bronchitis and increases the likelihood of bronchogenic cancer. Symptoms suggestive of respiratory tract infection〞 including fever, chills, and dyspnea〞should be elicited. The practitioner should inquire about recent inhalation exposures or use of illicit substances as well as risk factors for venous thromboembolism.

Past medical history of malignancy or treatment thereof, rheumatologic disease, vascular disease, or underlying lung disease such as bronchiectasis may be relevant to the cause of hemoptysis. Because many of the causes of DAH can be part of a pulmonary-renal syndrome, specific inquiry into a history of renal insufficiency also is important.

The physical examination begins with an assessment of vital signs and oxygen saturation to gauge whether there is evidence of life-threatening bleeding. Tachycardia, hypotension, and decreased oxygen saturation should dictate a more expedited evaluation of hemoptysis. Specific focus on respiratory and cardiac examinations are important and should include inspection of the nares, auscultation of the lungs and heart, assessment of the lower extremities for symmetric or asymmetric edema, and evaluation for jugular venous distention. Clubbing of the digits may suggest underlying lung diseases such as bronchogenic carcinoma or bronchiectasis, which predispose to hemoptysis. Similarly, mucocutaneous telangiectasias should raise the specter of pulmonary arterial-venous malformations.

Diagnostic Evaluation

For most patients, the next step in evaluation of hemoptysis should be a standard chest radiograph. If a source of bleeding is not identified on plain film, a CT of the chest should be obtained. CT allows better delineation of bronchiectasis, alveolar filling, cavitary infiltrates, and masses than does chest x-ray; it also gives further information on mediastinal lymphadenopathy, which may support a diagnosis of thoracic malignancy. The practitioner should consider a CT protocol to assess for pulmonary embolism if the history or examination suggests venous thromboembolism as a cause of the bleeding.

Laboratory studies should include a complete blood count to assess both the hematocrit as well as platelet count and coagulation studies. Renal function and urinalysis should be assessed because of the possibility of pulmonary-renal syndromes presenting with hemoptysis. Acute renal insufficiency, or red blood cells or red blood cell casts on urinalysis should increase suspicion for small-vessel vasculitis, and studies such as antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antiglomerular basement membrane antibody (anti-GBM), and antinuclear antibody (ANA), should be considered. If a patient is producing sputum, Gram and acid-fast stains as well as culture should be obtained.

If all of these studies are unrevealing, bronchoscopy should be considered. In any patient with a history of cigarette smoking, airway inspection should be part of the evaluation of new hemoptysis. Because these patients are at increased risk of bronchogenic carcinoma, and endobronchial lesions are often not reliably visualized on computed tomogram, bronchoscopy should be seriously considered to add to the completeness of the evaluation.

Treatment: Hemoptysis

For the most part, the treatment of hemoptysis will vary based on its etiology. However, large-volume, life-threatening hemoptysis generally requires immediate intervention regardless of the cause. The first step is to establish a patent airway usually by endotracheal intubation and subsequent mechanical ventilation. As most large-volume hemoptysis arises from an airway lesion, it is ideal if the site of the bleeding can be identified either by chest imaging or bronchoscopy (more commonly rigid than flexible). The goal is then to isolate the bleeding to one lung and not allow the preserved airspaces in the other lung to be filled with blood, further impairing gas exchange. Patients should be placed with the bleeding lung in a dependent position (i.e., bleeding-side down) and, if possible, dual lumen endotracheal tubes or an airway blocker should be placed in the proximal airway of the bleeding lung. These interventions generally require the assistance of anesthesiologists, interventional pulmonologists, or thoracic surgeons.

If the bleeding does not stop with therapies of the underlying cause and passage of time, severe hemoptysis from bronchial arteries can be treated with angiographic embolization of the culprit bronchial artery. This intervention should only be entertained in the most severe and life-threatening cases of hemoptysis because there is a risk of unintentional spinal-artery embolization and consequent paraplegia with this procedure. Endobronchial lesions can be treated with a variety of bronchoscopically directed interventions, including cauterization and laser therapy. In extreme conditions, surgical resection of the affected region of lung is considered. Most cases of hemoptysis will resolve with treatment of the infection or inflammatory process or with removal of the offending stimulus.
 
Further Readings

Bidwell JL, Pachner RW: Hemoptysis: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician 72:1253, 2005[PMID: 16225028] 

 
Chung KF, Pavord ID: Prevalence, pathogenesis, and causes of chronic cough. Lancet 37: 1364, 2008 

 
Irwin RS et al: Diagnosis and management of cough executive summary: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 129:1S, 2006 

 
Jean-Baptiste E: Clinical assessment and management of massive hemoptysis. Crit Care Med 28:1642, 2000[PMID: 10834728] 

 
Lara AR, Schwarz MI: Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Chest 137:1164, 2010[PMID: 20442117] 

 
Pavord ID, Chung KF: Management of chronic cough. Lancet 371: 1375, 2008[PMID: 18424326] 
 
 

^^
Hypoxia

The fundamental purpose of the cardiorespiratory system is to deliver O2 and nutrients to cells and to remove CO2 and other metabolic products from them. Proper maintenance of this function depends not only on intact cardiovascular and respiratory systems but also on an adequate number of red blood cells and hemoglobin and a supply of inspired gas containing adequate O2.

Responses to Hypoxia

Decreased O2 availability to cells results in an inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation and increased anaerobic glycolysis. This switch from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism, the Pasteur effect, maintains some, albeit reduced, adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) production. In severe hypoxia, when ATP production is inadequate to meet the energy requirements of ionic and osmotic equilibrium, cell membrane depolarization leads to uncontrolled Ca2+ influx and activation of Ca2+-dependent phospholipases and proteases. These events, in turn, cause cell swelling and, ultimately, cell death.

The adaptations to hypoxia are mediated, in part, by the upregulation of genes encoding a variety of proteins, including glycolytic enzymes such as phosphoglycerate kinase and phosphofructokinase, as well as the glucose transporters Glut-1 and Glut-2; and by growth factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and erythropoietin, which enhance erythrocyte production. The hypoxia-induced increase in expression of these key proteins is governed by the hypoxia-sensitive transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1).

During hypoxia, systemic arterioles dilate, at least in part, by opening of KATP channels in vascular smooth-muscle cells due to the hypoxia-induced reduction in ATP concentration. By contrast, in pulmonary vascular smooth-muscle cells, inhibition of K+ channels causes depolarization which, in turn, activates voltage-gated Ca2+ channels raising the cytosolic [Ca2+] and causing smooth-muscle cell contraction. Hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial constriction shunts blood away from poorly ventilated portions toward better ventilated portions of the lung; however, it also increases pulmonary vascular resistance and right ventricular afterload.

Effects on the Central Nervous System

Changes in the central nervous system (CNS), particularly the higher centers, are especially important consequences of hypoxia. Acute hypoxia causes impaired judgment, motor incoordination, and a clinical picture resembling acute alcohol intoxication. High-altitude illness is characterized by headache secondary to cerebral vasodilation, gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, insomnia, fatigue, or somnolence. Pulmonary arterial and sometimes venous constriction cause capillary leakage and high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) (Chap. 33), which intensifies hypoxia, further promoting vasoconstriction. Rarely, high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) develops, which is manifest by severe headache and papilledema and can cause coma. As hypoxia becomes more severe, the regulatory centers of the brainstem are affected, and death usually results from respiratory failure.

Causes of Hypoxia

Respiratory Hypoxia

When hypoxia occurs from respiratory failure, PaO2 declines, and when respiratory failure is persistent, the hemoglobin-oxygen (Hb-O2) dissociation curve (Fig. 104-2) is displaced to the right, with greater quantities of O2 released at any level of tissue PO2. Arterial hypoxemia, i.e., a reduction of O2 saturation of arterial blood (SaO2), and consequent cyanosis are likely to be more marked when such depression of PaO2 results from pulmonary disease than when the depression occurs as the result of a decline in the fraction of oxygen in inspired air (FiO2). In this latter situation, PaCO 2 falls secondary to anoxia-induced hyperventilation and the Hb-O2 dissociation curve is displaced to the left, limiting the decline in SaO2 at any level of PaO2.

The most common cause of respiratory hypoxia is ventilation-perfusion mismatch resulting from perfusion of poorly ventilated alveoli. Respiratory hypoxemia may also be caused by hypoventilation, in which case it is then associated with an elevation of PaCO 2 (Chap. 252). These two forms of respiratory hypoxia are usually correctable by inspiring 100% O2 for several minutes. A third cause of respiratory hypoxia is shunting of blood across the lung from the pulmonary arterial to the venous bed (intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting) by perfusion of nonventilated portions of the lung, as in pulmonary atelectasis or through pulmonary arteriovenous connections. The low PaO2 in this situation is only partially corrected by an FiO2 of 100%.

Hypoxia Secondary to High Altitude

As one ascends rapidly to 3000 m (10,000 ft), the reduction of the O2 content of inspired air (FiO2) leads to a decrease in alveolar PO2 to approximately 60 mmHg, and a condition termed high-altitude illness develops (see above). At higher altitudes, arterial saturation declines rapidly and symptoms become more serious; and at 5000 m, unacclimated individuals usually cease to be able to function normally owing to the changes in CNS function described above.

Hypoxia Secondary to Right-to-Left Extrapulmonary Shunting

From a physiologic viewpoint, this cause of hypoxia resembles intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting but is caused by congenital cardiac malformations, such as tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, and Eisenmenger's syndrome (Chap. 236). As in pulmonary right-to-left shunting, the PaO2 cannot be restored to normal with inspiration of 100% O2.

Anemic Hypoxia

A reduction in hemoglobin concentration of the blood is accompanied by a corresponding decline in the O2-carrying capacity of the blood. Although the PaO2 is normal in anemic hypoxia, the absolute quantity of O2 transported per unit volume of blood is diminished. As the anemic blood passes through the capillaries and the usual quantity of O2 is removed from it, the PO2 and saturation in the venous blood decline to a greater extent than normal.

Carbon Monoxide (Co) Intoxication

(See also Chap. e49) Hemoglobin that binds with CO (carboxyhemoglobin, COHb) is unavailable for O2 transport. In addition, the presence of COHb shifts the Hb-O2 dissociation curve to the left (Fig. 104-2) so that O2 is unloaded only at lower tensions, contributing further to tissue hypoxia.

Circulatory Hypoxia

As in anemic hypoxia, the PaO2 is usually normal, but venous and tissue PO2 values are reduced as a consequence of reduced tissue perfusion and greater tissue O2 extraction. This pathophysiology leads to an increased arterial-mixed venous O2 difference (a-v-O2 difference), or gradient. Generalized circulatory hypoxia occurs in heart failure (Chap. 234) and in most forms of shock (Chap. 270).

Specific Organ Hypoxia

Localized circulatory hypoxia may occur as a result of decreased perfusion secondary to arterial obstruction, as in localized atherosclerosis in any vascular bed, or as a consequence of vasoconstriction, as observed in Raynaud's phenomenon (Chap. 249). Localized hypoxia may also result from venous obstruction and the resultant expansion of interstitial fluid causing arteriolar compression and, thereby, reduction of arterial inflow. Edema, which increases the distance through which O2 must diffuse before it reaches cells, can also cause localized hypoxia. In an attempt to maintain adequate perfusion to more vital organs in patients with reduced cardiac output secondary to heart failure or hypovolemic shock, vasoconstriction may reduce perfusion in the limbs and skin, causing hypoxia of these regions.

Increased O2 Requirements

If the O2 consumption of tissues is elevated without a corresponding increase in perfusion, tissue hypoxia ensues and the PO2 in venous blood declines. Ordinarily, the clinical picture of patients with hypoxia due to an elevated metabolic rate, as in fever or thyrotoxicosis, is quite different from that in other types of hypoxia: the skin is warm and flushed owing to increased cutaneous blood flow that dissipates the excessive heat produced, and cyanosis is usually absent.

Exercise is a classic example of increased tissue O2 requirements. These increased demands are normally met by several mechanisms operating simultaneously: (1) increase in the cardiac output and ventilation and, thus, O2 delivery to the tissues; (2) a preferential shift in blood flow to the exercising muscles by changing vascular resistances in the circulatory beds of exercising tissues, directly and/or reflexly; (3) an increase in O2 extraction from the delivered blood and a widening of the arteriovenous O2 difference; and (4) a reduction in the pH of the tissues and capillary blood, shifting the Hb-O2 curve to the right (Fig. 104-2), and unloading more O2 from hemoglobin. If the capacity of these mechanisms is exceeded, then hypoxia, especially of the exercising muscles, will result.

Improper Oxygen Utilization

Cyanide (Chap. e50) and several other similarly acting poisons cause cellular hypoxia. The tissues are unable to utilize O2, and, as a consequence, the venous blood tends to have a high O2 tension. This condition has been termed histotoxic hypoxia.

Adaptation to Hypoxia

An important component of the respiratory response to hypoxia originates in special chemosensitive cells in the carotid and aortic bodies and in the respiratory center in the brainstem. The stimulation of these cells by hypoxia increases ventilation, with a loss of CO2, and can lead to respiratory alkalosis. When combined with the metabolic acidosis resulting from the production of lactic acid, the serum bicarbonate level declines (Chap. 47).

With the reduction of PaO2, cerebrovascular resistance decreases and cerebral blood flow increases in an attempt to maintain O2 delivery to the brain. However, when the reduction of PaO2 is accompanied by hyperventilation and a reduction of PaCO 2, cerebrovascular resistance rises, cerebral blood flow falls, and tissue hypoxia intensifies.

The diffuse, systemic vasodilation that occurs in generalized hypoxia increases the cardiac output. In patients with underlying heart disease, the requirements of peripheral tissues for an increase of cardiac output with hypoxia may precipitate congestive heart failure. In patients with ischemic heart disease, a reduced PaO2 may intensify myocardial ischemia and further impair left ventricular function.

One of the important compensatory mechanisms for chronic hypoxia is an increase in the hemoglobin concentration and in the number of red blood cells in the circulating blood, i.e., the development of polycythemia secondary to erythropoietin production (Chap. 108). In persons with chronic hypoxemia secondary to prolonged residence at a high altitude (>13,000 ft, 4200 m), a condition termed chronic mountain sickness develops. This disorder is characterized by a blunted respiratory drive, reduced ventilation, erythrocytosis, cyanosis, weakness, right ventricular enlargement secondary to pulmonary hypertension, and even stupor.
 
Cyanosis

Cyanosis refers to a bluish color of the skin and mucous membranes resulting from an increased quantity of reduced hemoglobin (i.e., deoxygenated hemoglobin) or of hemoglobin derivatives (e.g., methemoglobin or sulfhemoglobin) in the small blood vessels of those tissues. It is usually most marked in the lips, nail beds, ears, and malar eminences. Cyanosis, especially if developed recently, is more commonly detected by a family member than the patient. The florid skin characteristic of polycythemia vera (Chap. 108) must be distinguished from the true cyanosis discussed here. A cherry-colored flush, rather than cyanosis, is caused by COHb (Chap. e50).

The degree of cyanosis is modified by the color of the cutaneous pigment and the thickness of the skin, as well as by the state of the cutaneous capillaries. The accurate clinical detection of the presence and degree of cyanosis is difficult, as proved by oximetric studies. In some instances, central cyanosis can be detected reliably when the SaO2 has fallen to 85%; in others, particularly in dark-skinned persons, it may not be detected until it has declined to 75%. In the latter case, examination of the mucous membranes in the oral cavity and the conjunctivae rather than examination of the skin is more helpful in the detection of cyanosis.

The increase in the quantity of reduced hemoglobin in the mucocutaneous vessels that produces cyanosis may be brought about either by an increase in the quantity of venous blood as a result of dilation of the venules and venous ends of the capillaries or by a reduction in the SaO2 in the capillary blood. In general, cyanosis becomes apparent when the concentration of reduced hemoglobin in capillary blood exceeds 40 g/L (4 g/dL).

It is the absolute, rather than the relative, quantity of reduced hemoglobin that is important in producing cyanosis. Thus, in a patient with severe anemia, the relative quantity of reduced hemoglobin in the venous blood may be very large when considered in relation to the total quantity of hemoglobin in the blood. However, since the concentration of the latter is markedly reduced, the absolute quantity of reduced hemoglobin may still be small, and, therefore, patients with severe anemia and even marked arterial desaturation may not display cyanosis. Conversely, the higher the total hemoglobin content, the greater the tendency toward cyanosis; thus, patients with marked polycythemia tend to be cyanotic at higher levels of SaO2 than patients with normal hematocrit values. Likewise, local passive congestion, which causes an increase in the total quantity of reduced hemoglobin in the vessels in a given area, may cause cyanosis. Cyanosis is also observed when nonfunctional hemoglobin, such as methemoglobin or sulfhemoglobin (Chap. 104), is present in blood.

Cyanosis may be subdivided into central and peripheral types. In central cyanosis, the SaO2 is reduced or an abnormal hemoglobin derivative is present, and the mucous membranes and skin are both affected. Peripheral cyanosis is due to a slowing of blood flow and abnormally great extraction of O2 from normally saturated arterial blood; it results from vasoconstriction and diminished peripheral blood flow, such as occurs in cold exposure, shock, congestive failure, and peripheral vascular disease. Often in these conditions, the mucous membranes of the oral cavity or those beneath the tongue may be spared. Clinical differentiation between central and peripheral cyanosis may not always be simple, and in conditions such as cardiogenic shock with pulmonary edema there may be a mixture of both types.

Differential Diagnosis

Central Cyanosis

(Table 35-1) Decreased SaO2 results from a marked reduction in the PaO2. This reduction may be brought about by a decline in the FiO2 without sufficient compensatory alveolar hyperventilation to maintain alveolar PO2. Cyanosis usually becomes manifest in an ascent to an altitude of 4000 m (13,000 ft).

Table 35-1 Causes of Cyanosis

 
 
Central Cyanosis  
Decreased arterial oxygen saturation 
  Decreased atmospheric pressure〞high altitude 
  Impaired pulmonary function 
    Alveolar hypoventilation 
    Uneven relationships between pulmonary ventilation and 
perfusion (perfusion of hypoventilated alveoli) 
    Impaired oxygen diffusion 
  Anatomic shunts 
    Certain types of congenital heart disease 
    Pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas 
    Multiple small intrapulmonary shunts 
  Hemoglobin with low affinity for oxygen 
Hemoglobin abnormalities 
  Methemoglobinemia〞hereditary, acquired 
  Sulfhemoglobinema〞acquired 
  Carboxyhemoglobinemia (not true cyanosis) 
Peripheral Cyanosis  
Reduced cardiac output 
Cold exposure 
Redistribution of blood flow from extremities 
Arterial obstruction 
Venous obstruction 
 

 

Seriously impaired pulmonary function, through perfusion of unventilated or poorly ventilated areas of the lung or alveolar hypoventilation, is a common cause of central cyanosis (Chap. 252). This condition may occur acutely, as in extensive pneumonia or pulmonary edema, or chronically, with chronic pulmonary diseases (e.g., emphysema). In the latter situation, secondary polycythemia is generally present and clubbing of the fingers (see below) may occur. Another cause of reduced SaO2 is shunting of systemic venous blood into the arterial circuit. Certain forms of congenital heart disease are associated with cyanosis on this basis (see above and Chap. 236).

Pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae may be congenital or acquired, solitary or multiple, microscopic or massive. The severity of cyanosis produced by these fistulae depends on their size and number. They occur with some frequency in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. SaO2 reduction and cyanosis may also occur in some patients with cirrhosis, presumably as a consequence of pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae or portal vein每pulmonary vein anastomoses.

In patients with cardiac or pulmonary right-to-left shunts, the presence and severity of cyanosis depend on the size of the shunt relative to the systemic flow as well as on the Hb-O2 saturation of the venous blood. With increased extraction of O2 from the blood by the exercising muscles, the venous blood returning to the right side of the heart is more unsaturated than at rest, and shunting of this blood intensifies the cyanosis. Secondary polycythemia occurs frequently in patients in this setting and contributes to the cyanosis.

Cyanosis can be caused by small quantities of circulating methemoglobin (Hb Fe3+) and by even smaller quantities of sulfhemoglobin (Chap. 104); both of these hemoglobin derivatives are unable to bind oxygen. Although they are uncommon causes of cyanosis, these abnormal hemoglobin species should be sought by spectroscopy when cyanosis is not readily explained by malfunction of the circulatory or respiratory systems. Generally, digital clubbing does not occur with them.

Peripheral Cyanosis

Probably the most common cause of peripheral cyanosis is the normal vasoconstriction resulting from exposure to cold air or water. When cardiac output is reduced, cutaneous vasoconstriction occurs as a compensatory mechanism so that blood is diverted from the skin to more vital areas such as the CNS and heart, and cyanosis of the extremities may result even though the arterial blood is normally saturated.

Arterial obstruction to an extremity, as with an embolus, or arteriolar constriction, as in cold-induced vasospasm (Raynaud's phenomenon) (Chap. 249), generally results in pallor and coldness, and there may be associated cyanosis. Venous obstruction, as in thrombophlebitis or deep venous thrombosis, dilates the subpapillary venous plexuses and thereby intensifies cyanosis.

Approach to the Patient: Cyanosis

Certain features are important in arriving at the cause of cyanosis:

It is important to ascertain the time of onset of cyanosis. Cyanosis present since birth or infancy is usually due to congenital heart disease.

Central and peripheral cyanosis must be differentiated. Evidence of disorders of the respiratory or cardiovascular systems are helpful. Massage or gentle warming of a cyanotic extremity will increase peripheral blood flow and abolish peripheral, but not central, cyanosis.

The presence or absence of clubbing of the digits (see below) should be ascertained. The combination of cyanosis and clubbing is frequent in patients with congenital heart disease and right-to-left shunting and is seen occasionally in patients with pulmonary disease, such as lung abscess or pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae. In contrast, peripheral cyanosis or acutely developing central cyanosis is not associated with clubbed digits.

PaO2 and SaO2 should be determined, and, in patients with cyanosis in whom the mechanism is obscure, spectroscopic examination of the blood performed to look for abnormal types of hemoglobin (critical in the differential diagnosis of cyanosis).
 
Clubbing

The selective bulbous enlargement of the distal segments of the fingers and toes due to proliferation of connective tissue, particularly on the dorsal surface, is termed clubbing; there is also increased sponginess of the soft tissue at the base of the clubbed nail. Clubbing may be hereditary, idiopathic, or acquired and associated with a variety of disorders, including cyanotic congenital heart disease (see above), infective endocarditis, and a variety of pulmonary conditions (among them primary and metastatic lung cancer, bronchiectasis, asbestosis, sarcoidosis, lung abscess, cystic fibrosis, tuberculosis, and mesothelioma), as well as with some gastrointestinal diseases (including inflammatory bowel disease and hepatic cirrhosis). In some instances, it is occupational, e.g., in jackhammer operators.

Clubbing in patients with primary and metastatic lung cancer, mesothelioma, bronchiectasis, or hepatic cirrhosis may be associated with hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. In this condition, the subperiosteal formation of new bone in the distal diaphyses of the long bones of the extremities causes pain and symmetric arthritis-like changes in the shoulders, knees, ankles, wrists, and elbows. The diagnosis of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy may be confirmed by bone radiograph or MRI. Although the mechanism of clubbing is unclear, it appears to be secondary to humoral substances that cause dilation of the vessels of the distal digits as well as growth factors released from unfragmented platelet precursors in the digital circulation.
 
Acknowledgements

Dr. Eugene Braunwald authored this chapter in the previous edition.Some of the material from the 17th edition has been carried forward.
 
Further Readings

Fawcett RS et al: Nail abnormalities: Clues to systemic disease. Am Fam Physician 69:1417, 2004 [PMID: 15053406] 

 
Giordano FJ: Oxygen, oxidative stress, hypoxia, and heart failure. J Clin Invest 115:500, 2005 [PMID: 15765131] 

 
Griffey RT et al: Cyanosis. J Emerg Med 18:369, 2000 [PMID: 10729678] 

 
Hackett PH, Roach RC: Current concepts: High altitude illness. N Engl J Med 345:107, 2001 [PMID: 11450659] 

 
Le車n-Velarde F et al: Chronic mountain sickness and the heart. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 52:540, 2010 [PMID: 21608089] 

 
Levy MM: Pathophysiology of oxygen delivery in respiratory failure. Chest 128:547S, 2005 

 
Michiels C: Physiological and pathological responses to hypoxia. Am J Pathol 164:1875, 2004 [PMID: 15161623] 

 
Scherrer U et al: New insights in the pathogenesis of high-altitude pulmonary edema. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 52:485, 2010 [PMID: 20417341] 

 
Semenza GL: Involvement of oxygen-sensing pathways in physiological and pathological erythropoiesis. Blood 114:2015, 2009 [PMID: 19494350] 

 
Spicknall KE et al: Clubbing: an update on diagnosis, differential diagnosis, pathophysiology, and clinical relevance. J Am Acad Dermatol 52:1020, 2005 [PMID: 15928621] 

 
 

^^
Edema: Introduction

Edema is defined as a clinically apparent increase in the interstitial fluid volume, which may expand by several liters before the abnormality is evident. Therefore, a weight gain of several kilograms usually precedes overt manifestations of edema, and a similar weight loss from diuresis can be induced in a slightly edematous patient before "dry weight" is achieved. Anasarca refers to gross, generalized edema. Ascites (Chap. 43) and hydrothorax refer to accumulation of excess fluid in the peritoneal and pleural cavities, respectively, and are considered special forms of edema.

Depending on its cause and mechanism, edema may be localized or have a generalized distribution. Edema is recognized in its generalized form by puffiness of the face, which is most readily apparent in the periorbital areas, and by the persistence of an indentation of the skin after pressure; this is known as "pitting" edema. In its more subtle form, edema may be detected by noting that after the stethoscope is removed from the chest wall, the rim of the bell leaves an indentation on the skin of the chest for a few minutes. When the ring on a finger fits more snugly than in the past or when a patient complains of difficulty putting on shoes, particularly in the evening, edema may be present.

Pathogenesis

About one-third of total-body water is confined to the extracellular space. Approximately 75% of the latter is interstitial fluid, and the remainder is in the plasma compartment.

Starling Forces

The forces that regulate the disposition of fluid between these two components of the extracellular compartment frequently are referred to as the Starling forces. The hydrostatic pressure within the vascular system and the colloid oncotic pressure in the interstitial fluid tend to promote movement of fluid from the vascular to the extravascular space. By contrast, the colloid oncotic pressure contributed by plasma proteins and the hydrostatic pressure within the interstitial fluid promote the movement of fluid into the vascular compartment.

As a consequence of these forces, there is movement of water and diffusible solutes from the vascular space at the arteriolar end of the capillaries. Fluid is returned from the interstitial space into the vascular system at the venous end of the capillaries and by way of the lymphatics. Unless these channels are obstructed, lymph flow rises with increases in net movement of fluid from the vascular compartment to the interstitium. These flows are usually balanced so that there is a steady state in the sizes of the intravascular and interstitial compartments, yet a large exchange between them occurs. However, if either the hydrostatic or the oncotic pressure gradient is altered significantly, a further net movement of fluid between the two components of the extracellular space will take place. The development of edema then depends on one or more alterations in the Starling forces so that there is increased flow of fluid from the vascular system into the interstitium or into a body cavity.

Edema due to an increase in capillary pressure may result from an elevation of venous pressure caused by obstruction to venous and/or lymphatic drainage. An increase in capillary pressure may be generalized, as occurs in congestive heart failure (see below). The Starling forces also may be imbalanced when the colloid oncotic pressure of the plasma is reduced owing to any factor that may induce hypoalbuminemia, such as severe malnutrition, liver disease, loss of protein into the urine or into the gastrointestinal tract, or a severe catabolic state. Edema may be localized to one extremity when venous pressure is elevated due to unilateral thrombophlebitis (see below).

Capillary Damage

Edema may also result from damage to the capillary endothelium, which increases its permeability and permits the transfer of proteins into the interstitial compartment. Injury to the capillary wall can result from drugs, viral or bacterial agents, and thermal or mechanical trauma. Increased capillary permeability also may be a consequence of a hypersensitivity reaction and is characteristic of immune injury. Damage to the capillary endothelium is presumably responsible for inflammatory edema, which is usually nonpitting, localized, and accompanied by other signs of inflammation〞i.e., erythema, heat, and tenderness.

Reduction of Effective Arterial Volume

In many forms of edema, the effective arterial blood volume, a parameter that represents the filling of the arterial tree, is reduced. Underfilling of the arterial tree may be caused by a reduction of cardiac output and/or systemic vascular resistance. As a consequence of underfilling, a series of physiologic responses designed to restore the effective arterial volume to normal are set into motion. A key element of these responses is the retention of salt and, therefore, of water, ultimately leading to edema.

Renal Factors and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone (Raa) System

(See also Chap. 342) In the final analysis, renal retention of Na+ is central to the development of generalized edema (Fig. 36-1). The diminished renal blood flow characteristic of states in which the effective arterial blood volume is reduced is translated by the renal juxtaglomerular cells (specialized myoepithelial cells surrounding the afferent arteriole) into a signal for increased renin release. Renin is an enzyme with a molecular mass of about 40,000 Da that acts on its substrate, angiotensinogen, an 2-globulin synthesized by the liver, to release angiotensin I, a decapeptide, which in turn is converted to angiotensin II (AII), an octapeptide. AII has generalized vasoconstrictor properties; it is especially active on the renal efferent arterioles. This action reduces the hydrostatic pressure in the peritubular capillaries, whereas the increased filtration fraction raises the colloid osmotic pressure in these vessels, thereby enhancing salt and water reabsorption in the proximal tubule as well as in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle.

Figure 36-1

 
 
 
 
Clinical conditions in which a decrease in cardiac output (A) and systemic arterial vasodilation (B) cause arterial underfilling with resulting neurohumoral activation and renal sodium and water retention. In addition to activating the neurohumoral axis, adrenergic stimulation causes renal vasoconstriction and enhances sodium and fluid transport by the proximal tubuleepithelium. SNS, sympathetic nervous system; RAAS, renin-angiotensin aldosterone system. (Reprinted from RW Schrier: Ann Intern Med 113:155, 1990.)
 
 

The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) system has long been recognized as a hormonal system; however, it also operates locally. Intrarenally produced AII contributes to glomerular efferent arteriolar constriction, and this "tubuloglomerular feedback" causes salt and water retention and thereby contributes to the formation of edema.

AII that enters the systemic circulation stimulates the production of aldosterone by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone in turn enhances Na+ reabsorption (and K+ excretion) by the collecting tubule. In patients with heart failure, not only is aldosterone secretion elevated but the biologic half-life of aldosterone is prolonged, which increases further the plasma level of the hormone. A depression of hepatic blood flow, especially during exercise, is responsible for reduced hepatic catabolism of aldosterone.

Increased quantities of aldosterone are secreted in heart failure and in other edematous states, and blockade of the action of aldosterone by spironolactone or eplerenone (aldosterone antagonists) or by amiloride (a blocker of epithelial Na+ channels) often induces a moderate diuresis in edematous states. Yet persistently augmented levels of aldosterone (or other mineralocorticoids) alone do not always promote accumulation of edema, as witnessed by the lack of significant fluid retention in most instances of primary aldosteronism (Chap. 342). Furthermore, although normal individuals retain some NaCl and water with the administration of potent mineralocorticoids, such as deoxycorticosterone acetate and fludrocortisone, this accumulation is self-limiting despite continued exposure to the steroid, a phenomenon known as mineralocorticoid escape. The failure of normal individuals who receive large doses of mineralocorticoids to accumulate large quantities of extracellular fluid and develop edema is probably a consequence of an increase in glomerular filtration rate (pressure natriuresis) and the action of natriuretic substance(s) (see below). The continued secretion of aldosterone may be more important in the accumulation of fluid in edematous states because patients with edema secondary to heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and hepatic cirrhosis are generally unable to repair the deficit in effective arterial blood volume. As a consequence, they do not develop pressure natriuresis.

Arginine Vasopressin (Avp)

(See also Chap. 340) The secretion of AVP occurs in response to increased intracellular osmolar concentration, and, by stimulating V2 receptors, AVP increases the reabsorption of free water in the renal distal tubule and collecting duct, thereby increasing total-body water. Circulating AVP is elevated in many patients with heart failure secondary to a nonosmotic stimulus associated with decreased effective arterial volume. Such patients fail to show the normal reduction of AVP with a reduction of osmolality, contributing to edema formation and hyponatremia.

Endothelin

This potent peptide vasoconstrictor is released by endothelial cells. Its concentration is elevated in heart failure and contributes to renal vasoconstriction, Na+ retention, and edema in heart failure.

Natriuretic Peptides

Atrial distention and/or a Na+ load cause release into the circulation of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), a polypeptide; a high-molecular-weight precursor of ANP is stored in secretory granules within atrial myocytes. Release of ANP causes (1) excretion of sodium and water by augmenting glomerular filtration rate, inhibiting sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule, and inhibiting release of renin and aldosterone and (2) arteriolar and venous dilation by antagonizing the vasoconstrictor actions of AII, AVP, and sympathetic stimulation. Thus, ANP has the capacity to oppose Na+ retention and arterial pressure elevation in hypervolemic states.

The closely related brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is stored primarily in ventricular myocardium and is released when ventricular diastolic pressure rises. Its actions are similar to those of ANP, and both BNP and ANP bind to the natriuretic receptor-A, which is found in the myocardium. Yet another natriuretic peptide, C-type (CNP), is of endothelial and renal origin. CNP binds preferentially to the natriuretic peptide receptor-B, which is expressed principally in veins. Circulating levels of ANP and BNP are elevated in congestive heart failure and in cirrhosis with ascites, but obviously not sufficiently to prevent edema formation. In addition, in edematous states there is abnormal resistance to the actions of natriuretic peptides.

Clinical Causes of Edema

Obstruction of Venous (and Lymphatic) Drainage of a Limb

In this condition the hydrostatic pressure in the capillary bed upstream (proximal) to the obstruction increases so that an abnormal quantity of fluid is transferred from the vascular to the interstitial space. Since the alternative route (i.e., the lymphatic channels) also may be obstructed or maximally filled, an increased volume of interstitial fluid in the limb develops (i.e., there is trapping of fluid in the interstitium of the extremity). The displacement of fluid into a limb may occur at the expense of the blood volume in the remainder of the body, thereby reducing effective arterial blood volume and leading to the retention of NaCl and H2O until the deficit in plasma volume has been corrected.

Congestive Heart Failure

(See also Chap. 234) In this disorder the impaired systolic emptying of the ventricle(s) and/or the impairment of ventricular relaxation promotes an accumulation of blood in the venous circulation at the expense of the effective arterial volume, and the aforementioned sequence of events (Fig. 36-1) is initiated. In mild heart failure, a small increment of total blood volume may repair the deficit of arterial volume and establish a new steady state. Through the operation of Starling's law of the heart, an increase in ventricular diastolic volume promotes a more forceful contraction and may thereby maintain the cardiac output. However, if the cardiac disorder is more severe, fluid retention continues, and the increment in blood volume accumulates in the venous circulation, raising venous pressure and causing edema.

Incomplete ventricular emptying (systolic heart failure) and/or inadequate ventricular relaxation (diastolic heart failure) both lead to an elevation of ventricular diastolic pressure. If the impairment of cardiac function primarily involves the right ventricle, pressures in the systemic veins and capillaries rise, augmenting the transudation of fluid into the interstitial space and enhancing the likelihood of peripheral edema. The elevated systemic venous pressure is transmitted to the thoracic duct with consequent reduction of lymph drainage, further increasing the accumulation of edema. If the impairment of cardiac function involves the left ventricle primarily, pulmonary venous and capillary pressures rise. Pulmonary artery pressure rises, and this in turn interferes with the emptying of the right ventricle, leading to an elevation of right ventricular diastolic and central and systemic venous pressures, enhancing the likelihood of the formation of peripheral edema. The elevation of pulmonary capillary pressure may cause pulmonary edema, which impairs gas exchange. The resulting hypoxemia may impair cardiac function further, sometimes causing a vicious circle.

Nephrotic Syndrome and Other Hypoalbuminemic States

(See also Chap. 283) The primary alteration in this disorder is a diminished colloid oncotic pressure due to losses of large quantities of protein into the urine. With severe hypoalbuminemia and the consequent reduced colloid osmotic pressure, the NaCl and H2O that are retained cannot be restrained within the vascular compartment, and total and effective arterial blood volumes decline. This process initiates the edema-forming sequence of events described above, including activation of the RAA system. Impaired renal function contributes further to the formation of edema. A similar sequence of events occurs in other conditions that lead to severe hypoalbuminemia, including (1) severe nutritional deficiency states, (2) severe, chronic liver disease (see below), and (3) protein-losing enteropathy.

Cirrhosis

(See also Chaps. 43 and 308) This condition is characterized in part by hepatic venous outflow blockade, which in turn expands the splanchnic blood volume and increases hepatic lymph formation. Intrahepatic hypertension acts as a stimulus for renal Na+ retention and a reduction of effective arterial blood volume. These alterations frequently are complicated by hypoalbuminemia secondary to reduced hepatic synthesis, as well as systemic vasodilation. These effects reduce the effective arterial blood volume further, leading to activation of the RAA system, renal sympathetic nerves, and other NaCl- and H2O-retaining mechanisms. The concentration of circulating aldosterone often is elevated by the failure of the liver to metabolize this hormone. Initially, the excess interstitial fluid is localized preferentially proximal (upstream) to the congested portal venous system and obstructed hepatic lymphatics, i.e., in the peritoneal cavity (ascites, Chap. 43). In later stages, particularly when there is severe hypoalbuminemia, peripheral edema may develop. The excess production of prostaglandins (PGE2 and PGI2 ) in cirrhosis attenuates renal Na+ retention. When the synthesis of these substances is inhibited by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), renal function deteriorates and Na+ retention increases.

Drug-Induced Edema

A large number of widely used drugs can cause edema (Table 36-1). Mechanisms include renal vasoconstriction (NSAIDs and cyclosporine), arteriolar dilation (vasodilators), augmented renal Na+ reabsorption (steroid hormones), and capillary damage (interleukin 2).

Table 36-1 Drugs Associated with Edema Formation

 
 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
Antihypertensive agents 
  Direct arterial/arteriolar vasodilators 
    Hydralazine 
    Clonidine 
    Methyldopa 
    Guanethidine 
    Minoxidil 
  Calcium channel antagonists 
  -Adrenergic antagonists 
  Thiazolidinediones 
Steroid hormones 
  Glucocorticoids 
  Anabolic steroids 
  Estrogens 
  Progestins 
Cyclosporine 
Growth hormone 
Immunotherapies 
  Interleukin 2 
  OKT3 monoclonal antibody 
 


Source: From Chertow.
 
 
Differential Diagnosis

Localized Edema

(See also Chap. 249) Localized edema due to venous or lymphatic obstruction may be caused by thrombophlebitis, chronic lymphangitis, resection of regional lymph nodes, filariasis, etc. Lymphedema is particularly intractable because restriction of lymphatic flow results in increased protein concentration in the interstitial fluid, a circumstance that aggravates retention of fluid.

Generalized Edema

The differences among the major causes of generalized edema are shown in Table 36-2.

Table 36-2 Principal Causes of Generalized Edema: History, Physical Examination, and Laboratory Findings

 
 
Organ System History Physical Examination Laboratory Findings 
Cardiac Dyspnea with exertion prominent〞often associated with orthopnea〞or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea Elevated jugular venous pressure, ventricular (S3) gallop; occasionally with displaced or dyskinetic apical pulse; peripheral cyanosis, cool extremities, small pulse pressure when severe Elevated urea nitrogen-to-creatinine ratio common; elevated uric acid; serum sodium often diminished; liver enzymes occasionally elevated with hepatic congestion 
Hepatic Dyspnea uncommon, except if associated with significant degree of ascites; most often a history of ethanol abuse Frequently associated with ascites; jugular venous pressure normal or low; blood pressure lower than in renal or cardiac disease; one or more additional signs of chronic liver disease (jaundice, palmar erythema, Dupuytren〞s contracture, spider angiomata, male gynecomastia; asterixis and other signs of encephalopathy) may be present If severe, reductions in serum albumin, cholesterol, other hepatic proteins (transferrin, fibrinogen); liver enzymes elevated, depending on the cause and acuity of liver injury; tendency toward hypokalemia, respiratory alkalosis; macrocytosis from folate deficiency 
Renal (CRF) Usually chronic: may be associated with uremic signs and symptoms, including decreased appetite, altered (metallic or fishy) taste, altered sleep pattern, difficulty concentrating, restless legs or myoclonus; dyspnea can be present, but generally less prominent than in heart failure Elevated blood pressure; hypertensive retinopathy; nitrogenous fetor; pericardial friction rub in advanced cases with uremia Albuminuria, hypoalbuminemia; sometimes, elevation of serum creatinine and urea nitrogen; hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, anemia (usually normocytic) 
Renal (NS) Childhood diabetes mellitus; plasma cell dyscrasias Periorbital edema; hypertension Proteinuria (3.5 g/d); hypoalbuminemia; hypercholesterolemia; microscopic hematuria 
 


Abbreviations: CRF, chronic renal failure; NS, nephrotic syndrome. 

Source: Modified from Chertow.
 

A majority of patients with generalized edema develop cardiac, renal, hepatic, or nutritional disorders. Consequently, the differential diagnosis of generalized edema should be directed toward identifying or excluding these several conditions.

Edema of Heart Failure

(See also Chap. 234) The presence of heart disease, as manifested by cardiac enlargement and a gallop rhythm, together with evidence of cardiac failure, such as dyspnea, basilar rales, venous distention, and hepatomegaly, usually indicates that edema results from heart failure. Noninvasive tests such as echocardiography may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis of heart disease. The edema of heart failure typically occurs in the dependent portions of the body.

Edema of Acute Glomerulonephritis and Other Forms of Renal Failure

(See also Chap. 283) The edema that occurs during the acute phases of glomerulonephritis is characteristically associated with hematuria, proteinuria, and hypertension. Although some evidence supports the view that the fluid retention is due to increased capillary permeability, in most instances, the edema results from primary retention of NaCl and H2O by the kidneys owing to renal insufficiency. This state differs from congestive heart failure in that it is characterized by a normal (or sometimes even increased) cardiac output and a normal arterial每mixed venous oxygen difference. Patients with edema due to renal failure commonly have evidence of arterial hypertension as well as pulmonary congestion on chest roentgenogram even without cardiac enlargement, but they may not develop orthopnea. Patients with chronic renal failure may also develop edema due to primary renal retention of NaCl and H2O.

Edema of the Nephrotic Syndrome

(See also Chap. 283) Marked proteinuria (>3.5 g/d), hypoalbuminemia (<35 g/L), and, in some instances, hypercholesterolemia are present. This syndrome may occur during the course of a variety of kidney diseases, which include glomerulonephritis, diabetic glomerulosclerosis, and hypersensitivity reactions. A history of previous renal disease may or may not be elicited.

Edema of Cirrhosis

(See also Chap. 308) Ascites and biochemical and clinical evidence of hepatic disease (collateral venous channels, jaundice, and spider angiomata) characterize edema of hepatic origin. The ascites (Chap. 43) is frequently refractory to treatment because it collects as a result of a combination of obstruction of hepatic lymphatic drainage, portal hypertension, and hypoalbuminemia. A sizable accumulation of ascitic fluid may increase intra-abdominal pressure and impede venous return from the lower extremities; hence, it tends to promote accumulation of edema in this region as well.

Edema of Nutritional Origin

A diet grossly deficient in protein over a prolonged period may produce hypoproteinemia and edema. The latter may be intensified by the development of beriberi heart disease, which also is of nutritional origin, in which multiple peripheral arteriovenous fistulas result in reduced effective systemic perfusion and effective arterial blood volume, thereby enhancing edema formation (Chap. 74). Edema may actually become intensified when famished subjects are first provided with an adequate diet. The ingestion of more food may increase the quantity of NaCl ingested, which is then retained along with H2O. So-called refeeding edema also may be linked to increased release of insulin, which directly increases tubular Na+ reabsorption. In addition to hypoalbuminemia, hypokalemia and caloric deficits may be involved in the edema of starvation.

Other Causes of Edema

These causes include hypothyroidism (myxedema) and hyperthyroidism (pretibial myxedema secondary to Graves' disease), the edema in which is typically nonpitting and due to deposition of hyaluronic acid and, in Graves' disease, lymphocytic infiltration and inflammation; exogenous hyperadrenocortism; pregnancy; and administration of estrogens and vasodilators, particularly dihydropyridines such as nifedipine.

Distribution of Edema

The distribution of edema is an important guide to its cause. Thus, edema limited to one leg or to one or both arms is usually the result of venous and/or lymphatic obstruction. Edema resulting from hypoproteinemia characteristically is generalized, but it is especially evident in the very soft tissues of the eyelids and face and tends to be most pronounced in the morning because of the recumbent posture assumed during the night. Less common causes of facial edema include trichinosis, allergic reactions, and myxedema. Edema associated with heart failure, by contrast, tends to be more extensive in the legs and to be accentuated in the evening, a feature also determined largely by posture. When patients with heart failure have been confined to bed, edema may be most prominent in the presacral region. Paralysis reduces lymphatic and venous drainage on the affected side and may be responsible for unilateral edema.

Additional Factors in Diagnosis

The color, thickness, and sensitivity of the skin are significant. Local tenderness and warmth suggest inflammation. Local cyanosis may signify venous obstruction. In individuals who have had repeated episodes of prolonged edema, the skin over the involved areas may be thickened, indurated, and often red.

Estimation of the venous pressure is of importance in evaluating edema. Ordinarily, a significant generalized increase in venous pressure can be recognized by the level at which cervical veins collapse (Chap. 227). In patients with obstruction of the superior vena cava, edema is confined to the face, neck, and upper extremities, in which the venous pressure is elevated compared with that in the lower extremities. Severe heart failure may cause ascites that may be distinguished from the ascites caused by hepatic cirrhosis by the jugular venous pressure, which is usually elevated in heart failure and normal in cirrhosis.

Determination of the concentration of serum albuminaids importantly in identifying those patients in whom edema is due, at least in part, to diminished intravascular colloid oncotic pressure. The presence of proteinuria also affords useful clues. The absence of proteinuria excludes nephrotic syndrome but cannot exclude nonproteinuric causes of renal failure. Slight to moderate proteinuria is the rule in patients with heart failure.

Approach to the Patient: Edema

An important first question is whether the edema is localized or generalized. If it is localized, the local phenomena that may be responsible should be considered. If the edema is generalized, one should first determine if there is serious hypoalbuminemia, e.g., serum albumin <25 g/L. If so, the history, physical examination, urinalysis, and other laboratory data will help evaluate the question of cirrhosis, severe malnutrition, or the nephrotic syndrome as the underlying disorder. If hypoalbuminemia is not present, one should determine if there is evidence of congestive heart failure severe enough to promote generalized edema. Finally, one should determine whether the patient has an adequate urine output or if there is significant oliguria or anuria. These abnormalities are discussed in Chaps. 44, 279, and 280.
 
Further Readings

Bansal S et al: Sodium retention in heart failure and cirrhosis: Potential role of natriuretic doses of mineralocorticoid antagonist? Circ Heart Fail 2:370, 2009 [PMID: 19808361] 

 
Chertow GM: Approach to the patient with edema, in Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald, L Goldman (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2003, pp 117每128 

 
Lee CYW, Burnett JC Jr: Natriuretic peptides and therapeutic application. Heart Fail Rev 12:131, 2007 [PMID: 17440808] 

 
McCullough JC: Renal disorders and heart disease, in Braunwald's Heart Disease, 8th ed, P Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008 

 
Schrier RW: Decreased effective blood volume in edematous disorders: What does this mean? J Am Soc Nephrol 18:2028, 2007 [PMID: 17568020] 

 
Skorecki KL et al: Extracellular fluid and edema formation, in Brenner and Rector's The Kidney, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2008 

 
Streeten DH: Idiopathic edema: Pathogenesis, clinical features, and treatment. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 24:531, 1995 [PMID: 8575408] 
 
 

^^
Palpitations: Introduction

Palpitations are extremely common among patients who present to their internist and can best be defined as an intermittent "thumping," "pounding," or "fluttering" sensation in the chest. This sensation can be either intermittent or sustained and either regular or irregular. Most patients interpret palpitations as an unusual awareness of the heartbeat, and become especially concerned when they sense that they have had "skipped" or "missing" heartbeats. Palpitations are often noted when the patient is quietly resting, during which time other stimuli are minimal. Palpitations that are positional generally reflect a structural process within (e.g., atrial myxoma) or adjacent to (e.g., mediastinal mass) the heart.

Palpitations are brought about by cardiac (43%), psychiatric (31%), miscellaneous (10%), and unknown (16%) causes, according to one large series. Among the cardiovascular causes are premature atrial and ventricular contractions, supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, mitral valve prolapse (with or without associated arrhythmias), aortic insufficiency, atrial myxoma, and pulmonary embolism. Intermittent palpitations are commonly caused by premature atrial or ventricular contractions: the post-extrasystolic beat is sensed by the patient owing to the increase in ventricular end-diastolic dimension following the pause in the cardiac cycle and the increased strength of contraction (post-extrasystolic potentiation) of that beat. Regular, sustained palpitations can be caused by regular supraventricular and ventricular tachycardias. Irregular, sustained palpitations can be caused by atrial fibrillation. It is important to note that most arrhythmias are not associated with palpitations. In those that are, it is often useful either to ask the patient to "tap out" the rhythm of the palpitations or to take his/her pulse while experiencing palpitations. In general, hyperdynamic cardiovascular states caused by catecholaminergic stimulation from exercise, stress, or pheochromocytoma can lead to palpitations. Palpitations are common among athletes, especially older endurance athletes. In addition, the enlarged ventricle of aortic regurgitation and accompanying hyperdynamic precordium frequently lead to the sensation of palpitations. Other factors that enhance the strength of myocardial contraction, including tobacco, caffeine, aminophylline, atropine, thyroxine, cocaine, and amphetamines, can cause palpitations.

Psychiatric causes of palpitations include panic attacks or disorders, anxiety states, and somatization, alone or in combination. Patients with psychiatric causes for palpitations more commonly report a longer duration of the sensation (>15 min) and other accompanying symptoms than do patients with other causes. Among the miscellaneous causes of palpitations included are thyrotoxicosis, drugs (see above) and ethanol, spontaneous skeletal muscle contractions of the chest wall, pheochromocytoma, and systemic mastocytosis.

Approach to the Patient: Palpitations

The principal goal in assessing patients with palpitations is to determine if the symptom is caused by a life-threatening arrhythmia. Patients with preexisting coronary artery disease (CAD) or risk factors for CAD are at greatest risk for ventricular arrhythmias as a cause for palpitations. In addition, the association of palpitations with other symptoms suggesting hemodynamic compromise, including syncope or lightheadedness, supports this diagnosis. Palpitations caused by sustained tachyarrhythmias in patients with CAD can be accompanied by angina pectoris or dyspnea, and in patients with ventricular dysfunction (systolic or diastolic), aortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or mitral stenosis, with or without CAD, can be accompanied by dyspnea from increased left atrial and pulmonary venous pressure.

Key features of the physical examination that will help confirm or refute the presence of an arrhythmia as a cause for the palpitations and its adverse hemodynamic consequences include measurement of the vital signs, assessment of the jugular venous pressure and pulse, and auscultation of the chest and precordium. A resting electrocardiogram can be used to document the arrhythmia. If exertion is known to induce the arrhythmia and accompanying palpitations, exercise electrocardiography can be used to make the diagnosis. If the arrhythmia is sufficiently infrequent, other methods must be used, including continuous electrocardiographic (Holter) monitoring; telephonic monitoring, through which the patient can transmit an electrocardiographic tracing during a sensed episode; loop recordings (external or implantable), which can capture the electrocardiographic event for later review; and mobile cardiac outpatient telemetry. Recent data suggest that Holter monitoring is of limited clinical utility, while the implantable loop recorder and mobile cardiac outpatient telemetry are safe and possibly more cost-effective in the assessment of patients with recurrent, unexplained palpitations.

Most patients with palpitations do not have serious arrhythmias or underlying structural heart disease. Occasional benign atrial or ventricular premature contractions can often be managed with beta-blocker therapy if sufficiently troubling to the patient. Palpitations incited by alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs need to be managed by abstention, while those caused by pharmacologic agents should be addressed by considering alternate therapies when appropriate or possible. Psychiatric causes of palpitations may benefit from cognitive or pharmacotherapies. The physician should note that palpitations are at the very least bothersome and, on occasion, frightening to the patient. Once serious causes for the symptom have been excluded, the patient should be reassured that the palpitations will not adversely affect prognosis.
 
Further Readings

Abbott AV: Diagnostic approach to palpitations. Am Fam Phys 71:743, 2005[PMID: 15742913] 

 
Giada F et al: Recurrent unexplained palpitations (RUP) study. J Am Coll Cardiol 49:1951, 2007[PMID: 17498580] 

 
Lawless CE, Briner W: Palpitations in athletes. Sports Med 38:687, 2008[PMID: 18620468] 

 
Olson JA et al: Utility of mobile cardiac outpatient telemetry for the diagnosis of palpitations, presyncope, syncope, and the assessment of therapy efficacy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 18:473, 2007[PMID: 17343724] 

 
Sulfi S et al: Limited clinical utility of Holter monitoring in patients with palpitations or altered consciousness: analysis of 8973 recordings in 7394 patients. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 13:39, 2008[PMID: 18234005] 

 
Weber BE, Kapoor WN: Evaluation and outcomes of patients with palpitations. Am J Med 100:138, 1996[PMID: 8629647] 
 
 

^^
Dysphagia: Introduction

Dysphagia〞difficulty with swallowing〞refers to problems with the transit of food or liquid from the mouth to the hypopharynx or through the esophagus. Severe dysphagia can compromise nutrition, cause aspiration, and reduce quality of life. Additional terminology pertaining to swallowing dysfunction is as follows. Aphagia denotes complete esophageal obstruction, most commonly encountered in the acute setting of a food bolus or foreign body impaction. Odynophagia refers to painful swallowing, typically resulting from mucosal ulceration within the oropharynx or esophagus. It commonly is accompanied by dysphagia, but the converse is not true. Globus pharyngeus is a foreign body sensation localized in the neck that does not interfere with swallowing and sometimes is relieved by swallowing. Transfer dysphagia frequently results in nasal regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration during swallowing and is characteristic of oropharyngeal dysphagia. Phagophobia (fear of swallowing) and refusal to swallow may be psychogenic or related to anticipatory anxiety about food bolus obstruction, odynophagia, or aspiration.

Physiology of Swallowing

Swallowing begins with a voluntary (oral) phase that includes preparation during which food is masticated and mixed with saliva. This is followed by a transfer phase during which the bolus is pushed into the pharynx by the tongue. Bolus entry into the hypopharynx initiates the pharyngeal swallow response, which is centrally mediated and involves a complex series of actions, the net result of which is to propel food through the pharynx into the esophagus while preventing its entry into the airway. To accomplish this, the larynx is elevated and pulled forward, actions that also facilitate upper esophageal sphincter (UES) opening. Tongue pulsion then propels the bolus through the UES, followed by a peristaltic contraction that clears residue from the pharynx and through the esophagus. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxes as the food enters the esophagus and remains relaxed until the peristaltic contraction has delivered the bolus into the stomach. Peristaltic contractions elicited in response to a swallow are called primary peristalsis and involve sequenced inhibition followed by contraction of the musculature along the entire length of the esophagus. The inhibition that precedes the peristaltic contraction is called deglutitive inhibition. Local distention of the esophagus anywhere along its length, as may occur with gastroesophageal reflux, activates secondary peristalsis that begins at the point of distention and proceeds distally. Tertiary esophageal contractions are nonperistaltic, disordered esophageal contractions that may be observed to occur spontaneously during fluoroscopic observation.

The musculature of the oral cavity, pharynx, UES, and cervical esophagus is striated and directly innervated by lower motor neurons carried in cranial nerves (Fig. 38-1). Oral cavity muscles are innervated by the seventh (trigeminal) and eighth (facial) cranial nerves; the tongue, by the twelfth (hypoglossal) cranial nerve. Pharyngeal muscles are innervated by the eleventh (glossopharyngeal) and twelfth (vagus) cranial nerves.

Figure 38-1

 
 
 
Sagittal and diagrammatic views of the musculature involved in enacting oropharyngeal swallowing. Note the dominance of the tongue in the sagittal view and the intimate relationship between the entrance to the larynx (airway) and the esophagus. In the resting configuration illustrated, the esophageal inlet is closed. This is transiently reconfigured such that the esophageal inlet is open and the laryngeal inlet closed during swallowing. [Adapted from PJ Kahrilas, in DW Gelfand and JE Richter (eds): Dysphagia: Diagnosis and Treatment. New York: Igaku-Shoin Medical Publishers, 1989, pp. 11每28.]
 
 

Physiologically, the UES consists of the cricopharyngeus muscle, the adjacent inferior pharyngeal constrictor, and the proximal portion of the cervical esophagus. UES innervation is derived from the vagus nerve, whereas the innervation to the musculature acting on the UES to facilitate its opening during swallowing comes from the fifth, seventh, and twelfth cranial nerves. The UES remains closed at rest owing to both its inherent elastic properties and neurogenically mediated contraction of the cricopharyngeus muscle. UES opening during swallowing involves both cessation of vagal excitation to the cricopharyngeus and simultaneous contraction of the suprahyoid and geniohyoid muscles that pull open the UES in conjunction with the upward and forward displacement of the larynx.

The neuromuscular apparatus for peristalsis is distinct in proximal and distal parts of the esophagus. The cervical esophagus, like the pharyngeal musculature, consists of striated muscle and is directly innervated by lower motor neurons of the vagus nerve. Peristalsis in the proximal esophagus is governed by the sequential activation of the vagal motor neurons in the nucleus ambiguus. In contrast, the distal esophagus and LES are composed of smooth muscle and are controlled by excitatory and inhibitory neurons within the esophageal myenteric plexus. Medullary preganglionic neurons from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus trigger peristalsis via these ganglionic neurons during primary peristalsis. Neurotransmitters of the excitatory ganglionic neurons are acetylcholine and substance P; those of the inhibitory neurons are vasoactive intestinal peptide and nitric oxide. Peristalsis results from the patterned activation of inhibitory followed by excitatory ganglionic neurons, with progressive dominance of the inhibitory neurons distally. Similarly, LES relaxation occurs with the onset of deglutitive inhibition and persists until the peristaltic sequence is complete. At rest, the LES is contracted because of excitatory ganglionic stimulation and its intrinsic myogenic tone, a property that distinguishes it from the adjacent esophagus. The function of the LES is supplemented by the surrounding muscle of the right diaphragmatic crus, which acts as an external sphincter during inspiration, cough, or abdominal straining.

Pathophysiology of Dysphagia

Dysphagia can be subclassified both by location and by the circumstances in which it occurs. With respect to location, distinct considerations apply to oral, pharyngeal, or esophageal dysphagia. Normal transport of an ingested bolus depends on the consistency and size of the bolus, the caliber of the lumen, the integrity of peristaltic contraction, and deglutitive inhibition of both the UES and the LES. Dysphagia caused by an oversized bolus or a narrow lumen is called structural dysphagia, whereas dysphagia due to abnormalities of peristalsis or impaired sphincter relaxation after swallowing is called propulsive or motor dysphagia. More than one mechanism may be operative in a patient with dysphagia. Scleroderma commonly presents with absent peristalsis as well as a weakened LES that predisposes patients to peptic stricture formation. Likewise, radiation therapy for head and neck cancer may compound the functional deficits in the oropharyngeal swallow attributable to the tumor and cause cervical esophageal stenosis.

Oral and Pharyngeal (Oropharyngeal) Dysphagia

Oral-phase dysphagia is associated with poor bolus formation and control so that food has prolonged retention within the oral cavity and may seep out of the mouth. Drooling and difficulty in initiating swallowing are other characteristic signs. Poor bolus control also may lead to premature spillage of food into the hypopharynx with resultant aspiration into the trachea or regurgitation into the nasal cavity. Pharyngeal-phase dysphagia is associated with retention of food in the pharynx due to poor tongue or pharyngeal propulsion or obstruction at the UES. Signs and symptoms of concomitant hoarseness or cranial nerve dysfunction may be associated with oropharyngeal dysphagia.

Oropharyngeal dysphagia may be due to neurologic, muscular, structural, iatrogenic, infectious, and metabolic causes. Iatrogenic, neurologic, and structural pathologies are most common. Iatrogenic causes include surgery and radiation, often in the setting of head and neck cancer. Neurogenic dysphagia resulting from cerebrovascular accidents, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a major source of morbidity related to aspiration and malnutrition. Medullary nuclei directly innervate the oropharynx. Lateralization of pharyngeal dysphagia implies either a structural pharyngeal lesion or a neurologic process that selectively targeted the ipsilateral brainstem nuclei or cranial nerve. Advances in functional brain imaging have elucidated an important role of the cerebral cortex in swallow function and dysphagia. Asymmetry in the cortical representation of the pharynx provides an explanation for the dysphagia that occurs as a consequence of unilateral cortical cerebrovascular accidents.

Oropharyngeal structural lesions causing dysphagia include Zenker's diverticulum, cricopharyngeal bar, and neoplasia. Zenker's diverticulum typically is encountered in elderly patients, with an estimated prevalence between 1:1000 and 1:10,000. In addition to dysphagia, patients may present with regurgitation of particulate food debris, aspiration, and halitosis. The pathogenesis is related to stenosis of the cricopharyngeus that causes diminished opening of the UES and results in increased hypopharyngeal pressure during swallowing with development of a pulsion diverticulum immediately above the cricopharyngeus in a region of potential weakness known as Killian's dehiscence. A cricopharyngeal bar, appearing as a prominent indentation behind the lower third of the cricoid cartilage, is related to Zenker's diverticulum in that it involves limited distensibility of the cricopharyngeus and can lead to the formation of a Zenker's diverticulum. However, a cricopharyngeal bar is a common radiographic finding, and most patients with transient cricopharyngeal bars are asymptomatic, making it important to rule out alternative etiologies of dysphagia before treatment. Furthermore, cricopharyngeal bars may be secondary to other neuromuscular disorders.

Since the pharyngeal phase of swallowing occurs in less than a second, rapid-sequence fluoroscopy is necessary to evaluate for functional abnormalities. Adequate fluoroscopic examination requires that the patient be conscious and cooperative. The study incorporates recordings of swallow sequences during ingestion of food and liquids of varying consistencies. The pharynx is examined to detect bolus retention, regurgitation into the nose, or aspiration into the trachea. Timing and integrity of pharyngeal contraction and opening of the UES with a swallow are analyzed to assess both aspiration risk and the potential for swallow therapy. Structural abnormalities of the oropharynx, especially those which may require biopsies, also should be assessed by direct laryngoscopic examination.

Esophageal Dysphagia

The adult esophagus measures 18每26 cm in length and is anatomically divided into the cervical esophagus, extending from the pharyngoesophageal junction to the suprasternal notch, and the thoracic esophagus, which continues to the diaphragmatic hiatus. When distended, the esophageal lumen has internal dimensions of about 2 cm in the anteroposterior plane and 3 cm in the lateral plane. Solid food dysphagia becomes common when the lumen is narrowed to <13 mm but also can occur with larger diameters in the setting of poorly masticated food or motor dysfunction. Circumferential lesions are more likely to cause dysphagia than are lesions that involve only a partial circumference of the esophageal wall. The most common structural causes of dysphagia are Schatzki's rings, eosinophilic esophagitis, and peptic strictures. Dysphagia also occurs in the setting of gastroesophageal reflux disease without a stricture, perhaps on the basis of altered esophageal sensation, distensibility, or motor function.

Propulsive disorders leading to esophageal dysphagia result from abnormalities of peristalsis and/or deglutitive inhibition, potentially affecting the cervical or thoracic esophagus. Since striated muscle pathology usually involves both the oropharynx and the cervical esophagus, the clinical manifestations usually are dominated by oropharyngeal dysphagia. Diseases affecting smooth muscle involve both the thoracic esophagus and the LES. A dominant manifestation of this, absent peristalsis, refers to either the complete absence of swallow-induced contraction or the presence of nonperistaltic, disordered contractions. Absent peristalsis and failure of deglutitive LES relaxation are the defining features of achalasia. In diffuse esophageal spasm (DES), LES function is normal, with the disordered motility restricted to the esophageal body. Absent peristalsis combined with severe weakness of the LES is a nonspecific pattern commonly found in patients with scleroderma.

Approach to the Patient: Dysphagia

Figure 38-2 shows an algorithm for the approach to a patient with dysphagia.

Figure 38-2

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with dysphagia. Etiologies in bold print are the most common. ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 
 

History

The patient history is extremely valuable in making a presumptive diagnosis or at least substantially restricting the differential diagnoses in most patients. Key elements of the history are the localization of dysphagia, the circumstances in which dysphagia is experienced, other symptoms associated with dysphagia, and progression. Dysphagia that localizes to the suprasternal notch may indicate either an oropharyngeal or an esophageal etiology as distal dysphagia is referred proximally about 30% of the time. Dysphagia that localizes to the chest is esophageal in origin. Nasal regurgitation and tracheobronchial aspiration with swallowing are hallmarks of oropharyngeal dysphagia or a tracheoesophageal fistula. The presence of hoarseness may be another important diagnostic clue. When hoarseness precedes dysphagia, the primary lesion is usually laryngeal; hoarseness that occurs after the development of dysphagia may result from compromise of the recurrent laryngeal nerve by a malignancy. The type of food causing dysphagia is a crucial detail. Intermittent dysphagia that occurs only with solid food implies structural dysphagia, whereas constant dysphagia with both liquids and solids strongly suggests a motor abnormality. Two caveats to this pattern are that despite having a motor abnormality, patients with scleroderma generally develop mild dysphagia for solids only and, somewhat paradoxically, that patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia often have greater difficulty managing liquids than solids. Dysphagia that is progressive over the course of weeks to months raises concern for neoplasia. Episodic dysphagia to solids that is unchanged over years indicates a benign disease process such as a Schatzki's ring or eosinophilic esophagitis. Food impaction with a prolonged inability to pass an ingested bolus even with ingestion of liquid is typical of a structural dysphagia. Chest pain frequently accompanies dysphagia whether it is related to motor disorders, structural disorders, or reflux disease. A prolonged history of heartburn preceding the onset of dysphagia is suggestive of peptic stricture and, less commonly, esophageal adenocarcinoma. A history of prolonged nasogastric intubation, esophageal or head and neck surgery, ingestion of caustic agents or pills, previous radiation or chemotherapy, or associated mucocutaneous diseases may help isolate the cause of dysphagia. With accompanying odynophagia, which usually is indicative of ulceration, infectious or pill-induced esophagitis should be suspected. In patients with AIDS or other immunocompromised states, esophagitis due to opportunistic infections such as Candida, herpes simplex virus, or cytomegalovirus and to tumors such as Kaposi's sarcoma and lymphoma should be considered. A strong history of atopy increases concerns for eosinophilic esophagitis.

Physical Examination

Physical examination is important in the evaluation of oral and pharyngeal dysphagia because dysphagia is usually only one of many manifestations of a more global disease process. Signs of bulbar or pseudobulbar palsy, including dysarthria, dysphonia, ptosis, tongue atrophy, and hyperactive jaw jerk, in addition to evidence of generalized neuromuscular disease, should be elicited. The neck should be examined for thyromegaly. A careful inspection of the mouth and pharynx should disclose lesions that may interfere with passage of food. Physical examination is less helpful in the evaluation of esophageal dysphagia as most relevant pathology is restricted to the esophagus. The notable exception is skin disease. Changes in the skin may suggest a diagnosis of scleroderma or mucocutaneous diseases such as pemphigoid and epidermol-ysis bullosa, all of which can involve the esophagus.

Diagnostic Procedures

Although most instances of dysphagia are attributable to benign disease processes, dysphagia is also a cardinal symptom of several malignancies, making it an important symptom to evaluate. Even when not attributable to malignancy, dysphagia is usually a manifestation of an identifiable and treatable disease entity, making its evaluation beneficial to the patient and gratifying to the practitioner. The specific diagnostic algorithm to pursue is guided by the details of the history. If oral or pharyngeal dysphagia is suspected, a fluoroscopic swallow study, usually done by a swallow therapist, is the procedure of choice. Otolaryngoscopic and neurologic evaluation also can be important, depending on the circumstances. For suspected esophageal dysphagia, endoscopy is the single most useful test. Endoscopy allows better visualization of mucosal lesions than does barium radiography and also allows one to obtain mucosal biopsies. Furthermore, therapeutic intervention with esophageal dilatation can be done as part of the procedure if it is deemed necessary. Of note, the emergence of eosinophilic esophagitis as a common cause of dysphagia in adults has led to the recommendation that esophageal mucosal biopsies be obtained routinely in the evaluation of unexplained dysphagia even if no endoscopic lesions are evident. For cases of suspected esophageal motility disorders, esophagogastroscopy is still the primary examination as neoplastic and inflammatory conditions can secondarily produce patterns of either achalasia or esophageal spasm. Esophageal manometry is done if dysphagia is not adequately explained by endoscopy or to confirm the diagnosis of a suspected esophageal motor disorder. Barium radiography can provide useful adjunctive information in cases of subtle or complex esophageal strictures, esophageal diverticula, or paraesophageal herniation. In specific cases, CT examination and endoscopic ultrasonography may be useful.

Treatment

Treatment of dysphagia depends on both the locus and the specific etiology. Oropharyngeal dysphagia most commonly results from functional deficits caused by neurologic disorders. In such circumstances, the treatment focuses on utilizing postures or maneuvers devised to reduce pharyngeal residue and enhance airway protection learned under the direction of a trained swallow therapist. Aspiration risk may be reduced by altering the consistency of ingested food and liquid. Dysphagia resulting from a cerebrovascular accident usually, but not always, spontaneously improves within the first few weeks after the event. More severe and persistent cases may require gastrostomy and enteral feeding. Patients with myasthenia gravis (Chap. 386) and polymyositis (Chap. 388) may respond to medical treatment of the primary neuromuscular disease. Surgical intervention with cricopharyngeal myotomy is usually not helpful, with the exception of specific disorders such as the idiopathic cricopharyngeal bar, Zenker's diverticulum, and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy. Chronic neurologic disorders such as Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may manifest with severe oropharyngeal dysphagia. Feeding by a nasogastric tube or an endoscopically placed gastrostomy tube may be considered for nutritional support; however, these maneuvers do not provide protection against aspiration of salivary secretions or refluxed gastric contents.

Treatment of esophageal dysphagia is covered in detail in Chap. 292. The majority of causes of esophageal dysphagia are effectively managed by means of esophageal dilatation using bougie or balloon dilators. Cancer and achalasia are often managed surgically, although endoscopic techniques are available for both palliation and primary therapy, respectively. Infectious etiologies respond to antimicrobial medications or treatment of the underlying immunosuppressive state. Finally, eosinophilic esophagitis has emerged as an important cause of dysphagia that is amenable to treatment by elimination of dietary allergens or topical glucocorticoids.
 
Further Readings

Castell DO, Richter JE: The Esophagus, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2004 

 
Cook IJ, Kahrilas PJ: AGA technical review on management of oropharyngeal dysphagia. Gastroenterology 116:455, 1999[PMID: 9922328] 

 
Gomes CA Jr et al: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy versus nasogastric tube feeding for adults with swallowing disturbances. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD008096, 2010 

 
Goyal RK, Shaker R: GI Motility. http://www.nature.com/gimo/index.html 

 
Hirano I: Esophagus: Anatomy and structural anomalies, in Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th ed, T Yamada (ed). Oxford, United Kingdom, Wiley- Blackwell, 2008 
 
 

^^
Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion: Introduction

Nausea is the subjective feeling of a need to vomit. Vomiting (emesis) is the oral expulsion of gastrointestinal contents resulting from contractions of gut and thoracoabdominal wall musculature. Vomiting is contrasted with regurgitation, the effortless passage of gastric contents into the mouth. Rumination is the repeated regurgitation of stomach contents, which may be rechewed and reswallowed. In contrast to vomiting, these phenomena often exhibit volitional control. Indigestion is a nonspecific term that encompasses a variety of upper abdominal complaints including nausea, vomiting, heartburn, regurgitation, and dyspepsia (the presence of symptoms thought to originate in the gastroduodenal region). Some individuals with dyspepsia report predominantly epigastric burning, gnawing discomfort, or pain. Others with dyspepsia experience a constellation of symptoms including postprandial fullness, early satiety (an inability to complete a meal due to premature fullness), bloating, eructation (belching), and anorexia.
 
Nausea and Vomiting

Mechanisms

Vomiting is coordinated by the breainstem and is effected by responses in the gut, pharynx, and thoracoabdominal wall. The mechanisms underlying nausea are poorly understood but likely involve the cerebral cortex, because nausea requires conscious perception. This is supported by electroencephalographic studies showing activation of temporofrontal regions during nausea.

Coordination of Emesis

Brain stem nuclei〞including the nucleus tractus solitarius; dorsal vagal and phrenic nuclei; medullary nuclei that regulate respiration; and nuclei that control pharyngeal, facial, and tongue movements〞coordinate the initiation of emesis. Neurotransmitters involved in this coordination are uncertain, but neurokinin NK1, serotonin5-HT3, and vasopressin pathways may participate.

Somatic and visceral muscles exhibit stereotypic responses during emesis. Inspiratory thoracic and abdominal wall muscles contract, producing high intrathoracic and intraabdominal pressures that facilitate expulsion of gastric contents. The gastric cardia herniates across the diaphragm and the larynx moves upward to promote oral propulsion of the vomitus. Under normal conditions, distally migrating gut contractions are regulated by an electrical phenomenon, the slow wave, which cycles at 3 cycles/min in the stomach and 11 cycles/min in the duodenum. With emesis, there is slow-wave abolition and initiation of orally propagating spikes that evoke retrograde contractions that assist in oral expulsion of intestinal contents.

Activators of Emesis

Emetic stimuli act at several sites. Emesis provoked by unpleasant thoughts or smells originates in the cerebral cortex, whereas cranial nerves mediate vomiting after gag reflex activation. Motion sickness and inner ear disorders act on the labyrinthine apparatus, whereas gastric irritants and cytotoxic agents such as cisplatin stimulate gastroduodenal vagal afferent nerves. Nongastric visceral afferents are activated by intestinal and colonic obstruction and mesenteric ischemia. The area postrema, a medullary nucleus, responds to bloodborne emetic stimuli and is termed the chemoreceptor trigger zone. Many emetogenic drugs act on the area postrema, as do bacterial toxins and metabolic factors produced during uremia, hypoxia, and ketoacidosis.

Neurotransmitters that mediate induction of vomiting are selective for these anatomic sites. Labyrinthine disorders stimulate vestibular muscarinic M1 and histaminergic H1 receptors, whereas vagal afferent stimuli activate serotonin5-HT3 receptors. The area postrema is richly served by nerves acting on 5-HT3, M1, H1, and dopamine D2 subtypes. Transmitters in the cerebral cortex are poorly understood, although cannabinoid CB1 pathways may participate. Optimal pharmacologic therapy of vomiting requires understanding of these pathways.

Differential Diagnosis

Nausea and vomiting are caused by conditions within and outside the gut as well as by drugs and circulating toxins (Table 39每1).

Table 39每1 Causes of Nausea and Vomiting

 
 
Intraperitoneal Extraperitoneal Medications/Metabolic Disorders 
Obstructing disorders

   Pyloric obstruction

   Small bowel obstruction

   Colonic obstruction

   Superior mesenteric artery syndrome

Enteric infections

   Viral

   Bacterial

Inflammatory diseases

   Cholecystitis

   Pancreatitis

   Appendicitis

   Hepatitis

Altered sensorimotor function

   Gastroparesis

   Intestinal pseudoobstruction

   Gastroesophageal reflux

   Chronic idiopathicnausea

   Functional vomiting

   Cyclic vomiting syndrome

Biliary colic

Abdominal irradiation
 Cardiopulmonary disease

   Cardiomyopathy

   Myocardial infarction

Labyrinthine disease

   Motion sickness

   Labyrinthitis

   Malignancy

Intracerebral disorders

   Malignancy

   Hemorrhage

   Abscess

   Hydrocephalus

Psychiatric illness

   Anorexia and bulimia nervosa

   Depression

Postoperative vomiting
 Drugs

   Cancer chemotherapy

   Antibiotics

   Cardiac antiarrhythmics

   Digoxin

   Oral hypoglycemics

   Oral contraceptives

Endocrine/metabolic disease

   Pregnancy

   Uremia

   Ketoacidosis

   Thyroid and parathyroid disease

   Adrenal insufficiency

Toxins

   Liver failure

   Ethanol
 
 

 

Intraperitoneal Disorders

Visceral obstruction and inflammation of hollow and solid viscera may produce vomiting. Gastric obstruction results from ulcer disease and malignancy, while small-bowel and colonic obstruction occur because of adhesions, benign or malignant tumors, volvulus, intussusception, or inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's disease. The superior mesenteric artery syndrome, occurring after weight loss or prolonged bed rest, results when the duodenum is compressed by the overlying superior mesenteric artery. Abdominal irradiation impairs intestinal motor function and induces strictures. Biliary colic causes nausea via action on visceral afferent nerves. Vomiting with pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and appendicitis is due to visceral irritation and induction of ileus. Enteric infections with viruses or bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus commonly cause vomiting, especially in children. Opportunistic infections such as cytomegalovirus or herpes simplex virus induce emesis in immunocompromised individuals.

Disordered gut sensorimotor function commonly causes nausea and vomiting. Gastroparesis is defined as a delay in gastric emptying of food and occurs after vagotomy, with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, with mesenteric vascular insufficiency, or in systemic diseases such as diabetes, scleroderma, and amyloidosis. The most common form of disease, idiopathic gastroparesis, occurs in the absence of systemic illness and may follow a viral prodrome, suggesting an infectious etiology. Intestinal pseudoobstruction is characterized by disrupted intestinal and colonic motor activity and leads to retention of food residue and secretions; bacterial overgrowth; nutrient malabsorption; and symptoms of nausea, vomiting, bloating, pain, and altered defecation. Intestinal pseudoobstruction may be idiopathic or inherited as a familial visceral myopathy or neuropathy, or it may result from systemic disease or as a paraneoplastic complication of a malignancy such as small cell lung carcinoma. Patients with gastroesophageal reflux may report nausea and vomiting, as do some individuals with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

Other functional disorders without organic abnormalities have been characterized in adults. Chronic idiopathicnausea is defined as nausea without vomiting occurring several times weekly, whereas functional vomiting is defined as one or more vomiting episodes weekly in the absence of an eating disorder or psychiatric disease. Cyclic vomiting syndrome is a rare disorder of unknown etiology that produces periodic discrete episodes of relentless nausea and vomiting. The syndrome shows a strong association with migraine headaches, suggesting that some cases may be migraine variants. Cyclic vomiting is most common in children, although adult cases have been described in association with rapid gastric emptying and with chronic cannabis use.

Extraperitoneal Disorders

Myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure may cause nausea and vomiting. Postoperative emesis occurs after 25% of surgeries, most commonly laparotomy and orthopedic surgery, and is more prevalent in women. Increased intracranial pressure from tumors, bleeding, abscess, or obstruction to cerebrospinal fluid outflow produces prominent vomiting with or without nausea. Motion sickness, labyrinthitis, and M谷ni`re's disease evoke emesis via labyrinthine pathways. Patients with psychiatric illnesses including anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, anxiety, and depression may report significant nausea that may be associated with delayed gastric emptying.

Medications and Metabolic Disorders

Drugs evoke vomiting by action on the stomach (analgesics, erythromycin) or area postrema (digoxin, opiates, anti-Parkinsonian drugs). Emetogenic agents include antibiotics, cardiac antiarrhythmics, antihypertensives, oral hypoglycemics, and contraceptives. Cancer chemotherapy causes vomiting that is acute (within hours of administration), delayed (after one or more days), or anticipatory. Acute emesis resulting from highly emetogenic agents such as cisplatin is mediated by 5-HT3 pathways, whereas delayed emesis is 5-HT3-independent. Anticipatory nausea often responds better to anxiolytic therapy than to antiemetics.

Several metabolic disorders elicit nausea and vomiting. Pregnancy is the most prevalent endocrinologic cause of nausea, which affects 70% of women in the first trimester. Hyperemesis gravidarum is a severe form of nausea of pregnancy that can produce significant fluid loss and electrolyte disturbances. Uremia, ketoacidosis, and adrenal insufficiency, as well as parathyroid and thyroid disease, are other metabolic causes of emesis.

Circulating toxins evoke emesis via effects on the area postrema. Endogenous toxins are generated in fulminant liver failure, whereas exogenous enterotoxins may be produced by enteric bacterial infection. Ethanolintoxication is a common toxic etiology of nausea and vomiting.

Approach to the Patient: Nausea and Vomiting

History and Physical Examination

The history helps define the etiology of unexplained nausea and vomiting. Drugs, toxins, and gastrointestinal infections commonly cause acute symptoms, whereas established illnesses evoke chronic complaints. Pyloric obstruction and gastroparesis produce vomiting within one hour of eating, whereas emesis from intestinal obstruction occurs later. In severe cases of gastroparesis, the vomitus may contain food residue ingested hours or days previously. Hematemesis raises suspicion of an ulcer, malignancy, or Mallory-Weiss tear, whereas feculent emesis is noted with distal intestinal or colonic obstruction. Bilious vomiting excludes gastric obstruction, while emesis of undigested food is consistent with a Zenker's diverticulum or achalasia. Relief of abdominal pain by emesis characterizes intestinal obstruction, whereas vomiting has no effect on pancreatitis or cholecystitis pain. Pronounced weight loss raises concern about malignancy or obstruction. Fevers suggest inflammation; an intracranial source is considered if there are headaches or visual field changes. Vertigo or tinnitus indicates labyrinthine disease.

The physical examination complements information from the history. Orthostatic hypotension and reduced skin turgor indicate intravascular fluid loss. Pulmonary abnormalities raise concern for aspiration of vomitus. Abdominal auscultation may reveal absent bowel sounds with ileus. High-pitched rushes suggest bowel obstruction, while a succussion splash upon abrupt lateral movement of the patient is found with gastroparesis or pyloric obstruction. Tenderness or involuntary guarding raises suspicion of inflammation, whereas fecal blood suggests mucosal injury from ulcer, ischemia, or tumor. Neurologic disease presents with papilledema, visual field loss, or focal neural abnormalities. Neoplasm is suggested by palpation of masses or adenopathy.

Diagnostic Testing

For intractable symptoms or an elusive diagnosis, selected screening tests can direct clinical care. Electrolyte replacement is indicated for hypokalemia or metabolic alkalosis. Detection of iron-deficiency anemia mandates a search for mucosal injury. Pancreaticobiliary disease is indicated by abnormal pancreatic or liver biochemistries, whereas endocrinologic, rheumatologic, or paraneoplastic etiologies are suggested by hormone or serologic abnormalities. If bowel obstruction is suspected, supine and upright abdominal radiographs may show intestinal air-fluid levels with reduced colonic air. Ileus is characterized by diffusely dilated air-filled bowel loops.

Anatomic studies may be indicated if initial testing is nondiagnostic. Upper endoscopy detects ulcers or malignancy, while small-bowel barium radiography diagnoses partial intestinal obstruction. Colonoscopy or contrast enema radiography can detect colonic obstruction. Ultrasound or CT defines intraperitoneal inflammatory processes, while CT or MRI of the head can delineate intracranial disease. Advances in CT and MRI enterography have improved definition of bowel inflammation, as in Crohn's disease. Mesenteric angiography, CT, or MRI is useful for suspected ischemia.

Gastrointestinal motility testing may detect a motor disorder that contributes to symptoms when anatomic abnormalities are absent. Gastroparesis commonly is diagnosed using gastric scintigraphy, by which emptying of a radiolabeled meal is measured. Isotopic breath tests and wireless motility capsule methods have been validated and may become important alternatives to scintigraphy to define gastroparesis. The diagnosis of intestinal pseudoobstruction often is suggested by abnormal barium transit and luminal dilation on small-bowel contrast radiography. Delayed small-bowel transit also may be detected by wireless capsule techniques. Small-intestinal manometry can confirm the diagnosis and further characterize the motor abnormality as neuropathic or myopathic based on contractile patterns. Such investigation can obviate the need for open intestinal biopsy to evaluate for smooth muscle or neuronal degeneration.

Treatment: Nausea and Vomiting

General Principles

Therapy of vomiting is tailored to correcting medically or surgically remediable abnormalities if possible. Hospitalization is considered for severe dehydration, especially if oral fluid replenishment cannot be sustained. Once oral intake is tolerated, nutrients are restarted with liquids that are low in fat, as lipids delay gastric emptying. Foods high in indigestible residues are avoided because these also prolong gastric retention.

Antiemetic Medications

The most commonly used antiemetic agents act on sites in the central nervous system (Table 39每2). Antihistamines such as meclizine and dimenhydrinate and anticholinergic drugs like scopolamine act on labyrinthine pathways and are useful in motion sickness and inner ear disorders. Dopamine D2 antagonists treat emesis evoked by area postrema stimuli and are useful for medication, toxic, and metabolic etiologies. Dopamine antagonists freely cross the blood-brain barrier and cause anxiety, dystonic reactions, hyperprolactinemic effects (galactorrhea and sexual dysfunction), and irreversible tardivedyskinesia.

Table 39每2 Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting

 
 
Treatment Mechanism Examples Clinical Indications 
Antiemetic agents Antihistaminergic

Anticholinergic

Antidopaminergic 5-HT3 antagonist

NK1 antagonist

Tricyclic antidepressant

Other antidepressant
 Dimenhydrinate, meclizine

Scopolamine

Prochlorperazine, thiethylperazine

Ondansetron, granisetron

Aprepitant

Amitriptyline, nortriptyline

Mirtazapine
 Motion sickness, inner ear disease

Motion sickness, inner ear disease

Medication-, toxin-, or metabolic-induced emesis

Chemotherapy- and radiation-induced emesis, postoperative emesis

Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting

Chronic idiopathic nausea, functional vomiting, cyclic vomiting syndrome, ?gastroparesis

?Functional vomiting, ?gastroparesis
 
Prokinetic agents 5-HT4 agonist and antidopaminergic

Motilin agonist

Peripheral antidopaminergic

Somatostatin analogue

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
 Metoclopramide

Erythromycin

Domperidone

Octreotide

Pyridostigmine
 Gastroparesis

Gastroparesis, ?intestinal pseudoobstruction

Gastroparesis

Intestinal pseudoobstruction

?Small intestinal dysmotility/pseudoobstruction
 
Special settings Benzodiazepines

Glucocorticoids

Cannabinoids
 Lorazepam

Methylprednisolone, dexamethasone

Tetrahydrocannabinol
 Anticipatory nausea and vomiting with chemotherapy

Chemotherapy-induced emesis

Chemotherapy-induced emesis
 
 


Note:?, indication is uncertain.
 

Other drug classes exhibit antiemetic properties. Serotonin5-HT3 antagonists such as ondansetron and granisetron exhibit utility in postoperative vomiting, after radiation therapy, and for preventing cancer chemotherapy每induced emesis. The usefulness of 5-HT3 antagonists for other causes of emesis is less well established. Low-dose tricyclic antidepressant agents provide symptomatic benefit in patients with chronic idiopathicnausea and functional vomiting as well as in diabetic patients with nausea and vomiting whose disease is of long standing. Other antidepressants such as mirtazapine also may exhibit antiemetic effects.

Gastrointestinal Motor Stimulants

Drugs that stimulate gastric emptying are indicated for gastroparesis (Table 39每2). Metoclopramide, a combined 5-HT4 agonist and D2 antagonist, exhibits efficacy in gastroparesis, but antidopaminergic side effects, particularly tardivedyskinesia, limit its use in <25% of patients. Erythromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, increases gastroduodenal motility by action on receptors for motilin, an endogenous stimulant of fasting motor activity. Intravenous erythromycin is useful for inpatients with refractory gastroparesis; however, oral forms also have some utility. Domperidone, a D2 antagonist not available in the United States, exhibits prokinetic and antiemetic effects but does not cross into most other brain regions; thus, anxiety and dystonic reactions are rare. The main side effects of domperidone relate to induction of hyperprolactinemia via effects on pituitary regions served by a porous blood-brain barrier.

Refractory upper gut motility disorders pose significant challenges. Liquid suspensions of prokinetic drugs may be beneficial, because liquids empty from the stomach more rapidly than pills do. Metoclopramide can be administered subcutaneously in patients unresponsive to oral drugs. Intestinal pseudoobstruction may respond to the somatostatin analogue octreotide, which induces propagative small intestinal motor complexes. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as pyridostigmine are anecdotally observed to benefit some patients with small bowel dysmotility. Pyloric injections of botulinum toxin are reported in uncontrolled studies to benefit patients with gastroparesis. Placement of a feeding jejunostomy reduces hospitalizations and improves overall health in some patients with drug-refractory gastroparesis. Surgical options are limited for unresponsive cases, but postvagotomy gastroparesis may improve with near-total resection of the stomach. Implanted gastric electrical stimulators may reduce symptoms, enhance nutrition, improve quality of life, and decrease health care expenditures in medication-refractory gastroparesis, although small controlled trials report only modest benefits with this method.

Selected Clinical Settings

Some cancer chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin are intensely emetogenic (Chap. 85). Given prophylactically, 5-HT3 antagonists prevent chemotherapy-induced acute vomiting in most cases (Table 39每2). Optimal antiemetic effects often are obtained with a 5-HT3 antagonist combined with a glucocorticoid. Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam are useful to reduce anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Therapy of delayed emesis 1每5 days after chemotherapy is less successful. Neurokinin NK1 antagonists (e.g., aprepitant) exhibit antiemetic and antinausea effects during both the acute and delayed periods after chemotherapy. Cannabinoids such as tetrahydrocannabinol, long advocated for cancer-associated emesis, produce significant side effects and exhibit no more efficacy than antidopaminergic agents. Most antiemetic regimens produce greater reductions in vomiting than in nausea.

The clinician should exercise caution in managing the pregnant patient with nausea. Studies of the teratogenic effects of available antiemetic agents provide conflicting results. Few controlled trials have been performed in nausea of pregnancy, although antihistamines such as meclizine and antidopaminergics such as prochlorperazine demonstrate efficacy greater than placebo. Some obstetricians offer alternative therapies such as pyridoxine, acupressure, or ginger.

Controlling emesis in cyclic vomiting syndrome is a challenge. In many patients, prophylaxis with tricyclic antidepressants, cyproheptadine, or -adrenoceptor antagonists can reduce the frequency of attacks. Intravenous 5-HT3 antagonists combined with the sedating effects of a benzodiazepine such as lorazepam are a mainstay of treatment of acute symptom flares. Small studies report benefits with antimigraine therapies, including the serotonin 5-HT1 agonist sumatriptan, as well as selected anticonvulsant drugs such as zonisamide and levetiracetam.
 
Indigestion

Mechanisms

The most common causes of indigestion are gastroesophageal reflux and functional dyspepsia. Other cases are a consequence of a more serious organic illness.

Gastroesophageal Reflux

Gastroesophageal reflux can result from a variety of physiologic defects. Reduced lower esophageal sphincter (LES) tone is an important cause of reflux in scleroderma and pregnancy; it may also be a factor in patients without other systemic conditions. Many individuals exhibit frequent transient LES relaxations during which acid or nonacidic fluid bathes the esophagus. Overeating and aerophagia can transiently override the barrier function of the LES, whereas impaired esophageal body motility and reduced salivary secretion prolong fluid exposure. The role of hiatal hernias is controversial〞although most reflux patients exhibit hiatal hernias, most individuals with hiatal hernias do not have excess heartburn.

Gastric Motor Dysfunction

Disturbed gastric motility is purported to cause gastroesophageal reflux in some cases of indigestion. Delayed gastric emptying is also found in 25每50% of functional dyspeptics. The relation of these defects to symptom induction is uncertain; studies show poor correlation between symptom severity and degrees of motor dysfunction. Impaired gastric fundus relaxation after eating may underlie selected dyspeptic symptoms like bloating, nausea, and early satiety.

Visceral Afferent Hypersensitivity

Disturbed gastric sensory function is proposed as a pathogenic factor in functional dyspepsia. Visceral afferent hypersensitivity was first demonstrated in patients with IBS who had heightened perception of rectal balloon inflation without changes in rectal compliance. Similarly, dyspeptic patients experience discomfort with fundic distention to lower pressures than healthy controls. Some patients with heartburn exhibit no increase in reflux of acid or nonacidic fluid. These individuals with functional heartburn are believed to have heightened perception of normal esophageal pH and volume.

Other Factors

Helicobacter pylori has a clear etiologic role in peptic ulcer disease, but ulcers cause a minority of cases of dyspepsia. H. pylori is considered to be a minor factor in the genesis of functional dyspepsia. In contrast, functional dyspepsia is associated with a reduced sense of physical and mental well-being and is exacerbated by stress, suggesting important roles for psychological factors. Analgesics cause dyspepsia, while nitrates, calcium channel blockers, theophylline, and progesterone promote gastroesophageal reflux. Other stimuli that induce reflux include ethanol, tobacco, and caffeine via LES relaxation. Genetic factors may promote development of reflux.

Differential Diagnosis

Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is prevalent in Western society. Heartburn is reported once monthly by 40% of Americans and daily by 7每10%. Most cases of heartburn occur because of excess acid reflux, although reflux of non-acidic fluid may produce similar symptoms. Alkaline reflux esophagitis produces GERD-like symptoms most often in patients who have had surgery for peptic ulcer disease. Approximately 10% of patients with heartburn of a functional nature exhibit normal degrees of esophageal acid exposure and no increase in nonacidic reflux.

Functional Dyspepsia

Nearly 25% of the populace has dyspepsia at least 6 times yearly, but only 10每20% of these individuals present to physicians. Functional dyspepsia, the cause of symptoms in 60% of dyspeptic patients, is defined as 3 months of bothersome postprandial fullness, early satiety, or epigastric pain or burning with symptom onset at least 6 months before diagnosis in the absence of organic cause. Most cases follow a benign course, but some patients with H. pylori infection or on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) develop ulcers. As with idiopathic gastroparesis, some cases of functional dyspepsia result from prior gastrointestinal infection.

Ulcer Disease

In most cases of GERD, there is no destruction of the esophagus. However, 5% of patients develop esophageal ulcers, and some form strictures. Symptoms do not reliably distinguish nonerosive from erosive or ulcerative esophagitis. Some 15每25% of cases of dyspepsia stem from ulcers of the stomach or duodenum. The most common causes of ulcer disease are gastric infection with H. pylori and use of NSAIDs. Other rare causes of gastroduodenal ulcer include Crohn's disease (Chap. 295) and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (Chap. 293), a condition resulting from gastrin overproduction by an endocrine tumor.

Malignancy

Dyspeptic patients often seek care because of fear of cancer. However, <2% of cases result from gastroesophageal malignancy. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma occurs most often in those with histories of tobacco or ethanol intake. Other risk factors include prior caustic ingestion, achalasia, and the hereditary disorder tylosis. Esophageal adenocarcinoma usually complicates long-standing acid reflux. Between 8 and 20% of GERD patients exhibit intestinal metaplasia of the esophagus, termed Barrett's metaplasia. This condition predisposes to esophageal adenocarcinoma (Chap. 91). Gastric malignancies include adenocarcinoma, which is prevalent in certain Asian societies, and lymphoma.

Other Causes

Opportunistic fungal or viral esophageal infections may produce heartburn or chest discomfort but more often cause odynophagia. Other causes of esophageal inflammation include eosinophilic esophagitis and pill esophagitis. Biliary colic is in the differential diagnosis of dyspepsia, but most patients with true biliary colic report discrete episodes of right upper quadrant or epigastric pain rather than chronic burning discomfort, nausea, and bloating. Intestinal lactase deficiency produces gas, bloating, discomfort, and diarrhea after lactose ingestion. Lactase deficiency occurs in 15每25% of whites of northern European descent but is more common in blacks and Asians. Intolerance of other carbohydrates (e.g., fructose, sorbitol) produces similar symptoms. Small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth may produce dyspepsia, often with bowel dysfunction, distention, and malabsorption. Eosinophilic infiltration of the duodenal mucosa is described in some cases of dyspepsia. Pancreatic disease (chronic pancreatitis and malignancy), hepatocellular carcinoma, celiac disease, M谷n谷trier's disease, infiltrative diseases (sarcoidosis and eosinophilic gastroenteritis), mesenteric ischemia, thyroid and parathyroid disease, and abdominal wall strain cause dyspepsia. Extraperitoneal etiologies of indigestion include congestive heart failure and tuberculosis. Investigation is ongoing into genetic markers that predispose to developing functional dyspepsia.

Approach to the Patient: Indigestion

History and Physical Examination

Care of the patient with indigestion requires a thorough interview. GERD classically produces heartburn, a substernal warmth in the epigastrium that moves toward the neck. Heartburn often is exacerbated by meals and may awaken the patient. Associated symptoms include regurgitation of acid or nonacidic fluid and water brash, the reflex release of salty salivary secretions into the mouth. Atypical symptoms include pharyngitis, asthma, cough, bronchitis, hoarseness, and chest pain that mimics angina. Some patients with acid reflux on esophageal pH testing do not report heartburn, but note abdominal pain or other symptoms.

Some patients with dyspepsia report a predominance of epigastric pain or burning that is intermittent and not generalized or localized to other regions. Others experience a postprandial distress syndrome characterized by fullness occurring after normal-sized meals and early satiety that prevents completion of regular meals, with associated bloating, belching, or nausea. Functional dyspepsia overlaps with other functional disorders such as IBS.

The physical exam with GERD and functional dyspepsia usually is normal. In atypical GERD, pharyngeal erythema and wheezing may be noted. Recurrent acid regurgitation may cause poor dentition. Functional dyspeptics may report epigastric tenderness or distention.

Discrimination between functional and organic causes of indigestion mandates exclusion of selected historic and examination features. Odynophagia suggests esophageal infection, while dysphagia is worrisome for a benign or malignant esophageal blockage. Other alarming features include unexplained weight loss, recurrent vomiting, occult or gross gastrointestinal bleeding, jaundice, a palpable mass or adenopathy, and a family history of gastrointestinal malignancy.

Diagnostic Testing

Because indigestion is prevalent and most cases result from GERD or functional dyspepsia, a general principle is to perform only limited and directed diagnostic testing of selected individuals.

Once alarm factors are excluded (Table 39每3), patients with typical GERD do not need further evaluation and are treated empirically. Upper endoscopy is indicated to exclude mucosal injury in cases with atypical symptoms, symptoms unresponsive to acid suppressing drugs, or alarm factors. For heartburn <5 years in duration, especially in patients <50 years old, endoscopy is recommended to screen for Barrett's metaplasia. However, the clinical benefits and cost-effectiveness of this approach have not been validated in controlled studies. Ambulatory esophageal pH testing using a catheter method or an implanted esophageal capsule device is considered for drug-refractory symptoms and atypical symptoms like unexplained chest pain. Esophageal manometry most commonly is ordered when surgical treatment of GERD is considered. A low LES pressure may predict failure of drug therapy and helps select patients who may require surgery. Demonstration of disordered esophageal body peristalsis may affect the decision to operate or modify the type of operation chosen. High-resolution manometric methods improve characterization of ineffective esophageal propulsion, which may contribute to impaired esophageal acid clearance in some GERD patients. Manometry with provocative testing may clarify the diagnosis in patients with atypical symptoms. Blind perfusion of saline and then acid into the esophagus, known as the Bernstein test, can delineate whether unexplained chest discomfort results from acid reflux. Nonacidic reflux may be suggested by nuclear medicine reflux scanning or detected by combined esophageal impedance-pH testing, which increases the diagnostic yield by 15% versus pH testing alone. Ambulatory measurement of esophageal bilirubin levels facilitates diagnosis of alkaline reflux.

Table 39每3 Alarm Symptoms in GERD

 
 
Odynophagia 
Unexplained weight loss 
Recurrent vomiting 
Occult or gross gastrointestinal bleeding 
Jaundice 
Palpable mass or adenopathy 
Family history of gastrointestinal malignancy 
 

 

Upper endoscopy is performed as the initial diagnostic test in patients with unexplained dyspepsia who are >55 years old or who have alarm factors because of the elevated risks of malignancy and ulcer in these groups. The management approach to patients <55 years old without alarm factors is dependent on the local prevalence of H. pylori infection. For individuals in regions with low H. pylori prevalence (<10%), a 4-week trial of an acid-suppressing medication such as a proton pump inhibitor is recommended. If this fails, a "test and treat" approach is most commonly applied. H. pylori status is determined with urea breath testing, stool antigen measurement, or blood serology testing. Those who are H. pylori positive are given therapy to eradicate the infection. If symptoms resolve on either regimen, no further intervention is required. For patients in areas with high H. pylori prevalence (>10%), an initial test and treat approach is advocated, with a subsequent trial of an acid-suppressing regimen offered for those in whom H. pylori treatment fails or for those who are negative for the infection. In each of these patient subsets, upper endoscopy is reserved for those whose symptoms fail to respond to therapy.

Further testing is indicated if other factors are present. If bleeding is reported, a blood count is obtained to exclude anemia. Thyroid chemistries or calcium levels screen for metabolic disease, whereas serologies may suggest celiac disease. For possible pancreaticobiliary causes, pancreatic and liver chemistries are obtained. If abnormalities are found, ultrasound or CT may give important information. Gastric emptying measurement is considered to exclude gastroparesis in patients whose dyspeptic symptoms resemble postprandial distress when drug therapy fails. Gastric scintigraphy also assesses for gastroparesis in patients with GERD, especially if surgical intervention is being considered. Breath testing after carbohydrate ingestion may detect lactase deficiency, intolerance to other carbohydrates, or small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth.

Treatment: General Principles

For mild indigestion, reassurance that a careful evaluation revealed no serious organic disease may be the only intervention needed. Drugs that cause gastroesophageal reflux or dyspepsia should be stopped, if possible. Patients with GERD should limit ethanol, caffeine, chocolate, and tobacco use because of their effects on the LES. Other measures in GERD include ingesting a low-fat diet, avoiding snacks before bedtime, and elevating the head of the bed.

Specific therapies for organic disease should be offered when possible. Surgery is appropriate in disorders like biliary colic, while diet changes are indicated for lactase deficiency or celiac disease. Some illnesses such as peptic ulcer disease may be cured by specific medical regimens. However, because most indigestion is caused by GERD or functional dyspepsia, medications that reduce gastric acid, modulate motility, or blunt gastric sensitivity are indicated.

Acid-Suppressing or Neutralizing Medications

Drugs that reduce or neutralize gastric acid are often prescribed for GERD. Histamine H2 antagonists such as cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine are useful in mild to moderate GERD. For severe symptoms or for many cases of erosive or ulcerative esophagitis, proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, pantoprazole, esomeprazole, or dexlansoprazole are needed. These drugs, which inhibit gastric H+, K+-ATPase, are more potent than H2 antagonists. Up to one third of GERD patients do not respond to proton pump inhibitors; one third of these patients have nonacidic reflux while 10% have persistent acid-related disease. Acid suppressants may be taken continuously or on demand depending on symptom severity. Infrequent potential complications of long-term proton pump inhibitors may include infection, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, nutrient deficiency (vitamin B12, iron, calcium), bone demineralization, and impaired medication absorption (e.g. clopidogrel). Many patients started on a proton pump inhibitor can be stepped down to an H2 antagonist. Combining a proton pump inhibitor with an H2 antagonist is provided for some refractory cases.

Acid-suppressing drugs are also effective in appropriately selected patients with functional dyspepsia. Meta-analysis of eight controlled trials calculated a risk ratio of 0.86, with a 95% confidence interval of 0.78每0.95, favoring proton pump inhibitor therapy over placebo. The benefits of less potent acid reducing therapies such as H2 antagonists are unproven.

Liquid antacids are useful for short-term control of mild GERD but are less effective for severe disease unless given at high doses that elicit side effects (diarrhea and constipation with magnesium- and aluminum-containing agents, respectively). Alginic acid in combination with antacids may form a floating barrier to acid reflux in individuals with upright symptoms. Sucralfate is a salt of aluminum hydroxide and sucrose octasulfate that buffers acid and binds pepsin and bile salts. Its efficacy in GERD is felt to be comparable to that of H2 antagonists.

Helicobacter Pylori Eradication

H. pylori eradication is clearly indicated only for peptic ulcer and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue gastric lymphoma. The utility of eradication therapy in functional dyspepsia is less well established, but <15% of cases relate to this infection. Meta-analysis of 13 controlled trials calculated a risk ratio of 0.91, with a 95% confidence interval of 0.87每0.96, favoring H. pylori eradication therapy over placebo. Several drug combinations show efficacy in eliminating the infection (Chap. 293); most include 10每14 days of a proton pump inhibitor or bismuth subsalicylate in concert with two antibiotics. H. pylori infection is associated with reduced prevalence of GERD, especially in the elderly. However, eradication of the infection does not worsen GERD symptoms. To date, no consensus recommendations regarding H. pylori eradication in GERD patients have been offered.

Agents that Modify Gastrointestinal Motor Activity

Motor stimulants (also known as prokinetics) such as metoclopramide, erythromycin, and domperidone have limited utility in GERD. Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness of motor-stimulating drugs in functional dyspepsia; however, convincing evidence of their benefits has not been found. Some clinicians suggest that patients with symptoms resembling postprandial distress may respond preferentially to prokinetic drugs. The -aminobutyric acid B (GABA-B) agonist baclofen reduces esophageal exposure to acid and non-acidic fluids by inhibiting transient LES relaxations; this drug is proposed for refractory acid and non-acid reflux.

Other Options

Antireflux surgery (fundoplication) is most often offered to GERD patients who are young and may require lifelong therapy, have typical heartburn and regurgitation, and are responsive to proton pump inhibitors. Surgery also is effective for some cases of non-acidic reflux. Individuals who may respond less well to operative therapy include those with atypical symptoms and those who have esophageal body motor disturbances. Fundoplications are performed laparoscopically when possible and include the Nissen and Toupet procedures in which the proximal stomach is partly or completely wrapped around the distal esophagus to increase LES pressure. Dysphagia, gas-bloat syndrome, and gastroparesis may be long-term complications of these procedures. The utility and safety of endoscopic therapies for increasing the barrier function of the gastroesophageal junction, including radiofrequency energy delivery and gastroplication, have not been fully investigated for patients with refractory GERD.

Some patients with functional heartburn and functional dyspepsia refractory to standard therapies may respond to low-dose antidepressants in tricyclic and other classes. Their mechanism of action is unknown but may involve blunting of visceral pain processing in the brain. Gas and bloating are among the most troubling symptoms in some patients with indigestion and can be difficult to treat. Dietary exclusion of gas-producing foods such as legumes and use of simethicone or activated charcoal provide benefits in some cases. Therapies that modify gut flora, including antibiotics and probiotic preparations containing active bacterial cultures, are useful for cases of bacterial overgrowth and functional lower gastrointestinal disorders, but their utility in functional dyspepsia is unproven. Psychological treatments may be offered for refractory functional dyspepsia, but no convincing data suggest their efficacy.
 
Further Readings

Camilleri M, Tack JF: Current medical treatments of dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 39:481, 2010 DeVault KR, Talley NJ: Insights into the future of gastric acid suppression. Nature Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 6: 524, 2009 

 
Hasler WL: Methods of gastric electrical stimulation and pacing: a review of their benefits and mechanisms of action in gastroparesis and obesity. Neurogastroenterol Motil 21: 229, 2009[PMID: 19254353] 

 
Hesketh PJ: Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 358: 2482, 2008[PMID: 18525044] 

 
Kahrilas PJ, Sifrim D: High-resolution manometry and impedance-pH/manometry: valuable tools in clinical and investigational esophagology. Gastroenterology 135: 756, 2008[PMID: 18639550] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: American Gastroenterological Association Institute technical review on the management of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Gastroenterology 135: 1392, 2008 

 
Olden KW, Chepyala P: Functional nausea and vomiting. Nature Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 5: 202, 2008[PMID: 18301404] 

 
Parkman HP, Jones MP: Tests of gastric neuromuscular function. Gastroenterology 136: 1526, 2009[PMID: 19293005] 

 
Shafi MA, Bresalier RS: The gastrointestinal complications of oncologic therapy. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 39:629, 2010[PMID: 20951921] 

 
Stapleton J, WO JM: Current treatment of nausea and vomiting associated with gastroparesis: antiemetics, prokinetics, tricyclics. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 19: 57, 2009[PMID: 19232281] 
 
 

^^
Diarrhea and Constipation: Introduction

Diarrhea and constipation are exceedingly common and, together, exact an enormous toll in terms of mortality, morbidity, social inconvenience, loss of work productivity, and consumption of medical resources. Worldwide, >1 billion individuals suffer one or more episodes of acute diarrhea each year. Among the 100 million persons affected annually by acute diarrhea in the United States, nearly half must restrict activities, 10% consult physicians, 250,000 require hospitalization, and 5000 die (primarily the elderly). The annual economic burden to society may exceed $20 billion. Acute infectious diarrhea remains one of the most common causes of mortality in developing countries, particularly among children, accounting for 2每3 million deaths per year. Constipation, by contrast, is rarely associated with mortality and is exceedingly common in developed countries, leading to frequent self-medication and, in a third of those, to medical consultation. Population statistics on chronic diarrhea and constipation are more uncertain, perhaps due to variable definitions and reporting, but the frequency of these conditions is also high. United States population surveys put prevalence rates for chronic diarrhea at 2每7% and for chronic constipation at 12每19%, with women being affected twice as often as men. Diarrhea and constipation are among the most common patient complaints faced by internists and primary care physicians, and they account for nearly 50% of referrals to gastroenterologists.

Although diarrhea and constipation may present as mere nuisance symptoms at one extreme, they can be severe or life-threatening at the other. Even mild symptoms may signal a serious underlying gastrointestinal lesion, such as colorectal cancer, or systemic disorder, such as thyroid disease. Given the heterogeneous causes and potential severity of these common complaints, it is imperative for clinicians to appreciate the pathophysiology, etiologic classification, diagnostic strategies, and principles of management of diarrhea and constipation, so that rational and cost-effective care can be delivered.
 
Normal Physiology

While the primary function of the small intestine is the digestion and assimilation of nutrients from food, the small intestine and colon together perform important functions that regulate the secretion and absorption of water and electrolytes, the storage and subsequent transport of intraluminal contents aborally, and the salvage of some nutrients after bacterial metabolism of carbohydrate that are not absorbed in the small intestine. The main motor functions are summarized in Table 40每1. Alterations in fluid and electrolyte handling contribute significantly to diarrhea. Alterations in motor and sensory functions of the colon result in highly prevalent syndromes such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), chronic diarrhea, and chronic constipation.

Table 40每1 Normal Gastrointestinal Motility: Functions at Different Anatomic Levels

 
 
Stomach and small bowel  
  Synchronized MMC in fasting 
  Accommodation, trituration, mixing, transit 
    Stomach 3 h 
    Small bowel 3 h 
  Ileal reservoir empties boluses 
Colon: irregular mixing, fermentation, absorption, transit  
  Ascending, transverse: reservoirs 
  Descending: conduit 
  Sigmoid/rectum: volitional reservoir 
 


Note: MMC, migrating motor complex.
 

Neural Control

The small intestine and colon have intrinsic and extrinsic innervation. The intrinsic innervation, also called the enteric nervous system, comprises myenteric, submucosal, and mucosal neuronal layers. The function of these layers is modulated by interneurons through the actions of neurotransmitter amines or peptides, including acetylcholine, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), opioids, norepinephrine, serotonin, Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and nitric oxide (NO). The myenteric plexus regulates smooth-muscle function, and the submucosal plexus affects secretion, absorption, and mucosal blood flow.

The extrinsic innervations of the small intestine and colon are part of the autonomic nervous system and also modulate motor and secretory functions. The parasympathetic nerves convey visceral sensory and excitatory pathways to the colon. Parasympathetic fibers via the vagus nerve reach the small intestine and proximal colon along the branches of the superior mesenteric artery. The distal colon is supplied by sacral parasympathetic nerves (S2每4) via the pelvic plexus; these fibers course through the wall of the colon as ascending intracolonic fibers as far as, and in some instances including, the proximal colon. The chief excitatory neurotransmitters controlling motor function are acetylcholine and the tachykinins, such as substance P. The sympathetic nerve supply modulates motor functions and reaches the small intestine and colon alongside their arterial vessels. Sympathetic input to the gut is generally excitatory to sphincters and inhibitory to nonsphincteric muscle. Visceral afferents convey sensation from the gut to the central nervous system (CNS); initially, they course along sympathetic fibers, but as they approach the spinal cord they separate, have cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion, and enter the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Afferent signals are conveyed to the brain along the lateral spinothalamic tract and the nociceptive dorsal column pathway and are then projected beyond the thalamus and brainstem to the insula and cerebral cortex to be perceived. Other afferent fibers synapse in the prevertebral ganglia and reflexly modulate intestinal motility.

Intestinal Fluid Absorption and Secretion

On an average day, 9 L of fluid enter the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, 1 L of residual fluid reaches the colon, and the stool excretion of fluid constitutes about 0.2 L/d. The colon has a large capacitance and functional reserve and may recover up to four times its usual volume of 0.8 L/d, provided the rate of flow permits reabsorption to occur. Thus, the colon can partially compensate for excess fluid delivery to the colon because of intestinal absorptive or secretory disorders.

In the colon, sodium absorption is predominantly electrogenic, and uptake takes place at the apical membrane; it is compensated for by the export functions of the basolateral sodium pump. A variety of neural and non-neural mediators regulate colonic fluid and electrolyte balance, including cholinergic, adrenergic, and serotonergic mediators. Angiotensin and aldosterone also influence colonic absorption, reflecting the common embryologic development of the distal colonic epithelium and the renal tubules.

Small-Intestinal Motility

During fasting, the motility of the small intestine is characterized by a cyclical event called the migrating motor complex (MMC), which serves to clear nondigestible residue from the small intestine (the intestinal "housekeeper"). This organized, propagated series of contractions last, on average, 4 min, occurs every 60每90 min, and usually involve the entire small intestine. After food ingestion, the small intestine produces irregular, mixing contractions of relatively low amplitude, except in the distal ileum where more powerful contractions occur intermittently and empty the ileum by bolus transfers.

Ileocolonic Storage and Salvage

The distal ileum acts as a reservoir, emptying intermittently by bolus movements. This action allows time for salvage of fluids, electrolytes, and nutrients. Segmentation by haustra compartmentalizes the colon and facilitates mixing, retention of residue, and formation of solid stools. There is increased appreciation of the intimate interaction between the colonic function and the luminal ecology. The resident bacteria in the colon are necessary for the digestion of unabsorbed carbohydrates that reach the colon even in health, thereby providing a vital source of nutrients to the mucosa. Normal colonic flora also keeps pathogens at bay by a variety of mechanisms. In health, the ascending and transverse regions of colon function as reservoirs (average transit, 15 h), and the descending colon acts as a conduit (average transit, 3 h). The colon is efficient at conserving sodium and water, a function that is particularly important in sodium-depleted patients in whom the small intestine alone is unable to maintain sodium balance. Diarrhea or constipation may result from alteration in the reservoir function of the proximal colon or the propulsive function of the left colon. Constipation may also result from disturbances of the rectal or sigmoid reservoir, typically as a result of dysfunction of the pelvic floor, the anal sphincters, or the coordination of defecation.

Colonic Motility and Tone

The small intestinal MMC only rarely continues into the colon. However, short duration or phasic contractions mix colonic contents, and high-amplitude (>75 mmHg) propagated contractions (HAPCs) are sometimes associated with mass movements through the colon and normally occur approximately five times per day, usually on awakening in the morning and postprandially. Increased frequency of HAPCs may result in diarrhea or urgency. The predominant phasic contractions in the colon are irregular and nonpropagated and serve a "mixing" function.

Colonic tone refers to the background contractility upon which phasic contractile activity (typically contractions lasting <15 s) is superimposed. It is an important cofactor in the colon's capacitance (volume accommodation) and sensation.

Colonic Motility after Meal Ingestion

After meal ingestion, colonic phasic and tonic contractility increase for a period of 2 h. The initial phase (10 min) is mediated by the vagus nerve in response to mechanical distention of the stomach. The subsequent response of the colon requires caloric stimulation and is mediated at least in part by hormones (e.g., gastrin and serotonin).

Defecation

Tonic contraction of the puborectalis muscle, which forms a sling around the rectoanal junction, is important to maintain continence; during defecation, sacral parasympathetic nerves relax this muscle, facilitating the straightening of the rectoanal angle (Fig. 40-1). Distention of the rectum results in transient relaxation of the internal anal sphincter via intrinsic and reflex sympathetic innervation. As sigmoid and rectal contractions increase the pressure within the rectum, the rectosigmoid angle opens by >15∼. Voluntary relaxation of the external anal sphincter (striated muscle innervated by the pudendal nerve) in response to the sensation produced by distention permits the evacuation of feces; this evacuation process can be augmented by an increase in intraabdominal pressure created by the Valsalva maneuver. Defecation can also be delayed voluntarily by contraction of the external anal sphincter.

Figure 40-1

 
 
 
 
Sagittal view of the anorectum (A) at rest and (B) during straining to defecate. Continence is maintained by normal rectal sensation and tonic contraction of the internal anal sphincter and the puborectalis muscle, which wraps around the anorectum, maintaining an anorectal angle between 80∼ and 110∼. During defecation, the pelvic floor muscles (including the puborectalis) relax, allowing the anorectal angle to straighten by at least 15∼, and the perineum descends by 1每3.5 cm. The external anal sphincter also relaxes and reduces pressure on the anal canal. (Reproduced with permission from Lembo and Camilleri.)
 
 
 
Diarrhea

Definition

Diarrhea is loosely defined as passage of abnormally liquid or unformed stools at an increased frequency. For adults on a typical Western diet, stool weight >200 g/d can generally be considered diarrheal. Diarrhea may be further defined as acute if <2 weeks, persistent if 2每4 weeks, and chronic if >4 weeks in duration.

Two common conditions, usually associated with the passage of stool totaling <200 g/d, must be distinguished from diarrhea, because diagnostic and therapeutic algorithms differ. Pseudodiarrhea, or the frequent passage of small volumes of stool, is often associated with rectal urgency and accompanies IBS or proctitis. Fecal incontinence is the involuntary discharge of rectal contents and is most often caused by neuromuscular disorders or structural anorectal problems. Diarrhea and urgency, especially if severe, may aggravate or cause incontinence. Pseudodiarrhea and fecal incontinence occur at prevalence rates comparable to or higher than that of chronic diarrhea and should always be considered in patients complaining of "diarrhea." Overflow diarrhea may occur in nursing home patients due to fecal impaction that is readily detectable by rectal examination. A careful history and physical examination generally allow these conditions to be discriminated from true diarrhea.

Acute Diarrhea

More than 90% of cases of acute diarrhea are caused by infectious agents; these cases are often accompanied by vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. The remaining 10% or so are caused by medications, toxic ingestions, ischemia, and other conditions.

Infectious Agents

Most infectious diarrheas are acquired by fecal-oral transmission or, more commonly, via ingestion of food or water contaminated with pathogens from human or animal feces. In the immunocompetent person, the resident fecal microflora, containing >500 taxonomically distinct species, are rarely the source of diarrhea and may actually play a role in suppressing the growth of ingested pathogens. Disturbances of flora by antibiotics can lead to diarrhea by reducing the digestive function or by allowing the overgrowth of pathogens, such as Clostridium difficile (Chap. 129). Acute infection or injury occurs when the ingested agent overwhelms or bypasses the host's mucosal immune and nonimmune (gastric acid, digestive enzymes, mucus secretion, peristalsis, and suppressive resident flora) defenses. Established clinical associations with specific enteropathogens may offer diagnostic clues.

In the United States, five high-risk groups are recognized:

Travelers. Nearly 40% of tourists to endemic regions of Latin America, Africa, and Asia develop so-called traveler's diarrhea, most commonly due to enterotoxigenic or enteroaggregative Escherichia coli as well as to Campylobacter, Shigella, Aeromonas, norovirus, Coronavirus, and Salmonella. Visitors to Russia (especially St. Petersburg) may have increased risk of Giardia-associated diarrhea; visitors to Nepal may acquire Cyclospora. Campers, backpackers, and swimmers in wilderness areas may become infected with Giardia. Cruise ships may be affected by outbreaks of gastroenteritis caused by agents such as norovirus.

Consumers of certain foods. Diarrhea closely following food consumption at a picnic, banquet, or restaurant may suggest infection with Salmonella, Campylobacter, or Shigella from chicken; enterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7) from undercooked hamburger; Bacillus cereus from fried rice or other reheated food; Staphylococcus aureus or Salmonella from mayonnaise or creams; Salmonella from eggs; Listeria from uncooked foods or soft cheeses; and Vibrio species, Salmonella, or acute hepatitis A from seafood, especially if raw.

Immunodeficient persons. Individuals at risk for diarrhea include those with either primary immunodeficiency (e.g., IgA deficiency, common variable hypogammaglobulinemia, chronic granulomatous disease) or the much more common secondary immunodeficiency states (e.g., AIDS, senescence, pharmacologic suppression). Common enteric pathogens often cause a more severe and protracted diarrheal illness, and, particularly in persons with AIDS, opportunistic infections, such as by Mycobacterium species, certain viruses (cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, and herpes simplex), and protozoa (Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli, Microsporida, and Blastocystis hominis) may also play a role (Chap. 189). In patients with AIDS, agents transmitted venereally per rectum (e.g., Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Treponema pallidum, Chlamydia) may contribute to proctocolitis. Persons with hemochromatosis are especially prone to invasive, even fatal, enteric infections with Vibrio species and Yersinia infections and should avoid raw fish.

Daycare attendees and their family members. Infections with Shigella, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, rotavirus, and other agents are very common and should be considered.

Institutionalized persons. Infectious diarrhea is one of the most frequent categories of nosocomial infections in many hospitals and long-term care facilities; the causes are a variety of microorganisms but most commonly C. difficile. C. difficile can affect those with no history of antibiotic use and may be acquired in the community.

The pathophysiology underlying acute diarrhea by infectious agents produces specific clinical features that may also be helpful in diagnosis (Table 40每2). Profuse, watery diarrhea secondary to small-bowel hypersecretion occurs with ingestion of preformed bacterial toxins, enterotoxin-producing bacteria, and enteroadherent pathogens. Diarrhea associated with marked vomiting and minimal or no fever may occur abruptly within a few hours after ingestion of the former two types; vomiting is usually less, abdominal cramping or bloating is greater, and fever is higher with the latter. Cytotoxin-producing and invasive microorganisms all cause high fever and abdominal pain. Invasive bacteria and Entamoeba histolytica often cause bloody diarrhea (referred to as dysentery). Yersinia invades the terminal ileal and proximal colon mucosa and may cause especially severe abdominal pain with tenderness mimicking acute appendicitis.

Table 40每2 Association between Pathobiology of Causative Agents and Clinical Features in Acute Infectious Diarrhea

 
 
Pathobiology/Agents Incubation Period Vomiting Abdominal Pain Fever Diarrhea 
Toxin producers           
  Preformed toxin           
    Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus, Clostridium perfringens  1每8 h 8每24 h 3每4+ 1每2+ 0每1+ 3每4+, watery 
  Enterotoxin           
    Vibrio cholerae, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Aeromonas species  8每72 h 2每4+ 1每2+ 0每1+ 3每4+, watery 
Enteroadherent           
  Enteropathogenic and enteroadherent E. coli, Giardia organisms, cryptosporidiosis, helminths  1每8 d 0每1+ 1每3+ 0每2+ 1每2+, watery, mushy 
Cytotoxin producers           
  C. difficile  1每3 d 0每1+ 3每4+ 1每2+ 1每3+, usually watery, occasionally bloody 
  Hemorrhagic E. coli  12每72 h 0每1+ 3每4+ 1每2+ 1每3+, initially watery, quickly bloody 
Invasive organisms           
  Minimal inflammation           
    Rotavirus and norovirus 1每3 d 1每3+ 2每3+ 3每4+ 1每3+, watery 
  Variable inflammation           
    Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Aeromonas species, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Yersinia  12 h每11 d 0每3+ 2每4+ 3每4+ 1每4+, watery or bloody 
  Severe inflammation           
    Shigella species, enteroinvasive E. coli, Entamoeba histolytica  12 h每8 d 0每1+ 3每4+ 3每4+ 1每2+, bloody 
 


Source: Adapted from DW Powell, in T Yamada (ed): Textbook of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003.
 

Finally, infectious diarrhea may be associated with systemic manifestations. Reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome), arthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis may accompany or follow infections by Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, and Yersinia. Yersiniosis may also lead to an autoimmune-type thyroiditis, pericarditis, and glomerulonephritis. Both enterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7) and Shigella can lead to the hemolytic-uremic syndrome with an attendant high mortality rate. The syndrome of postinfectious IBS has now been recognized as a complication of infectious diarrhea. Acute diarrhea can also be a major symptom of several systemic infections including viral hepatitis, listeriosis, legionellosis, and toxic shock syndrome.

Other Causes

Side effects from medications are probably the most common noninfectious causes of acute diarrhea, and etiology may be suggested by a temporal association between use and symptom onset. Although innumerable medications may produce diarrhea, some of the more frequently incriminated include antibiotics, cardiac antidysrhythmics, antihypertensives, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), certain antidepressants, chemotherapeutic agents, bronchodilators, antacids, and laxatives. Occlusive or nonocclusive ischemic colitis typically occurs in persons >50 years; often presents as acute lower abdominal pain preceding watery, then bloody diarrhea; and generally results in acute inflammatory changes in the sigmoid or left colon while sparing the rectum. Acute diarrhea may accompany colonic diverticulitis and graft-versus-host disease. Acute diarrhea, often associated with systemic compromise, can follow ingestion of toxins including organophosphate insecticides; amanita and other mushrooms; arsenic; and preformed environmental toxins in seafood, such as ciguatera and scombroid. Acute anaphylaxis to food ingestion can have a similar presentation. Conditions causing chronic diarrhea can also be confused with acute diarrhea early in their course. This confusion may occur with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and some of the other inflammatory chronic diarrheas that may have an abrupt rather than insidious onset and exhibit features that mimic infection.

Approach to the Patient: Acute Diarrhea

The decision to evaluate acute diarrhea depends on its severity and duration and on various host factors (Fig. 40-2). Most episodes of acute diarrhea are mild and self-limited and do not justify the cost and potential morbidity rate of diagnostic or pharmacologic interventions. Indications for evaluation include profuse diarrhea with dehydration, grossly bloody stools, fever 38.5∼C (101∼F), duration >48 h without improvement, recent antibiotic use, new community outbreaks, associated severe abdominal pain in patients >50 years, and elderly (70 years) or immunocompromised patients. In some cases of moderately severe febrile diarrhea associated with fecal leukocytes (or increased fecal levels of the leukocyte proteins) or with gross blood, a diagnostic evaluation might be avoided in favor of an empirical antibiotic trial (see below).

Figure 40-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for the management of acute diarrhea. Consider empirical Rx before evaluation with (*) metronidazole and with () quinolone. WBCs, white blood cells.
 
 

The cornerstone of diagnosis in those suspected of severe acute infectious diarrhea is microbiologic analysis of the stool. Workup includes cultures for bacterial and viral pathogens, direct inspection for ova and parasites, and immunoassays for certain bacterial toxins (C. difficile), viral antigens (rotavirus), and protozoal antigens (Giardia, E. histolytica). The aforementioned clinical and epidemiologic associations may assist in focusing the evaluation. If a particular pathogen or set of possible pathogens is so implicated, then either the whole panel of routine studies may not be necessary or, in some instances, special cultures may be appropriate as for enterohemorrhagic and other types of E. coli, Vibrio species, and Yersinia. Molecular diagnosis of pathogens in stool can be made by identification of unique DNA sequences; and evolving microarray technologies could lead to a more rapid, sensitive, specific, and cost-effective diagnostic approach in the future.

Persistent diarrhea is commonly due to Giardia (Chap. 209), but additional causative organisms that should be considered include C. difficile (especially if antibiotics had been administered), E. histolytica, Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter, and others. If stool studies are unrevealing, flexible sigmoidoscopy with biopsies and upper endoscopy with duodenal aspirates and biopsies may be indicated. Brainerd diarrhea is an increasingly recognized entity characterized by an abrupt-onset diarrhea that persists for at least 4 weeks, but may last 1每3 years, and is thought to be of infectious origin. It may be associated with subtle inflammation of the distal small intestine or proximal colon.

Structural examination by sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, or abdominal CT scanning (or other imaging approaches) may be appropriate in patients with uncharacterized persistent diarrhea to exclude IBD or as an initial approach in patients with suspected noninfectious acute diarrhea such as might be caused by ischemic colitis, diverticulitis, or partial bowel obstruction.

Treatment: Acute Diarrhea

Fluid and electrolyte replacement are of central importance to all forms of acute diarrhea. Fluid replacement alone may suffice for mild cases. Oral sugar-electrolyte solutions (sport drinks or designed formulations) should be instituted promptly with severe diarrhea to limit dehydration, which is the major cause of death. Profoundly dehydrated patients, especially infants and the elderly, require IV rehydration.

In moderately severe nonfebrile and nonbloody diarrhea, antimotility and antisecretory agents such as loperamide can be useful adjuncts to control symptoms. Such agents should be avoided with febrile dysentery, which may be exacerbated or prolonged by them. Bismuth subsalicylate may reduce symptoms of vomiting and diarrhea but should not be used to treat immunocompromised patients or those with renal impairment because of the risk of bismuthencephalopathy.

Judicious use of antibiotics is appropriate in selected instances of acute diarrhea and may reduce its severity and duration (Fig. 40-2). Many physicians treat moderately to severely ill patients with febrile dysentery empirically without diagnostic evaluation using a quinolone, such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid for 3每5 d). Empirical treatment can also be considered for suspected giardiasis with metronidazole (250 mg qid for 7 d). Selection of antibiotics and dosage regimens are otherwise dictated by specific pathogens, geographic patterns of resistance, and conditions found (Chaps. 128, 149, and 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, and 159). Antibiotic coverage is indicated, whether or not a causative organism is discovered, in patients who are immunocompromised, have mechanical heart valves or recent vascular grafts, or are elderly. Bismuth subsalicylate may reduce the frequency of traveler's diarrhea. Antibiotic prophylaxis is only indicated for certain patients traveling to high-risk countries in whom the likelihood or seriousness of acquired diarrhea would be especially high, including those with immunocompromise, IBD, hemochromatosis, or gastric achlorhydria. Use ofciprofloxacin or rifaximin may reduce bacterial diarrhea in such travelers by 90%, though rifaximin is not suitable for invasive disease, but rather as treatment for uncomplicated traveler's diarrhea. Finally, physicians should be vigilant to identify if an outbreak of diarrheal illness is occurring and to alert the public health authorities promptly. This may reduce the ultimate size of the affected population.

Chronic Diarrhea

Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to exclude serious underlying pathology. In contrast to acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea are noninfectious. The classification of chronic diarrhea by pathophysiologic mechanism facilitates a rational approach to management, though many diseases cause diarrhea by more than one mechanism (Table 40每3).

Table 40每3 Major Causes of Chronic Diarrhea According to Predominant Pathophysiologic Mechanism

 
 
Secretory causes

   Exogenous stimulant laxatives

   Chronic ethanol ingestion

   Other drugs and toxins

   Endogenous laxatives (dihydroxy bile acids)

   Idiopathic secretory diarrhea

   Certain bacterial infections

   Bowel resection, disease, or fistula ( absorption)

   Partial bowel obstruction or fecal impaction

   Hormone-producing tumors (carcinoid, VIPoma, medullary cancer of thyroid, mastocytosis, gastrinoma, colorectal villous adenoma)

   Addison's disease

   Congenital electrolyte absorption defects

Osmotic causes

   Osmotic laxatives (Mg2+, PO4每3, SO4每2

   Lactase and other disaccharide deficiencies

   Nonabsorbable carbohydrates (sorbitol, lactulose, polyethylene glycol)

Steatorrheal causes

   Intraluminal maldigestion (pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, bacterial overgrowth, bariatric surgery, liver disease)

   Mucosal malabsorption (celiac sprue, Whipple's disease, infections, abetalipoproteinemia, ischemia)

   Postmucosal obstruction (1∼ or 2∼ lymphatic obstruction)
 Inflammatory causes

   Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's, chronic ulcerative colitis)

   Lymphocytic and collagenous colitis

   Immune-related mucosal disease (1∼ or 2∼ immunodeficiencies, food allergy, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, graft-vs-host disease)

   Infections (invasive bacteria, viruses, and parasites, Brainerd diarrhea)

   Radiation injury Gastrointestinal malignancies

Dysmotile causes

   Irritable bowel syndrome (including postinfectious IBS)

   Visceral neuromyopathies

   Hyperthyroidism

   Drugs (prokinetic agents) Postvagotomy

Factitial causes

   Munchausen

   Eating disorders

Iatrogenic causes

   Cholecystectomy

   Ileal resection

   Bariatric surgery

   Vagotomy, fundoplication
 
 

 

Secretory Causes

Secretory diarrheas are due to derangements in fluid and electrolyte transport across the enterocolonic mucosa. They are characterized clinically by watery, large-volume fecal outputs that are typically painless and persist with fasting. Because there is no malabsorbed solute, stool osmolality is accounted for by normal endogenous electrolytes with no fecal osmotic gap.

Medications

Side effects from regular ingestion of drugs and toxins are the most common secretory causes of chronic diarrhea. Hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter medications (see "Acute Diarrhea, Other Causes," above) may produce diarrhea. Surreptitious or habitual use of stimulant laxatives [e.g., senna, cascara, bisacodyl, ricinoleic acid (castor oil)] must also be considered. Chronic ethanol consumption may cause a secretory-type diarrhea due to enterocyte injury with impaired sodium and water absorption as well as rapid transit and other alterations. Inadvertent ingestion of certain environmental toxins (e.g., arsenic) may lead to chronic rather than acute forms of diarrhea. Certain bacterial infections may occasionally persist and be associated with a secretory-type diarrhea.

Bowel Resection, Mucosal Disease, or Enterocolic Fistula

These conditions may result in a secretory-type diarrhea because of inadequate surface for reabsorption of secreted fluids and electrolytes. Unlike other secretory diarrheas, this subset of conditions tends to worsen with eating. With disease (e.g., Crohn's ileitis) or resection of <100 cm of terminal ileum, dihydroxy bile acids may escape absorption and stimulate colonic secretion (cholorrheic diarrhea). This mechanism may contribute to so-called idiopathic secretory diarrhea, in which bile acids are functionally malabsorbed from a normal-appearing terminal ileum. This idiopathic bile acid malabsorption may account for an average of 40% of unexplained chronic diarrhea. Reduced negative feedback regulation of bile acid synthesis by fibroblast growth factor 19 produced by enterocytes results in a degree of bile-acid synthesis that exceeds the normal capacity for ileal reabsorption, producing bile acid diarrhea.

Partial bowel obstruction, ostomy stricture, or fecal impaction may paradoxically lead to increased fecal output due to fluid hypersecretion.

Hormones

Although uncommon, the classic examples of secretory diarrhea are those mediated by hormones. Metastatic gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors or, rarely, primary bronchial carcinoids may produce watery diarrhea alone or as part of the carcinoid syndrome that comprises episodic flushing, wheezing, dyspnea, and right-sided valvular heart disease. Diarrhea is due to the release into the circulation of potent intestinal secretagogues including serotonin, histamine, prostaglandins, and various kinins. Pellagra-like skin lesions may rarely occur as the result of serotonin overproduction with niacin depletion. Gastrinoma, one of the most common neuroendocrine tumors, most typically presents with refractory peptic ulcers, but diarrhea occurs in up to one-third of cases and may be the only clinical manifestation in 10%. While other secretagogues released with gastrin may play a role, the diarrhea most often results from fat maldigestion owing to pancreatic enzyme inactivation by low intraduodenal pH. The watery diarrhea hypokalemia achlorhydria syndrome, also called pancreatic cholera, is due to a non- cell pancreatic adenoma, referred to as a VIPoma, that secretes VIP and a host of other peptide hormones including pancreatic polypeptide, secretin, gastrin, gastrin-inhibitory polypeptide (also called glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide), neurotensin, calcitonin, and prostaglandins. The secretory diarrhea is often massive with stool volumes >3 L/d; daily volumes as high as 20 L have been reported. Life-threatening dehydration; neuromuscular dysfunction from associated hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or hypercalcemia; flushing; and hyperglycemia may accompany a VIPoma. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid may present with watery diarrhea caused by calcitonin, other secretory peptides, or prostaglandins. Prominent diarrhea is often associated with metastatic disease and poor prognosis. Systemic mastocytosis, which may be associated with the skin lesion urticaria pigmentosa, may cause diarrhea that is either secretory and mediated by histamine or inflammatory due to intestinal infiltration by mast cells. Large colorectal villous adenomas may rarely be associated with a secretory diarrhea that may cause hypokalemia, can be inhibited by NSAIDs, and are apparently mediated by prostaglandins.

Congenital Defects in Ion Absorption

Rarely, defects in specific carriers associated with ion absorption cause watery diarrhea from birth. These disorders include defective Cl每/HCO3每 exchange (congenital chloridorrhea) with alkalosis (which results from a mutated DRA [down-regulated in adenoma] gene) and defective Na+/H+ exchange (congential sodium diarrhea), which results from a mutation in the NHE3 (sodium-hydrogen exchanger) gene and results in acidosis.

Some hormone deficiencies may be associated with watery diarrhea, such as occurs with adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison's disease) that may be accompanied by skin hyperpigmentation.

Osmotic Causes

Osmotic diarrhea occurs when ingested, poorly absorbable, osmotically active solutes draw enough fluid into the lumen to exceed the reabsorptive capacity of the colon. Fecal water output increases in proportion to such a solute load. Osmotic diarrhea characteristically ceases with fasting or with discontinuation of the causative agent.

Osmotic Laxatives

Ingestion of magnesium-containing antacids, health supplements, or laxatives may induce osmotic diarrhea typified by a stool osmotic gap (>50 mosmol/L): serum osmolarity (typically 290 mosmol/kg)-[2 x (fecal sodium + potassium concentration)]. Measurement of fecal osmolarity is no longer recommended because, even when measured immediately after evacuation, it may be erroneous because carbohydrates are metabolized by colonic bacteria, causing an increase in osmolarity.

Carbohydrate Malabsorption

Carbohydrate malabsorption due to acquired or congenital defects in brush-border disaccharidases and other enzymes leads to osmotic diarrhea with a low pH. One of the most common causes of chronic diarrhea in adults is lactase deficiency, which affects three-fourths of non-whites worldwide and 5每30% of persons in the United States; the total lactose load at any one time influences the symptoms experienced. Most patients learn to avoid milk products without requiring treatment with enzyme supplements. Some sugars, such as sorbitol, lactulose, or fructose, are frequently malabsorbed, and diarrhea ensues with ingestion of medications, gum, or candies sweetened with these poorly or incompletely absorbed sugars.

Steatorrheal Causes

Fat malabsorption may lead to greasy, foul-smelling, difficult-to-flush diarrhea often associated with weight loss and nutritional deficiencies due to concomitant malabsorption of amino acids and vitamins. Increased fecal output is caused by the osmotic effects of fatty acids, especially after bacterial hydroxylation, and, to a lesser extent, by the neutral fat. Quantitatively, steatorrhea is defined as stool fat exceeding the normal 7 g/d; rapid-transit diarrhea may result in fecal fat up to 14 g/d; daily fecal fat averages 15每25 g with small intestinal diseases and is often >32 g with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Intraluminal maldigestion, mucosal malabsorption, or lymphatic obstruction may produce steatorrhea.

Intraluminal Maldigestion

This condition most commonly results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which occurs when >90% of pancreatic secretory function is lost. Chronic pancreatitis, usually a sequel of ethanol abuse, most frequently causes pancreatic insufficiency. Other causes include cystic fibrosis; pancreatic duct obstruction; and, rarely, somatostatinoma. Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine may deconjugate bile acids and alter micelle formation, impairing fat digestion; it occurs with stasis from a blind-loop, small-bowel diverticulum or dysmotility and is especially likely in the elderly. Finally, cirrhosis or biliary obstruction may lead to mild steatorrhea due to deficient intraluminal bile acid concentration.

Mucosal Malabsorption

Mucosal malabsorption occurs from a variety of enteropathies, but it most commonly occurs from celiac disease. This gluten-sensitive enteropathy affects all ages and is characterized by villous atrophy and crypt hyperplasia in the proximal small bowel and can present with fatty diarrhea associated with multiple nutritional deficiencies of varying severity. Celiac disease is much more frequent than previously thought; it affects 1% of the population, frequently presents without steatorrhea, can mimic IBS, and has many other GI and extraintestinal manifestations. Tropical sprue may produce a similar histologic and clinical syndrome but occurs in residents of or travelers to tropical climates; abrupt onset and response to antibiotics suggest an infectious etiology. Whipple's disease, due to the bacillus Tropheryma whipplei and histiocytic infiltration of the small-bowel mucosa, is a less common cause of steatorrhea that most typically occurs in young or middle-aged men; it is frequently associated with arthralgias, fever, lymphadenopathy, and extreme fatigue, and it may affect the CNS and endocardium. A similar clinical and histologic picture results from Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infection in patients with AIDS. Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare defect of chylomicron formation and fat malabsorption in children, associated with acanthocytic erythrocytes, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa. Several other conditions may cause mucosal malabsorption including infections, especially with protozoa such as Giardia; numerous medications (e.g., colchicine, cholestyramine, neomycin); amyloidosis; and chronic ischemia.

Postmucosal Lymphatic Obstruction

The pathophysiology of this condition, which is due to the rare congenital intestinal lymphangiectasia or to acquired lymphatic obstruction secondary to trauma, tumor, cardiac disease or infection, leads to the unique constellation of fat malabsorption with enteric losses of protein (often causing edema) and lymphocytopenia. Carbohydrate and amino acid absorption are preserved.

Inflammatory Causes

Inflammatory diarrheas are generally accompanied by pain, fever, bleeding, or other manifestations of inflammation. The mechanism of diarrhea may not only be exudation but, depending on lesion site, may include fat malabsorption, disrupted fluid/electrolyte absorption, and hypersecretion or hypermotility from release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators. The unifying feature on stool analysis is the presence of leukocytes or leukocyte-derived proteins such as calprotectin. With severe inflammation, exudative protein loss can lead to anasarca (generalized edema). Any middle-aged or older person with chronic inflammatory-type diarrhea, especially with blood, should be carefully evaluated to exclude a colorectal tumor.

Idiopathic Inflammatory Bowel Disease

The illnesses in this category, which include Crohn's disease and chronic ulcerative colitis, are among the most common organic causes of chronic diarrhea in adults and range in severity from mild to fulminant and life-threatening. They may be associated with uveitis, polyarthralgias, cholestatic liver disease (primary sclerosing cholangitis), and skin lesions (erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum). Microscopic colitis, including both lymphocytic and collagenous colitis, is an increasingly recognized cause of chronic watery diarrhea, especially in middle-aged women and those on NSAIDs, statins, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); biopsy of a normal-appearing colon is required for histologic diagnosis. It may coexist with symptoms suggesting IBS or with celiac sprue. It typically responds well to anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., bismuth), to the opioid agonist loperamide, or to budesonide.

Primary or Secondary Forms of Immunodeficiency

Immunodeficiency may lead to prolonged infectious diarrhea. With selective IgA deficiency or common variable hypogammaglobulinemia, diarrhea is particularly prevalent and often the result of giardiasis, bacterial overgrowth, or sprue.

Eosinophilic Gastroenteritis

Eosinophil infiltration of the mucosa, muscularis, or serosa at any level of the GI tract may cause diarrhea, pain, vomiting, or ascites. Affected patients often have an atopic history, Charcot-Leyden crystals due to extruded eosinophil contents may be seen on microscopic inspection of stool, and peripheral eosinophilia is present in 50每75% of patients. While hypersensitivity to certain foods occurs in adults, true food allergy causing chronic diarrhea is rare.

Other Causes

Chronic inflammatory diarrhea may be caused by radiation enterocolitis, chronic graft-versus-host disease, Beh?t's syndrome, and Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, among others.

Dysmotility Causes

Rapid transit may accompany many diarrheas as a secondary or contributing phenomenon, but primary dysmotility is an unusual etiology of true diarrhea. Stool features often suggest a secretory diarrhea, but mild steatorrhea of up to 14 g of fat per day can be produced by maldigestion from rapid transit alone. Hyperthyroidism, carcinoid syndrome, and certain drugs (e.g., prostaglandins, prokinetic agents) may produce hypermotility with resultant diarrhea. Primary visceral neuromyopathies or idiopathic acquired intestinal pseudoobstruction may lead to stasis with secondary bacterial overgrowth causing diarrhea. Diabetic diarrhea, often accompanied by peripheral and generalized autonomic neuropathies, may occur in part because of intestinal dysmotility.

The exceedingly common IBS (10% point prevalence, 1每2% per year incidence) is characterized by disturbed intestinal and colonic motor and sensory responses to various stimuli. Symptoms of stool frequency typically cease at night, alternate with periods of constipation, are accompanied by abdominal pain relieved with defecation, and rarely result in weight loss.

Factitial Causes

Factitial diarrhea accounts for up to 15% of unexplained diarrheas referred to tertiary care centers. Either as a form of Munchausen syndrome (deception or self-injury for secondary gain) or eating disorders, some patients covertly self-administer laxatives alone or in combination with other medications (e.g., diuretics) or surreptitiously add water or urine to stool sent for analysis. Such patients are typically women, often with histories of psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolarity, respectively. Such patients often deny this possibility when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric counseling when they acknowledge their behavior.

Approach to the Patient: Chronic Diarrhea

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history and physical examination (Fig. 40-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 40-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 40每4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient's fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Blood chemistries may demonstrate electrolyte, hepatic, or other metabolic disturbances. Measuring tissue transglutaminase antibodies may help detect celiac disease.

Figure 40-3

 
 
 
 
Chronic diarrhea. A. Initial management based on accompanying symptoms or features. B. Evaluation based on findings from a limited age-appropriate screen for organic disease. pr, per rectum; bm, bowel movement; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; Hb, hemoglobin; Alb, albumin; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; MCH, mean corpuscular hemoglobin; OSM, osmolality. (Reprinted from M Camilleri: Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2:198, 2004.)
 
 
Table 40每4 Physical Examination in Patients with Chronic Diarrhea

 
 
1. Are there general features to suggest malabsorption or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) such as anemia, dermatitis herpetiformis, edema, or clubbing? 
2. Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints? 
3. Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness? 
4. Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal defects, or altered anal sphincter functions? 
5. Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of systemic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing (carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease? 
 

 

A therapeutic trial is often appropriate, definitive, and highly cost effective when a specific diagnosis is suggested on the initial physician encounter. For example, chronic watery diarrhea, which ceases with fasting in an otherwise healthy young adult, may justify a trial of a lactose-restricted diet; bloating and diarrhea persisting since a mountain backpacking trip may warrant a trial of metronidazole for likely giardiasis; and postprandial diarrhea persisting following resection of terminal ileum might be due to bile acid malabsorption and be treated with cholestyramine or colesevelam before further evaluation. Persistent symptoms require additional investigation.

Certain diagnoses may be suggested on the initial encounter (e.g., idiopathic IBD); however, additional focused evaluations may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis and characterize the severity or extent of disease so that treatment can be best guided. Patients suspected of having IBS should be initially evaluated with flexible sigmoidoscopy with colorectal biopsies; those with normal findings might be reassured and, as indicated, treated empirically with antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, bulk agents, anxiolytics, or antidepressants. Any patient who presents with chronic diarrhea and hematochezia should be evaluated with stool microbiologic studies and colonoscopy.

In an estimated two-thirds of cases, the cause for chronic diarrhea remains unclear after the initial encounter, and further testing is required. Quantitative stool collection and analyses can yield important objective data that may establish a diagnosis or characterize the type of diarrhea as a triage for focused additional studies (Fig. 40-3B). If stool weight is >200 g/d, additional stool analyses should be performed that might include electrolyte concentration, pH, occult blood testing, leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat quantitation, and laxative screens.

For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Pleisiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite (e.g., 14CO2). However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel barium x-rays are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, or urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, and histamine).

Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes. Low fecal pH suggests carbohydrate malabsorption; lactose malabsorption can be confirmed by lactose breath testing or by a therapeutic trial with lactose exclusion and observation of the effect of lactose challenge (e.g., a liter of milk). Lactase determination on small-bowel biopsy is not generally available. If fecal magnesium or laxative levels are elevated, inadvertent or surreptitious ingestion should be considered and psychiatric help should be sought.

For those with proven fatty diarrhea, endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy (including aspiration for Giardia and quantitative cultures) should be performed; if this procedure is unrevealing, a small-bowel radiograph is often an appropriate next step. If small-bowel studies are negative or if pancreatic disease is suspected, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency should be excluded with direct tests, such as the secretin-cholecystokinin stimulation test or a variation that could be performed endoscopically. In general, indirect tests such as assay of fecal elastase or chymotrypsin activity or a bentiromide test have fallen out of favor because of low sensitivity and specificity.

Chronic inflammatory-type diarrheas should be suspected by the presence of blood or leukocytes in the stool. Such findings warrant stool cultures; inspection for ova and parasites; C. difficile toxin assay; colonoscopy with biopsies; and, if indicated, small-bowel contrast studies.

Treatment: Chronic Diarrhea

Treatment of chronic diarrhea depends on the specific etiology and may be curative, suppressive, or empirical. If the cause can be eradicated, treatment is curative as with resection of a colorectal cancer, antibiotic administration for Whipple's disease or tropical sprue, or discontinuation of a drug. For many chronic conditions, diarrhea can be controlled by suppression of the underlying mechanism. Examples include elimination of dietary lactose for lactase deficiency or gluten for celiac sprue, use of glucocorticoids or other anti-inflammatory agents for idiopathic IBDs, adsorptive agents such as cholestyramine for ileal bile acid malabsorption, proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole for the gastric hypersecretion of gastrinomas, somatostatin analogues such as octreotide for malignantcarcinoid syndrome, prostaglandin inhibitors such as indomethacin for medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, and pancreatic enzyme replacement for pancreatic insufficiency. When the specific cause or mechanism of chronic diarrhea evades diagnosis, empirical therapy may be beneficial. Mild opiates, such as diphenoxylate or loperamide, are often helpful in mild or moderate watery diarrhea. For those with more severe diarrhea, codeine or tincture of opium may be beneficial. Such antimotility agents should be avoided with severe IBD, because toxic megacolon may be precipitated. Clonidine, an 2-adrenergic agonist, may allow control of diabetic diarrhea. For all patients with chronic diarrhea, fluid and electrolyte repletion is an important component of management (see "Acute Diarrhea," above). Replacement of fat-soluble vitamins may also be necessary in patients with chronic steatorrhea.
 
Constipation

Definition

Constipation is a common complaint in clinical practice and usually refers to persistent, difficult, infrequent, or seemingly incomplete defecation. Because of the wide range of normal bowel habits, constipation is difficult to define precisely. Most persons have at least three bowel movements per week; however, low stool frequency alone is not the sole criterion for the diagnosis of constipation. Many constipated patients have a normal frequency of defecation but complain of excessive straining, hard stools, lower abdominal fullness, or a sense of incomplete evacuation. The individual patient's symptoms must be analyzed in detail to ascertain what is meant by "constipation" or "difficulty" with defecation.

Stool form and consistency are well correlated with the time elapsed from the preceding defecation. Hard, pellety stools occur with slow transit, while loose, watery stools are associated with rapid transit. Both small pellety or very large stools are more difficult to expel than normal stools.

The perception of hard stools or excessive straining is more difficult to assess objectively, and the need for enemas or digital disimpaction is a clinically useful way to corroborate the patient's perceptions of difficult defecation.

Psychosocial or cultural factors may also be important. A person whose parents attached great importance to daily defecation will become greatly concerned when he or she misses a daily bowel movement; some children withhold stool to gain attention or because of fear of pain from anal irritation; and some adults habitually ignore or delay the call to have a bowel movement.

Causes

Pathophysiologically, chronic constipation generally results from inadequate fiber or fluid intake or from disordered colonic transit or anorectal function. These result from neurogastroenterologic disturbance, certain drugs, advancing age, or in association with a large number of systemic diseases that affect the GI tract (Table 40每5). Constipation of recent onset may be a symptom of significant organic disease such as tumor or stricture. In idiopathic constipation, a subset of patients exhibit delayed emptying of the ascending and transverse colon with prolongation of transit (often in the proximal colon) and a reduced frequency of propulsive HAPCs. Outlet obstruction to defecation (also called evacuation disorders) may cause delayed colonic transit, which is usually corrected by biofeedback retraining of the disordered defecation. Constipation of any cause may be exacerbated by hospitalization or chronic illnesses that lead to physical or mental impairment and result in inactivity or physical immobility.

Table 40每5 Causes of Constipation in Adults

 
 
Types of Constipation and Causes Examples 
Recent onset    
  Colonic obstruction Neoplasm; stricture: ischemic, diverticular, inflammatory 
  Anal sphincter spasm Anal fissure, painful hemorrhoids 
  Medications   
Chronic    
  Irritable bowel syndrome Constipation-predominant, alternating 
  Medications Ca2+ blockers, antidepressants
  
  Colonic pseudoobstruction Slow-transit constipation, megacolon (rare Hirschsprung's, Chagas' diseases) 
  Disorders of rectal evacuation Pelvic floor dysfunction; anismus; descending perineum syndrome; rectal mucosal prolapse; rectocele 
  Endocrinopathies Hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, pregnancy 
  Psychiatric disorders Depression, eating disorders, drugs 
  Neurologic disease Parkinsonism, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury 
  Generalized muscle disease Progressive systemic sclerosis 
 

 

Treatment: Constipation

A careful history should explore the patient's symptoms and confirm whether he or she is indeed constipated based on frequency (e.g., fewer than three bowel movements per week), consistency (lumpy/hard), excessive straining, prolonged defecation time, or need to support the perineum or digitate the anorectum. In the vast majority of cases (probably >90%), there is no underlying cause (e.g., cancer, depression, or hypothyroidism), and constipation responds to ample hydration, exercise, and supplementation of dietary fiber (15每25 g/d). A good diet and medication history and attention to psychosocial issues are key. Physical examination and, particularly, a rectal examination should exclude fecal impaction and most of the important diseases that present with constipation and possibly indicate features suggesting an evacuation disorder (e.g., high anal sphincter tone).

The presence of weight loss, rectal bleeding, or anemia with constipation mandates either flexible sigmoidoscopy plus barium enema or colonoscopy alone, particularly in patients >40 years, to exclude structural diseases such as cancer or strictures. Colonoscopy alone is most cost-effective in this setting because it provides an opportunity to biopsy mucosal lesions, perform polypectomy, or dilate strictures. Barium enema has advantages over colonoscopy in the patient with isolated constipation because it is less costly and identifies colonic dilation and all significant mucosal lesions or strictures that are likely to present with constipation. Melanosis coli, or pigmentation of the colon mucosa, indicates the use of anthraquinone laxatives such as cascara or senna; however, this is usually apparent from a careful history. An unexpected disorder such as megacolon or cathartic colon may also be detected by colonic radiographs. Measurement of serum calcium, potassium, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels will identify rare patients with metabolic disorders.

Patients with more troublesome constipation may not respond to fiber alone and may be helped by a bowel-training regimen: taking an osmotic laxative (lactulose, sorbitol, polyethylene glycol) and evacuating with enema or glycerine suppository as needed. After breakfast, a distraction-free 15每20 min on the toilet without straining is encouraged. Excessive straining may lead to development of hemorrhoids, and, if there is weakness of the pelvic floor or injury to the pudendal nerve, may result in obstructed defecation from descending perineum syndrome several years later. Those few who do not benefit from the simple measures delineated above or require long-term treatment with potent laxatives, with the attendant risk of developing laxative abuse syndrome, are assumed to have severe or intractable constipation and should have further investigation (Fig. 40-4). Novel agents that induce secretion (e.g., lubiprostone, a chloride channel activator) are also available.

Figure 40-4

 
 
 
Algorithm for the management of constipation.
 
 

Investigation of Severe Constipation

A small minority (probably <5%) of patients have severe or "intractable" constipation. These are the patients most likely to be seen by gastroenterologists or in referral centers. Further observation of the patient may occasionally reveal a previously unrecognized cause, such as an evacuation disorder, laxative abuse, malingering, or psychological disorder. In these patients, evaluations of the physiologic function of the colon and pelvic floor and of psychological status aid in the rational choice of treatment. Even among these highly selected patients with severe constipation, a cause can be identified in only about two-thirds of tertiary referral patients (see below).

Measurement of Colonic Transit

Radiopaque marker transit tests are easy, repeatable, generally safe, inexpensive, reliable, and highly applicable in evaluating constipated patients in clinical practice. Several validated methods are very simple. For example, radiopaque markers are ingested; an abdominal flat film taken 5 days later should indicate passage of 80% of the markers out of the colon without the use of laxatives or enemas. This test does not provide useful information about the transit profile of the stomach and small bowel.

Radioscintigraphy with a delayed-release capsule containing radiolabeled particles has been used to noninvasively characterize normal, accelerated, or delayed colonic function over 24每48 h with low radiation exposure. This approach simultaneously assesses gastric, small bowel (which may be important in 20% of patients with delayed colonic transit because they reflect a more generalized GI motility disorder), and colonic transit. The disadvantages are the greater cost and the need for specific materials prepared in a nuclear medicine laboratory.

Anorectal and Pelvic Floor Tests

Pelvic floor dysfunction is suggested by the inability to evacuate the rectum, a feeling of persistent rectal fullness, rectal pain, the need to extract stool from the rectum digitally, application of pressure on the posterior wall of the vagina, support of the perineum during straining, and excessive straining. These significant symptoms should be contrasted with the sense of incomplete rectal evacuation, which is common in IBS.

Formal psychological evaluation may identify eating disorders, "control issues," depression, or post-traumatic stress disorders that may respond to cognitive or other intervention and may be important in restoring quality of life to patients who might present with chronic constipation.

A simple clinical test in the office to document a nonrelaxing puborectalis muscle is to have the patient strain to expel the index finger during a digital rectal examination. Motion of the puborectalis posteriorly during straining indicates proper coordination of the pelvic floor muscles.

Measurement of perineal descent is relatively easy to gauge clinically by placing the patient in the left decubitus position and watching the perineum to detect inadequate descent (<1.5 cm, a sign of pelvic floor dysfunction) or perineal ballooning during straining relative to bony landmarks (>4 cm, suggesting excessive perineal descent).

A useful overall test of evacuation is the balloon expulsion test. A balloon-tipped urinary catheter is placed and inflated with 50 mL of water. Normally, a patient can expel it while seated on a toilet or in the left lateral decubitus position. In the lateral position, the weight needed to facilitate expulsion of the balloon is determined; normally, expulsion occurs with <200 g added.

Anorectal manometry, when used in the evaluation of patients with severe constipation, may find an excessively high resting (>80 mmHg) or squeeze anal sphincter tone, suggesting anismus (anal sphincter spasm). This test also identifies rare syndromes, such as adult Hirschsprung's disease, by the absence of the rectoanal inhibitory reflex.

Defecography (a dynamic barium enema including lateral views obtained during barium expulsion) reveals "soft abnormalities" in many patients; the most relevant findings are the measured changes in rectoanal angle, anatomic defects of the rectum such as internal mucosal prolapse, and enteroceles or rectoceles. Surgically remediable conditions are identified in only a few patients. These include severe, whole-thickness intussusception with complete outlet obstruction due to funnel-shaped plugging at the anal canal or an extremely large rectocele that fills preferentially during attempts at defecation instead of expulsion of the barium through the anus. In summary, defecography requires an interested and experienced radiologist, and abnormalities are not pathognomonic for pelvic floor dysfunction. The most common cause of outlet obstruction is failure of the puborectalis muscle to relax; this is not identified by defecography but requires a dynamic study such as proctography. MRI is being developed as an alternative and provides more information about the structure and function of the pelvic floor, distal colorectum, and anal sphincters.

Dynamic imaging studies such as proctography during defecation or scintigraphic expulsion of artificial stool help measure perineal descent and the rectoanal angle during rest, squeezing, and straining, and scintigraphic expulsion quantitates the amount of "artificial stool" emptied. Lack of straightening of the rectoanal angle by at least 15∼ during defecation confirms pelvic floor dysfunction.

Neurologic testing (electromyography) is more helpful in the evaluation of patients with incontinence than of those with symptoms suggesting obstructed defecation. The absence of neurologic signs in the lower extremities suggests that any documented denervation of the puborectalis results from pelvic (e.g., obstetric) injury or from stretching of the pudendal nerve by chronic, long-standing straining. Constipation is common among patients with spinal cord injuries, neurologic diseases such as Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and diabetic neuropathy.

Spinal-evoked responses during electrical rectal stimulation or stimulation of external anal sphincter contraction by applying magnetic stimulation over the lumbosacral cord identify patients with limited sacral neuropathies with sufficient residual nerve conduction to attempt biofeedback training.

In summary, a balloon expulsion test is an important screening test for anorectal dysfunction. If positive, an anatomic evaluation of the rectum or anal sphincters and an assessment of pelvic floor relaxation are the tools for evaluating patients in whom obstructed defecation is suspected.

Treatment: Constipation

After the cause of constipation is characterized, a treatment decision can be made. Slow-transit constipation requires aggressive medical or surgical treatment; anismus or pelvic floor dysfunction usually responds to biofeedback management (Fig. 40-4). However, only 60% of patients with severe constipation are found to have such a physiologic disorder (half with colonic transit delay and half with evacuation disorder). Patients with spinal cord injuries or other neurologic disorders require a dedicated bowel regimen that often includes rectal stimulation, enema therapy, and carefully timed laxative therapy.

Patients with slow-transit constipation are treated with bulk, osmotic, prokinetic, secretory, and stimulant laxatives including fiber, psyllium, milk of magnesia, lactulose, polyethylene glycol (colonic lavage solution), lubiprostone, and bisacodyl. Newer treatment aimed at enhancing motility and secretion may have application in circumstances such as constipation-predominant IBS in females or severe constipation. If a three- to six-month trial of medical therapy fails and patients continue to have documented slow-transit constipation unassociated with obstructed defecation, the patients should be considered for laparoscopiccolectomy with ileorectostomy; however, this should not be undertaken if there is continued evidence of an evacuation disorder or a generalized GI dysmotility. Referral to a specialized center for further tests of colonic motor function is warranted. The decision to resort to surgery is facilitated in the presence of megacolon and megarectum. The complications after surgery include small-bowel obstruction (11%) and fecal soiling, particularly at night during the first postoperative year. Frequency of defecation is 3每8 per day during the first year, dropping to 1每3 per day from the second year after surgery.

Patients who have a combined (evacuation and transit/motility) disorder should pursue pelvic floor retraining (biofeedback and muscle relaxation), psychological counseling, and dietetic advice first, followed by colectomy and ileorectostomy if colonic transit studies do not normalize and symptoms are intractable despite biofeedback and optimized medical therapy. In patients with pelvic floor dysfunction alone, biofeedback training has a 70每80% success rate, measured by the acquisition of comfortable stool habits. Attempts to manage pelvic floor dysfunction with operations (internal anal sphincter or puborectalis muscle division) have achieved only mediocre success and have been largely abandoned.
 
Further Readings

Bartlett JG: Narrative review: The new epidemic of Clostridium difficile每associated enteric disease. Ann Intern Med 145:758, 2006 

 
Binder HJ: Causes of chronic diarrhea. N Engl J Med 355:236, 2006 

 
Camilleri M: Chronic diarrhea: A review on pathophysiology and management for the clinical gastroenterologist. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2:198, 2004 

 
DuPont HL: Clinical practice. Bacterial diarrhea. N Engl J Med 361:1560, 2009 

 
Lembo A, Camilleri M: Chronic constipation. N Engl J Med 349:1360, 2003 

 
Musher DM, Musher BL: Contagious acute gastrointestinal infections. N Engl J Med 351:2417, 2004 

 
Navaneethan U, Giannella RA: Mechanisms of infectious diarrhea. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 5:637, 2008 

 
Riddle MS, et al: Effect of adjunctive loperamide in combination with antibiotics on treatment outcomes in traveler's diarrhea: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 47:1007, 2008 

 
Rostom A, et al: American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute technical review on the diagnosis and management of celiac disease. Gastroenterology 131:1981, 2006 

 
Wald A: Clinical practice. Fecal incontinence in adults. N Engl J Med 356:1648, 2007 

 
Walters JR, et al: A new mechanism for bile acid diarrhea: defective feedback inhibition of bile acid biosynthesis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 7:1189, 2009 

 
Whitehead WE, Bharucha AE: Diagnosis and treatment of pelvic floor disorders: What's new and what to do. Gastroenterology 138:1231, 2010 
 
 

^^
Gastrointestinal Bleeding: Introduction

Bleeding from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract may present in five ways. Hematemesis is vomitus of red blood or "coffee-grounds" material. Melena is black, tarry, foul-smelling stool. Hematochezia is the passage of bright red or maroon blood from the rectum. Occult GI bleeding (GIB) may be identified in the absence of overt bleeding by a fecal occult blood test or the presence of iron deficiency. Finally, patients may present only with symptoms of blood loss or anemia such as lightheadedness, syncope, angina, or dyspnea.

Sources of Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Upper Gastrointestinal Sources of Bleeding

(Table 41-1) The annual incidence of hospital admissions for upper GIB (UGIB) in the United States and Europe is 0.1%, with a mortality rate of 5每10%. Patients rarely die from exsanguination; rather, they die due to decompensation from other underlying illnesses. The mortality rate for patients <60 years in the absence of major concurrent illness is <1%. Independent predictors of rebleeding and death in patients hospitalized with UGIB include increasing age, comorbidities, and hemodynamic compromise (tachycardia or hypotension).

Table 41-1 Sources of Bleeding in Patients Hospitalized for Upper GI Bleeding

 
 
Sources of Bleeding Proportion of Patients, % 
Ulcers 31每67 
Varices 6每39 
Mallory-Weiss tears 2每8 
Gastroduodenal erosions 2每18 
Erosive esophagitis 1每13 
Neoplasm 2每8 
Vascular ectasias 0每6 
No source identified 5每14 
 


Source: Data on hospitalizations from year 2000 onward from Am J Gastroenterol 98:1494, 2003; Gastrointest Endosc 57:AB147, 2003; 60;875, 2004; Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 16:177, 2004; 17:641, 2005; J Clin Gastroenterol 42:128, 2008; World J Gastroenterol 14:5046, 2008; Dig Dis Sci 54:333, 2009.
 

Peptic ulcers are the most common cause of UGIB, accounting for up to 50% of cases; an increasing proportion is due to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), with the prevalence of Helicobacter pylori decreasing. Mallory-Weiss tears account for 5每10% of cases. The proportion of patients bleeding from varices varies widely from 5 to 40%, depending on the population. Hemorrhagic or erosive gastropathy (e.g., due to NSAIDs or alcohol) and erosive esophagitis often cause mild UGIB, but major bleeding is rare.

Peptic Ulcers

In addition to clinical features, characteristics of an ulcer at endoscopy provide important prognostic information. One-third of patients with active bleeding or a nonbleeding visible vessel have further bleeding that requires urgent surgery if they are treated conservatively. These patients clearly benefit from endoscopic therapy with bipolar electrocoagulation; heater probe; injection therapy (e.g., absolute alcohol, 1:10,000 epinephrine); and/or clips with reductions in bleeding, hospital stay, mortality rate, and costs. In contrast, patients with clean-based ulcers have rates of recurrent bleeding approaching zero. If there is no other reason for hospitalization, such patients may be discharged on the first hospital day, following stabilization. Patients without clean-based ulcers should usually remain in the hospital for three days because most episodes of recurrent bleeding occur within three days.

Randomized controlled trials document that a high-dose, constant-infusion IV proton pump inhibitor (PPI) (e.g., omeprazole 80-mg bolus and 8-mg/h infusion), designed to sustain intragastric pH > 6 and enhance clot stability, decreases further bleeding and mortality in patients with high-risk ulcers (active bleeding, nonbleeding visible vessel, adherent clot) when given after endoscopic therapy. Institution of PPI therapy at presentation in all patients with UGIB decreases high-risk ulcer characteristics (e.g., active bleeding) but does not significantly improve outcomes such as further bleeding, transfusions, or mortality as compared to initiating therapy only when high-risk ulcers are identified at the time of endoscopy.

Approximately one-third of patients with bleeding ulcers will rebleed within the next 1每2 years if no preventive strategies are employed. Prevention of recurrent bleeding focuses on the three main factors in ulcer pathogenesis, H. pylori, NSAIDs, and acid. Eradication of H. pylori in patients with bleeding ulcers decreases rates of rebleeding to <5%. If a bleeding ulcer develops in a patient taking NSAIDs, the NSAIDs should be discontinued, if possible. If NSAIDs must be continued or reinstituted, a cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) selective inhibitor (coxib) plus a PPI should be used. PPI co-therapy alone or a coxib alone is associated with an annual rebleeding rate of 10% in patients with a recent bleeding ulcer, while combination of a coxib and PPI provides a further significant decrease in recurrent ulcer bleeding. Patients with cardiovascular disease who develop bleeding ulcers while taking low-dose aspirin should restart aspirin as soon as possible after their bleeding episode (e.g.,  7 days). A randomized trial showed that failure to restart aspirin was associated with a nonsignificant difference in rebleeding (5% vs. 10% at 30 days), but a significant increase in mortality at 30 days (9% vs. 1%) and 8 weeks (13% vs. 1%) as compared to immediate reinstitution of aspirin. Patients with bleeding ulcers unrelated to H. pylori or NSAIDs should remain on full-dose antisecretory therapy indefinitely. Peptic ulcers are discussed in Chap. 293.

Mallory-Weiss Tears

The classic history is vomiting, retching, or coughing preceding hematemesis, especially in an alcoholic patient. Bleeding from these tears, which are usually on the gastric side of the gastroesophageal junction, stops spontaneously in 80每90% of patients and recurs in only 0每7%. Endoscopic therapy is indicated for actively bleeding Mallory-Weiss tears. Angiographic therapy with embolization and operative therapy with oversewing of the tear are rarely required. Mallory-Weiss tears are discussed in Chap. 292.

Esophageal Varices

Patients with variceal hemorrhage have poorer outcomes than patients with other sources of UGIB. Endoscopic therapy for acute bleeding and repeated sessions of endoscopic therapy to eradicate esophageal varices significantly reduce rebleeding and mortality. Ligation is the endoscopic therapy of choice for esophageal varices because it has less rebleeding, a lower mortality rate, fewer local complications, and it requires fewer treatment sessions to achieve variceal eradication than sclerotherapy.

Octreotide (50-g bolus and 50-g/h IV infusion for 2每5 days) further helps in the control of acute bleeding when used in combination with endoscopic therapy. Other vasoactive agents such as somatostatin and terlipressin, available outside the United States, are also effective. Antibiotic therapy (e.g., ceftriaxone) is also recommended for patients with cirrhosis presenting with UGIB because antibiotics decrease bacterial infections and mortality in this population. Over the long term, treatment with nonselective beta blockers decreases recurrent bleeding from esophageal varices. Chronic therapy with beta blockers plus endoscopic ligation is recommended for prevention of recurrent esophageal variceal bleeding.

In patients who have persistent or recurrent bleeding despite endoscopic and medical therapy, more invasive therapy with transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is recommended. Older studies indicate that most patients with TIPS developed shunt stenosis within 1每2 years and required reintervention to maintain shunt patency. The use of coated stents appears to decrease shunt dysfunction by 50% in the first 2 years. A randomized comparison of TIPS (with uncoated stents) and distal splenorenal shunt in Child-Pugh class A or B cirrhotic patients with refractory variceal bleeding revealed no significant difference in rebleeding, encephalopathy, or survival, but had a much higher rate of reintervention with TIPS (82% vs. 11%). Therefore, decompressive surgery may be an option in patients with milder, well-compensated cirrhosis.

Portal hypertension is also responsible for bleeding from gastric varices, varices in the small and large intestine, and portal hypertensive gastropathy and enterocolopathy.

Hemorrhagic and Erosive Gastropathy ("Gastritis")

Hemorrhagic and erosive gastropathy, often labeled gastritis, refers to endoscopically visualized subepithelial hemorrhages and erosions. These are mucosal lesions and, thus, do not cause major bleeding. They develop in various clinical settings, the most important of which are NSAID use, alcohol intake, and stress. Half of patients who chronically ingest NSAIDs have erosions (15每30% have ulcers), while up to 20% of actively drinking alcoholic patients with symptoms of UGIB have evidence of subepithelial hemorrhages or erosions.

Stress-related gastric mucosal injury occurs only in extremely sick patients: those who have experienced serious trauma, major surgery, burns covering more than one-third of the body surface area, major intracranial disease, or severe medical illness (i.e., ventilator dependence, coagulopathy). Significant bleeding probably does not develop unless ulceration occurs. The mortality rate in these patients is quite high because of their serious underlying illnesses.

The incidence of bleeding from stress-related gastric mucosal injury or ulceration has decreased dramatically in recent years, most likely due to better care of critically ill patients. Pharmacologic prophylaxis for bleeding may be considered in the high-risk patients mentioned above. Multiple trials document the efficacy of intravenous H2-receptor antagonist therapy, which is more effective than sucralfate but not superior to a PPI immediate-release suspension given via nasogastric tube. Prophylactic therapy decreases bleeding but does not lower the mortality rate.

Other Causes

Other less frequent causes of UGIB include erosive duodenitis, neoplasms, aortoenteric fistulas, vascular lesions [including hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasias (Osler-Weber-Rendu) and gastric antral vascular ectasia ("watermelon stomach")], Dieulafoy's lesion (in which an aberrant vessel in the mucosa bleeds from a pinpoint mucosal defect), prolapse gastropathy (prolapse of proximal stomach into esophagus with retching, especially in alcoholics), and hemobilia or hemosuccus pancreaticus (bleeding from the bile duct or pancreatic duct).

Small-Intestinal Sources of Bleeding

Small-intestinal sources of bleeding (bleeding from sites beyond the reach of the standard upper endoscope) are difficult to diagnose and are responsible for the majority of cases of obscure GIB. Fortunately, small-intestinal bleeding is uncommon. The most common causes in adults are vascular ectasias, tumors (e.g., adenocarcinoma, leiomyoma, lymphoma, benign polyps, carcinoid, metastases, and lipoma), and NSAID-induced erosions and ulcers. Other less common causes in adults include Crohn's disease, infection, ischemia, vasculitis, small-bowel varices, diverticula, Meckel's diverticulum, duplication cysts, and intussusception.

Meckel's diverticulum is the most common cause of significant lower GIB (LGIB) in children, decreasing in frequency as a cause of bleeding with age. In adults <40每50 years, small-bowel tumors often account for obscure GIB; in patients >50每60 years, vascular ectasias and NSAID-induced lesions are more commonly responsible.

Vascular ectasias should be treated with endoscopic therapy if possible. Surgical therapy can be used for vascular ectasias isolated to a segment of the small intestine when endoscopic therapy is unsuccessful. Although estrogen/progesterone compounds have been used for vascular ectasias, a double-blind trial found no benefit in prevention of recurrent bleeding. Isolated lesions, such as tumors, diverticula, or duplications, are generally treated with surgical resection.

Colonic Sources of Bleeding

The incidence of hospitalizations for LGIB is 20% that for UGIB. Hemorrhoids are probably the most common cause of LGIB; anal fissures also cause minor bleeding and pain. If these local anal processes, which rarely require hospitalization, are excluded, the most common causes of LGIB in adults are diverticula, vascular ectasias (especially in the proximal colon of patients >70 years), neoplasms (primarily adenocarcinoma), and colitis〞most commonly infectious or idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease, but occasionally ischemic or radiation-induced. Uncommon causes include post-polypectomy bleeding, solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, NSAID-induced ulcers or colitis, trauma, varices (most commonly rectal), lymphoid nodular hyperplasia, vasculitis, and aortocolic fistulas. In children and adolescents, the most common colonic causes of significant GIB are inflammatory bowel disease and juvenile polyps.

Diverticular bleeding is abrupt in onset, usually painless, sometimes massive, and often from the right colon; minor and occult bleeding is not characteristic. Clinical reports suggest that bleeding colonic diverticula stop bleeding spontaneously in 80% of patients and rebleed in about 20每25% of patients. Intraarterial vasopressin or embolization by superselective technique should stop bleeding in a majority of patients. If bleeding persists or recurs, segmental surgical resection is indicated.

Bleeding from right colonic vascular ectasias in the elderly may be overt or occult; it tends to be chronic and only occasionally is hemodynamically significant. Endoscopic hemostatic therapy may be useful in the treatment of vascular ectasias, as well as discrete bleeding ulcers and post-polypectomy bleeding, while endoscopic polypectomy, if possible, is used for bleeding colonic polyps. Surgical therapy is generally required for major, persistent, or recurrent bleeding from the wide variety of colonic sources of GIB that cannot be treated medically, angiographically, or endoscopically.

Approach to the Patient: Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Measurement of the heart rate and blood pressure is the best way to initially assess a patient with GIB. Clinically significant bleeding leads to postural changes in heart rate or blood pressure, tachycardia, and, finally, recumbent hypotension. In contrast, the hemoglobin does not fall immediately with acute GIB, due to proportionate reductions in plasma and red cell volumes (i.e., "people bleed whole blood"). Thus, hemoglobin may be normal or only minimally decreased at the initial presentation of a severe bleeding episode. As extravascular fluid enters the vascular space to restore volume, the hemoglobin falls, but this process may take up to 72 h. Patients with slow, chronic GIB may have very low hemoglobin values despite normal blood pressure and heart rate. With the development of iron-deficiency anemia, the mean corpuscular volume will be low and red blood cell distribution width will increase.

Differentiation of Upper from Lower Gib

Hematemesis indicates an upper GI source of bleeding (above the ligament of Treitz). Melena indicates that blood has been present in the GI tract for at least 14 h (and as long as 3每5 days). The more proximal the bleeding site, the more likely melena will occur. Hematochezia usually represents a lower GI source of bleeding, although an upper GI lesion may bleed so briskly that blood does not remain in the bowel long enough for melena to develop. When hematochezia is the presenting symptom of UGIB, it is associated with hemodynamic instability and dropping hemoglobin. Bleeding lesions of the small bowel may present as melena or hematochezia. Other clues to UGIB include hyperactive bowel sounds and an elevated blood urea nitrogen level (due to volume depletion and blood proteins absorbed in the small intestine).

A nonbloody nasogastric aspirate may be seen in up to 18% of patients with UGIB〞usually from a duodenal source. Even a bile-stained appearance does not exclude a bleeding postpyloric lesion because reports of bile in the aspirate are incorrect in 50% of cases. Testing of aspirates that are not grossly bloody for occult blood is not useful.

Diagnostic Evaluation of the Patient with Gib

Upper Gib

(Fig. 41-1) History and physical examination are not usually diagnostic of the source of GIB. Upper endoscopy is the test of choice in patients with UGIB and should be performed urgently in patients who present with hemodynamic instability (hypotension, tachycardia, or postural changes in heart rate or blood pressure). Early endoscopy is also beneficial in cases of milder bleeding for management decisions. Patients with major bleeding and high-risk endoscopic findings (e.g., varices, ulcers with active bleeding or a visible vessel) benefit from endoscopic hemostatic therapy, while patients with low-risk lesions (e.g., clean-based ulcers, nonbleeding Mallory-Weiss tears, erosive or hemorrhagic gastropathy) who have stable vital signs and hemoglobin, and no other medical problems, can be discharged home.

Figure 41-1

 
 
 
Suggested algorithm for patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Recommendations on level of care and time of discharge assume patient is stabilized without further bleeding or other concomitant medical problems. ICU, intensive care unit; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
 
 

Lower Gib

(Fig. 41-2) Patients with hematochezia and hemodynamic instability should have upper endoscopy to rule out an upper GI source before evaluation of the lower GI tract. Patients with presumed LGIB may undergo early sigmoidoscopy for the detection of obvious, low-lying lesions. However, the procedure is difficult with brisk bleeding, and it is usually not possible to identify the area of bleeding. Sigmoidoscopy is useful primarily in patients <40 years with minor bleeding.

Figure 41-2

 
 
 
Suggested algorithm for patients with acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding.*Some suggest colonoscopy for any degree of rectal bleeding in patients <40 years as well. If massive bleeding does not allow time for colonic lavage, proceed to angiography.
 
 

Colonoscopy after an oral lavage solution is the procedure of choice in patients admitted with LGIB unless bleeding is too massive or unless sigmoidoscopy has disclosed an obvious actively bleeding lesion. 99mTc-labeled red cell scan allows repeated imaging for up to 24 h and may identify the general location of bleeding. However, radionuclide scans should be interpreted with caution because results, especially from later images, are highly variable. In active LGIB, angiography can detect the site of bleeding (extravasation of contrast into the gut) and permits treatment with embolization or intraarterial infusion of vasopressin. Even after bleeding has stopped, angiography may identify lesions with abnormal vasculature, such as vascular ectasias or tumors.

Gib of Obscure Origin

Obscure GIB is defined as persistent or recurrent bleeding for which no source has been identified by routine endoscopic and contrast x-ray studies; it may be overt (melena, hematochezia) or occult (iron-deficiency anemia). Current guidelines suggest angiography as the initial test for massive obscure bleeding, and video capsule endoscopy, which allows examination of the entire small intestine, for all others. Push enteroscopy, with a specially designed enteroscope or a pediatric colonoscope to inspect the entire duodenum and part of the jejunum, also may be considered as an initial evaluation. A systematic review of 14 trials comparing push enteroscopy to capsule revealed "clinically significant findings" in 26% and 56% of patients, respectively. However, in contrast to enteroscopy, lack of control of the capsule prevents its manipulation and full visualization of the intestine; in addition, tissue cannot be sampled and therapy cannot be applied.

If capsule endoscopy is positive, management (e.g., enteroscopy, laparoscopy) is dictated by the finding. If capsule is negative, current recommendations suggest patients may be either observed, or if their clinical course mandates (e.g., recurrent bleeding, need for transfusions or hospitalization), undergo further testing. Newer endoscopic techniques (e.g., double-balloon, single-balloon, and spiral enteroscopy) allow the endoscopist to examine, obtain specimens from, and provide therapy to much or all of the small intestine. Newer imaging techniques (CT and MR enterography) are now frequently being used in place of older specialized small-bowel radiographic exams (e.g., enteroclysis). Other tests include 99mTc-labeled red blood cell scintigraphy; angiography, which may be useful even if bleeding has subsided because it may disclose vascular anomalies or tumor vessels; and 99mTc-pertechnetate scintigraphy for diagnosis of Meckel's diverticulum (especially in young patients). When all tests are unrevealing, intraoperative endoscopy is indicated in patients with severe recurrent or persistent bleeding requiring repeated transfusions.

Positive Fecal Occult Blood Test

Fecal occult blood testing is recommended only for colorectal cancer screening and may be used in average-risk adults (beginning at age 50) and in adults with a first-degree relative with colorectal neoplasm at 60 years or two second-degree relatives with colorectal cancer (beginning at age 40). A positive test necessitates colonoscopy. If evaluation of the colon is negative, further workup is not recommended unless iron-deficiency anemia or GI symptoms are present.
 
Further Readings

Barkun AN et al: International consensus recommendations on the management of patients with nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Ann Intern Med 152:101, 2010 

 
Conrad SA et al: Randomized, double-blind comparison of immediate-release omeprazole oral suspension versus intravenous cimetidine for the prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in critically ill patients. Crit Care Med 33:760, 2005 

 
Garcia-Tsao G et al: Prevention and management of gastroesophageal varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol 102:2086, 2007 

 
Henderson JM et al: Distal splenorenal shunt versus transjugular intrahepatic portal systematic shunt for variceal bleeding: A randomized trial. Gastroenterology 130:1643, 2006 

 
Laine L, McQuaid KR: Endoscopic therapy for bleeding ulcers: an evidence-based approach based on meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 7:33, 2009 

 
Raju GS et al: American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute technical review on obscure gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroenterology 133:1697, 2007 

 
Rockall TA et al: Risk assessment after acute upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Gut 38:316, 1996 

 
Sung JJY et al: Continuation of low-dose aspirin in peptic ulcer bleeding. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 152:1, 2010 

 
Triester SL et al: A meta-analysis of the yield of capsule endoscopy compared to other diagnostic modalities in patients with obscure gastrointestinal bleeding. Am J Gastroenterol 100:2407, 2005 
 
 

^^
Jaundice: Introduction

Jaundice, or icterus, is a yellowish discoloration of tissue resulting from the deposition of bilirubin. Tissue deposition of bilirubin occurs only in the presence of serum hyperbilirubinemia and is a sign of either liver disease or, less often, a hemolytic disorder. The degree of serum bilirubin elevation can be estimated by physical examination. Slight increases in serum bilirubin are best detected by examining the sclerae, which have a particular affinity for bilirubin due to their high elastin content. The presence of scleral icterus indicates a serum bilirubin of at least 51 mol/L (3 mg/dL). The ability to detect scleral icterus is made more difficult if the examining room has fluorescent lighting. If the examiner suspects scleral icterus, a second place to examine is underneath the tongue. As serum bilirubin levels rise, the skin will eventually become yellow in light-skinned patients and even green if the process is long-standing; the green color is produced by oxidation of bilirubin to biliverdin.

The differential diagnosis for yellowing of the skin is limited. In addition to jaundice, it includes carotenoderma, the use of the drug quinacrine, and excessive exposure to phenols. Carotenoderma is the yellow color imparted to the skin by the presence of carotene; it occurs in healthy individuals who ingest excessive amounts of vegetables and fruits that contain carotene, such as carrots, leafy vegetables, squash, peaches, and oranges. Unlike jaundice, where the yellow coloration of the skin is uniformly distributed over the body, in carotenoderma, the pigment is concentrated on the palms, soles, forehead, and nasolabial folds. Carotenoderma can be distinguished from jaundice by the sparing of the sclerae. Quinacrine causes a yellow discoloration of the skin in 4每37% of patients treated with it. Unlike carotene, quinacrine can cause discoloration of the sclerae.

Another sensitive indicator of increased serum bilirubin is darkening of the urine, which is due to the renal excretion of conjugated bilirubin. Patients often describe their urine as tea- or cola-colored. Bilirubinuria indicates an elevation of the direct serum bilirubin fraction and, therefore, the presence of liver disease.

Increased serum bilirubin levels occur when an imbalance exists between bilirubin production and clearance. A logical evaluation of the patient who is jaundiced requires an understanding of bilirubin production and metabolism.

Production and Metabolism of Bilirubin

(See also Chap. 303) Bilirubin, a tetrapyrrole pigment, is a breakdown product of heme (ferroprotoporphyrin IX). About 70每80% of the 250每300 mg of bilirubin produced each day is derived from the breakdown of hemoglobin in senescent red blood cells. The remainder comes from prematurely destroyed erythroid cells in bone marrow and from the turnover of hemoproteins such as myoglobin and cytochromes found in tissues throughout the body.

The formation of bilirubin occurs in reticuloendothelial cells, primarily in the spleen and liver. The first reaction, catalyzed by the microsomal enzyme heme oxygenase, oxidatively cleaves the  bridge of the porphyrin group and opens the heme ring. The end products of this reaction are biliverdin, carbon monoxide, and iron. The second reaction, catalyzed by the cytosolic enzyme biliverdin reductase, reduces the central methylene bridge of biliverdin and converts it to bilirubin. Bilirubin formed in the reticuloendothelial cells is virtually insoluble in water. This is due to tight internal hydrogen bonding between the water-soluble moieties of bilirubin, proprionic acid carboxyl groups of one dipyrrolic half of the molecule with the imino and lactam groups of the opposite half. This configuration blocks solvent access to the polar residues of bilirubin and places the hydrophobic residues on the outside. To be transported in blood, bilirubin must be solubilized. This is accomplished by its reversible, noncovalent binding to albumin. Unconjugated bilirubin bound to albumin is transported to the liver, where it, but not the albumin, is taken up by hepatocytes via a process that at least partly involves carrier-mediated membrane transport. No specific bilirubin transporter has yet been identified (Chap. 303, Fig. 303-1).

After entering the hepatocyte, unconjugated bilirubin is bound in the cytosol to a number of proteins including proteins in the glutathione-S-transferase superfamily. These proteins serve both to reduce efflux of bilirubin back into the serum and to present the bilirubin for conjugation. In the endoplasmic reticulum, bilirubin is solubilized by conjugation to glucuronic acid, a process that disrupts the internal hydrogen bonds and yields bilirubin monoglucuronide and diglucuronide. The conjugation of glucuronic acid to bilirubin is catalyzed by bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyl transferase (UDPGT). The now hydrophilic bilirubin conjugates diffuse from the endoplasmic reticulum to the canalicular membrane, where bilirubin monoglucuronide and diglucuronide are actively transported into canalicular bile by an energy-dependent mechanism involving the multiple drug resistance protein 2.

The conjugated bilirubin excreted into bile drains into the duodenum and passes unchanged through the proximal small bowel. Conjugated bilirubin is not taken up by the intestinal mucosa. When the conjugated bilirubin reaches the distal ileum and colon, it is hydrolyzed to unconjugated bilirubin by bacterial -glucuronidases. The unconjugated bilirubin is reduced by normal gut bacteria to form a group of colorless tetrapyrroles called urobilinogens. About 80每90% of these products are excreted in feces, either unchanged or oxidized to orange derivatives called urobilins. The remaining 10每20% of the urobilinogens are passively absorbed, enter the portal venous blood, and are reexcreted by the liver. A small fraction (usually <3 mg/dL) escapes hepatic uptake, filters across the renal glomerulus, and is excreted in urine.

Measurement of Serum Bilirubin

The terms direct and indirect bilirubin, conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin, respectively, are based on the original van den Bergh reaction. This assay, or a variation of it, is still used in most clinical chemistry laboratories to determine the serum bilirubin level. In this assay, bilirubin is exposed to diazotized sulfanilic acid, splitting into two relatively stable dipyrrylmethene azopigments that absorb maximally at 540 nm, allowing for photometric analysis. The direct fraction is that which reacts with diazotized sulfanilic acid in the absence of an accelerator substance such as alcohol. The direct fraction provides an approximate determination of the conjugated bilirubin in serum. The total serum bilirubin is the amount that reacts after the addition of alcohol. The indirect fraction is the difference between the total and the direct bilirubin and provides an estimate of the unconjugated bilirubin in serum.

With the van den Bergh method, the normal serum bilirubin concentration usually is 17 mol/L (<1 mg/dL). Up to 30%, or 5.1 mol/L (0.3 mg/dL), of the total may be direct-reacting (conjugated) bilirubin. Total serum bilirubin concentrations are between 3.4 and 15.4 mol/L (0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL) in 95% of a normal population.

Several new techniques, although less convenient to perform, have added considerably to our understanding of bilirubin metabolism. First, they demonstrate that in normal persons or those with Gilbert's syndrome, almost 100% of the serum bilirubin is unconjugated; <3% is monoconjugated bilirubin. Second, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, the total serum bilirubin concentration measured by these new, more accurate methods is lower than the values found with diazo methods. This suggests that there are diazo-positive compounds distinct from bilirubin in the serum of patients with hepatobiliary disease. Third, these studies indicate that, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, monoglucuronides of bilirubin predominate over the diglucuronides. Fourth, part of the direct-reacting bilirubin fraction includes conjugated bilirubin that is covalently linked to albumin. This albumin-linked bilirubin fraction (delta fraction, or biliprotein) represents an important fraction of total serum bilirubin in patients with cholestasis and hepatobiliary disorders. Albumin-bound conjugated bilirubin is formed in serum when hepatic excretion of bilirubin glucuronides is impaired and the glucuronides are present in serum in increasing amounts. By virtue of its tight binding to albumin, the clearance rate of albumin-bound bilirubin from serum approximates the half-life of albumin, 12每14 days, rather than the short half-life of bilirubin, about 4 hours.

The prolonged half-life of albumin-bound conjugated bilirubin explains two previously unexplained enigmas in jaundiced patients with liver disease: (1) that some patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia do not exhibit bilirubinuria during the recovery phase of their disease because the bilirubin is covalently bound to albumin and therefore not filtered by the renal glomeruli, and (2) that the elevated serum bilirubin level declines more slowly than expected in some patients who otherwise appear to be recovering satisfactorily. Late in the recovery phase of hepatobiliary disorders, all the conjugated bilirubin may be in the albumin-linked form. Its value in serum falls slowly because of the long half-life of albumin.

Measurement of Urine Bilirubin

Unconjugated bilirubin is always bound to albumin in the serum, is not filtered by the kidney, and is not found in the urine. Conjugated bilirubin is filtered at the glomerulus and the majority is reabsorbed by the proximal tubules; a small fraction is excreted in the urine. Any bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin. The presence of bilirubinuria implies the presence of liver disease. A urine dipstick test (Ictotest) gives the same information as fractionation of the serum bilirubin. This test is very accurate. A false-negative test is possible in patients with prolonged cholestasis due to the predominance of conjugated bilirubin covalently bound to albumin.

Approach to the Patient: Bilirubin

The bilirubin present in serum represents a balance between input from production of bilirubin and hepatic/biliary removal of the pigment. Hyperbilirubinemia may result from (1) overproduction of bilirubin; (2) impaired uptake, conjugation, or excretion of bilirubin; or (3) regurgitation of unconjugated or conjugated bilirubin from damaged hepatocytes or bile ducts. An increase in unconjugated bilirubin in serum results from either overproduction, impairment of uptake, or conjugation of bilirubin. An increase in conjugated bilirubin is due to decreased excretion into the bile ductules or backward leakage of the pigment. The initial steps in evaluating the patient with jaundice are to determine (1) whether the hyperbilirubinemia is predominantly conjugated or unconjugated in nature, and (2) whether other biochemical liver tests are abnormal. The thoughtful interpretation of limited data will allow for a rational evaluation of the patient (Fig. 42-1). This discussion will focus solely on the evaluation of the adult patient with jaundice.

Figure 42-1

 
 
 
Evaluation of the patient with jaundice. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AMA, antimitochondrial antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; LKM, liver-kidney microsomal antibody; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis.
 
 

Isolated Elevation of Serum Bilirubin

Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia

The differential diagnosis of an isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is limited (Table 42每1). The critical determination is whether the patient is suffering from a hemolytic process resulting in an overproduction of bilirubin (hemolytic disorders and ineffective erythropoiesis) or from impaired hepatic uptake/conjugation of bilirubin (drug effect or genetic disorders).

Table 42每1 Causes of Isolated Hyperbilirubinemia

 
 
I. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia 
  A. Hemolytic disorders 
    1. Inherited 
       a. Spherocytosis, elliptocytosis Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and pyruvate kinase deficiencies 
       b. Sickle cell anemia 
    2. Acquired 
       a. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias 
       b. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 
       c. Spur cell anemia 
       d. Immune hemolysis 
       e. Parasitic infections 
    1. Malaria 
    2. Babesiosis 
  B. Ineffective erythropoiesis 
    1. Cobalamin, folate, thalassemia, and severe iron deficiencies 
  C. Drugs 
1. Rifampicin, probenecid, ribavirin 
  D. Inherited conditions 
    1. Crigler-Najjar types I and II 
    2. Gilbert's syndrome 
II. Direct hyperbilirubinemia 
  A. Inherited conditions 
    1. Dubin-Johnson syndrome 
    2. Rotor's syndrome 
 

 

Hemolytic disorders that cause excessive heme production may be either inherited or acquired. Inherited disorders include spherocytosis, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, and deficiency of red cell enzymes such as pyruvate kinase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. In these conditions, the serum bilirubin rarely exceeds 86 mol/L (5 mg/dL). Higher levels may occur when there is coexistent renal or hepatocellular dysfunction or in acute hemolysis such as a sickle cell crisis. In evaluating jaundice in patients with chronic hemolysis, it is important to remember the high incidence of pigmented (calcium bilirubinate) gallstones found in these patients, which increases the likelihood of choledocholithiasis as an alternative explanation for hyperbilirubinemia.

Acquired hemolytic disorders include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (e.g., hemolytic-uremic syndrome), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, spur cell anemia, and immune hemolysis and parasitic infections including malaria and babesiosis. Ineffective erythropoiesis occurs in cobalamin, folate, and iron deficiencies.

In the absence of hemolysis, the physician should consider a problem with the hepatic uptake or conjugation of bilirubin. Certain drugs, including rifampicin and probenecid, may cause unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia by diminishing hepatic uptake of bilirubin. Impaired bilirubin conjugation occurs in three genetic conditions: Crigler-Najjar syndrome, types I and II, and Gilbert's syndrome. Crigler-Najjar type I is an exceptionally rare condition found in neonates and characterized by severe jaundice [bilirubin > 342 mol/L (>20 mg/dL)] and neurologic impairment due to kernicterus, frequently leading to death in infancy or childhood. These patients have a complete absence of bilirubin UDPGT activity, usually due to mutations in the critical 3' domain of the UDPGT gene, and are totally unable to conjugate, hence cannot excrete, bilirubin. The only effective treatment is orthotopic liver transplantation. Use of gene therapy and allogeneic hepatocyte infusion are experimental approaches of future promise for this devastating disease.

Crigler-Najjar type II is somewhat more common than type I. Patients live into adulthood with serum bilirubin levels that range from 103每428 mol/L (6每25 mg/dL). In these patients, mutations in the bilirubin UDPGT gene cause reduced but not completely absent activity of the enzyme. Bilirubin UDPGT activity can be induced by the administration of phenobarbital, which can reduce serum bilirubin levels in these patients. Despite marked jaundice, these patients usually survive into adulthood, although they may be susceptible to kernicterus under the stress of intercurrent illness or surgery.

Gilbert's syndrome is also marked by the impaired conjugation of bilirubin due to reduced bilirubin UDPGT activity to approximately 1/3 of normal. Gilbert's syndrome is very common, with a reported incidence of 3每12%. Patients with Gilbert's syndrome have a mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with serum levels almost always <103 mol/L (6 mg/dL). The serum levels may fluctuate, and jaundice is often identified only during periods of fasting. One molecular defect that has been identified in patients with Gilbert's syndrome is in the TATAA element in the 5' promoter region of the bilirubin UDPGT gene upstream of exon 1. This defect alone is not necessarily sufficient for producing the clinical syndrome of Gilbert's as there are patients who are homozygous for this defect yet do not have the levels of hyperbilirubinemia typically seen in Gilbert's syndrome. An enhancer polymorphism that lowers transcriptional activity has been identified. The decrease in transcription caused by both mutations together may be critical for producing the syndrome. Unlike both Crigler-Najjar syndromes, Gilbert's syndrome is very common. The reported incidence is 3每7% of the population with males predominating over females by a ratio of 2每7:1.

Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia

Elevated conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is found in two rare inherited conditions: Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor's syndrome (Table 42每1). Patients with both conditions present with asymptomatic jaundice, typically in the second generation of life. The defect in Dubin-Johnson syndrome is mutations in the gene for multiple drug resistance protein 2. These patients have altered excretion of bilirubin into the bile ducts. Rotor's syndrome seems to be a problem with the hepatic storage of bilirubin. Differentiating between these syndromes is possible, but clinically unnecessary, due to their benign nature.

Elevation of Serum Bilirubin with Other Liver Test Abnormalities

The remainder of this chapter will focus on the evaluation of the patient with a conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the setting of other liver test abnormalities. This group of patients can be divided into those with a primary hepatocellular process and those with intra- or extrahepatic cholestasis. Being able to make this differentiation will guide the physician's evaluation (Fig. 42-1). This differentiation is made on the basis of the history and physical examination as well as the pattern of liver test abnormalities.

History

A complete medical history is perhaps the single most important part of the evaluation of the patient with unexplained jaundice. Important considerations include the use of or exposure to any chemical or medication, either physician-prescribed, over-the-counter, complementary or alternative medicines such as herbal and vitamin preparations, or other drugs such as anabolic steroids. The patient should be carefully questioned about possible parenteral exposures, including transfusions, intravenous and intranasal drug use, tattoos, and sexual activity. Other important questions include recent travel history; exposure to people with jaundice; exposure to possibly contaminated foods; occupational exposure to hepatotoxins; alcohol consumption; the duration of jaundice; and the presence of any accompanying symptoms such as arthralgias, myalgias, rash, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, fever, pruritus, and changes in the urine and stool. While none of these latter symptoms are specific for any one condition, they can suggest a particular diagnosis. A history of arthralgias and myalgias predating jaundice suggests hepatitis, either viral or drug-related. Jaundice associated with the sudden onset of severe right upper quadrant pain and shaking chills suggests choledocholithiasis and ascending cholangitis.

Physical Examination

The general assessment should include assessment of the patient's nutritional status. Temporal and proximal muscle wasting suggests long-standing diseases such as pancreatic cancer or cirrhosis. Stigmata of chronic liver disease, including spider nevi, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, caput medusae, Dupuytren's contractures, parotid gland enlargement, and testicular atrophy are commonly seen in advanced alcoholic (Laennec's) cirrhosis and occasionally in other types of cirrhosis. An enlarged left supraclavicular node (Virchow's node) or periumbilical nodule (Sister Mary Joseph's nodule) suggests an abdominal malignancy. Jugular venous distention, a sign of right-sided heart failure, suggests hepatic congestion. Right pleural effusion, in the absence of clinically apparent ascites, may be seen in advanced cirrhosis.

The abdominal examination should focus on the size and consistency of the liver, whether the spleen is palpable and hence enlarged, and whether there is ascites present. Patients with cirrhosis may have an enlarged left lobe of the liver, which is felt below the xiphoid, and an enlarged spleen. A grossly enlarged nodular liver or an obvious abdominal mass suggests malignancy. An enlarged tender liver could be viral or alcoholic hepatitis; an infiltrative process such as amyloid; or, less often, an acutely congested liver secondary to right-sided heart failure. Severe right upper quadrant tenderness with respiratory arrest on inspiration (Murphy's sign) suggests cholecystitis or, occasionally, ascending cholangitis. Ascites in the presence of jaundice suggests either cirrhosis or malignancy with peritoneal spread.

Laboratory Tests

When the physician encounters a patient with unexplained jaundice, there is a battery of tests that are helpful in the initial evaluation. These include total and direct serum bilirubin with fractionation, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, and prothrombin time tests. Enzyme tests [alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP)] are helpful in differentiating between a hepatocellular process and a cholestatic process (Table 302-1; Fig. 42-1), a critical step in determining what additional workup is indicated. Patients with a hepatocellular process generally have a disproportionate rise in the aminotransferases compared to the ALP. Patients with a cholestatic process have a disproportionate rise in the ALP compared to the aminotransferases. The bilirubin can be prominently elevated in both hepatocellular and cholestatic conditions and, therefore, is not necessarily helpful in differentiating between the two.

In addition to the enzyme tests, all jaundiced patients should have additional blood tests, specifically an albumin level and a prothrombin time, to assess liver function. A low albumin level suggests a chronic process such as cirrhosis or cancer. A normal albumin level is suggestive of a more acute process such as viral hepatitis or choledocholithiasis. An elevated prothrombin time indicates either vitamin K deficiency due to prolonged jaundice and malabsorption of vitamin K or significant hepatocellular dysfunction. The failure of the prothrombin time to correct with parenteral administration of vitamin K indicates severe hepatocellular injury.

The results of the bilirubin, enzyme tests, albumin, and prothrombin time tests will usually indicate whether a jaundiced patient has a hepatocellular or a cholestatic disease, as well as some indication of the duration and severity of the disease. The causes and evaluation of hepatocellular and cholestatic diseases are quite different.

Hepatocellular Conditions

Hepatocellular diseases that can cause jaundice include viral hepatitis, drug or environmental toxicity, alcohol, and end-stage cirrhosis from any cause (Table 42每2). Wilson's disease, once believed to occur primarily in young adults, should be considered in all adults if no other cause of jaundice is found. Autoimmune hepatitis is typically seen in young to middle-aged women but may affect men and women of any age. Alcoholic hepatitis can be differentiated from viral and toxin-related hepatitis by the pattern of the aminotransferases. Patients with alcoholic hepatitis typically have an AST:ALT ratio of at least 2:1. The AST rarely exceeds 300 U/L. Patients with acute viral hepatitis and toxin-related injury severe enough to produce jaundice typically have aminotransferases > 500 U/L, with the ALT greater than or equal to the AST. The degree of aminotransferase elevation can occasionally help in differentiating between hepatocellular and cholestatic processes. While ALT and AST values less than 8 times normal may be seen in either hepatocellular or cholestatic liver disease, values 25 times normal or higher are seen primarily in acute hepatocellular diseases. Patients with jaundice from cirrhosis can have normal or only slight elevations of the aminotransferases.

Table 42每2 Hepatocellular Conditions that May Produce Jaundice

 
 
Viral hepatitis 
  Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E 
  Epstein-Barr virus 
  Cytomegalovirus 
  Herpes simplex 
Alcohol 
Drug toxicity 
  Predictable, dose-dependent (e.g., acetaminophen) 
  Unpredictable, idiosyncratic (e.g., isoniazid) 
Environmental toxins 
  Vinyl chloride 
  Jamaica bush tea〞pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
  Kava Kava 
  Wild mushrooms〞Amanita phalloides or A. verna  
Wilson's disease 
Autoimmune hepatitis 
 

 

When the physician determines that the patient has a hepatocellular disease, appropriate testing for acute viral hepatitis includes a hepatitis A IgM antibody, a hepatitis B surface antigen and core IgM antibody, and a hepatitis C viral RNA test. It can take many weeks for the hepatitis C antibody to become detectable, making it an unreliable test if acute hepatitis C is suspected. Depending on circumstances, studies for hepatitis D and E, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) may be indicated. Ceruloplasmin is the initial screening test for Wilson's disease. Testing for autoimmune hepatitis usually includes an antinuclear antibody and measurement of specific immunoglobulins.

Drug-induced hepatocellular injury can be classified either as predictable or unpredictable. Predictable drug reactions are dose-dependent and affect all patients who ingest a toxic dose of the drug in question. The classic example is acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. Unpredictable or idiosyncratic drug reactions are not dose-dependent and occur in a minority of patients. A great number of drugs can cause idiosyncratic hepatic injury. Environmental toxins are also an important cause of hepatocellular injury. Examples include industrial chemicals such as vinyl chloride, herbal preparations containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Jamaica bush tea) and Kava Kava, and the mushrooms Amanita phalloides or A. verna that contain highly hepatotoxic amatoxins.

Cholestatic Conditions

When the pattern of the liver tests suggests a cholestatic disorder, the next step is to determine whether it is intra- or extrahepatic cholestasis (Fig. 42-1). Distinguishing intrahepatic from extrahepatic cholestasis may be difficult. History, physical examination, and laboratory tests are often not helpful. The next appropriate test is an ultrasound. The ultrasound is inexpensive, does not expose the patient to ionizing radiation, and can detect dilation of the intra- and extrahepatic biliary tree with a high degree of sensitivity and specificity. The absence of biliary dilatation suggests intrahepatic cholestasis, while the presence of biliary dilatation indicates extrahepatic cholestasis. False-negative results occur in patients with partial obstruction of the common bile duct or in patients with cirrhosis or primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) where scarring prevents the intrahepatic ducts from dilating.

Although ultrasonography may indicate extrahepatic cholestasis, it rarely identifies the site or cause of obstruction. The distal common bile duct is a particularly difficult area to visualize by ultrasound because of overlying bowel gas. Appropriate next tests include CT, magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRCP), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). CT scanning and MRCP are better than ultrasonography for assessing the head of the pancreas and for identifying choledocholithiasis in the distal common bile duct, particularly when the ducts are not dilated. ERCP is the "gold standard" for identifying choledocholithiasis. It is performed by introducing a side-viewing endoscope perorally into the duodenum. The ampulla of Vater is visualized, and a catheter is advanced through the ampulla. Injection of dye allows for the visualization of the common bile duct and the pancreatic duct. Beyond its diagnostic capabilities, ERCP allows for therapeutic interventions, including the removal of common bile duct stones and the placement of stents. In patients in whom ERCP is unsuccessful and there is a high likelihood of the need for a therapeutic intervention, transhepatic cholangiography can provide the same information and allow for intervention. MRCP has replaced ERCP as the initial diagnostic test in cases where the need for intervention is felt to be small.

In patients with apparent intrahepatic cholestasis, the diagnosis is often made by serologic testing in combination with percutaneous liver biopsy. The list of possible causes of intrahepatic cholestasis is long and varied (Table 42每3). A number of conditions that typically cause a hepatocellular pattern of injury can also present as a cholestatic variant. Both hepatitis B and C can cause a cholestatic hepatitis (fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis). This disease variant has been reported in patients who have undergone solid organ transplantation. Hepatitis A, alcoholic hepatitis, EBV, and CMV may also present as cholestatic liver disease.

Table 42每3 Cholestatic Conditions that May Produce Jaundice

 
 
I. Intrahepatic 
  A. Viral hepatitis 
    1. Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis〞hepatitis B and C 
    2. Hepatitis A, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus 
  B. Alcoholic hepatitis 
  C. Drug toxicity 
    1. Pure cholestasis〞anabolic and contraceptive steroids 
    2. Cholestatic hepatitis〞chlorpromazine, erythromycin estolate 
    3. Chronic cholestasis〞chlorpromazine and prochlorperazine 
  D. Primary biliary cirrhosis 
  E. Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
  F. Vanishing bile duct syndrome 
    1. Chronic rejection of liver transplants 
    2. Sarcoidosis 
    3. Drugs 
  G. Inherited 
    1. Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 
    2. Benign recurrent cholestasis 
  H. Cholestasis of pregnancy 
  I. Total parenteral nutrition 
  J. Nonhepatobiliary sepsis 
  K. Benign postoperative cholestasis 
  L. Paraneoplastic syndrome 
  M. Venoocclusive disease 
  N. Graft-versus-host disease 
  O. Infiltrative disease 
    1. TB 
    2. Lymphoma 
    3. Amyloid 
  P. Infections 
    1. Malaria 
    2. Leptospirosis 
II. Extrahepatic 
  A. Malignant 
    1. Cholangiocarcinoma 
    2. Pancreatic cancer 
    3. Gallbladder cancer 
    4. Ampullary cancer 
    5. Malignant involvement of the porta hepatis lymph nodes 
  B. Benign 
    1. Choledocholithiasis 
    2. Postoperative biliary structures 
    3. Primary sclerosing cholangitis 
    4. Chronic pancreatitis 
    5. AIDS cholangiopathy 
    6. Mirizzi's syndrome 
    7. Parasitic disease (ascariasis) 
 

 

Drugs may cause intrahepatic cholestasis, a variant of drug-induced hepatitis. Drug-induced cholestasis is usually reversible after eliminating the offending drug, although it may take many months for cholestasis to resolve. Drugs most commonly associated with cholestasis are the anabolic and contraceptive steroids. Cholestatic hepatitis has been reported with chlorpromazine, imipramine, tolbutamide, sulindac, cimetidine, and erythromycin estolate. It also occurs in patients taking trimethoprim; sulfamethoxazole; and penicillin-based antibiotics such as ampicillin, dicloxacillin, and clavulinic acid. Rarely, cholestasis may be chronic and associated with progressive fibrosis despite early discontinuation of the drug. Chronic cholestasis has been associated with chlorpromazine and prochlorperazine.

Primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune disease predominantly of middle-aged women in which there is a progressive destruction of interlobular bile ducts. The diagnosis is made by the presence of the antimitochondrial antibody that is found in 95% of patients. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is characterized by the destruction and fibrosis of larger bile ducts. The disease may involve only the intrahepatic ducts and present as intrahepatic cholestasis. However, in 95% of patients with PSC, both intra- and extrahepatic ducts are involved. The diagnosis of PSC is made by imaging the biliary tree. The pathognomonic findings are multiple strictures of bile ducts with dilatations proximal to the strictures. Approximately 75% of patients with PSC have inflammatory bowel disease.

The vanishing bile duct syndrome and adult bile ductopenia are rare conditions in which there are a decreased number of bile ducts seen in liver biopsy specimens. The histologic picture is similar to that found in primary biliary cirrhosis. This picture is seen in patients who develop chronic rejection after liver transplantation and in those who develop graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. Vanishing bile duct syndrome also occurs in rare cases of sarcoidosis, in patients taking certain drugs including chlorpromazine, and idiopathically.

There are also familial forms of intrahepatic cholestasis. The familial intrahepatic cholestatic syndromes include progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) types 1每3, and benign recurrent cholestasis (BRC). PFIC1 and BRC are autosomal recessive diseases that result from mutations in the ATP8B1 gene that encodes a protein belonging to the subfamily of P-type ATPases; the exact function of this protein remains poorly defined. While PFIC1 is a progressive condition that manifests in childhood, BRC presents later than PFIC1 and is marked by recurrent episodes of jaundice and pruritus; the episodes are self-limited but can be debilitating. PFIC2 is caused by mutations in the ABCB11 gene, which encodes the bile salt export pump, and PFIC3 is caused by mutations in the multidrug-resistant P-glycoprotein 3. Cholestasis of pregnancy occurs in the second and third trimesters and resolves after delivery. Its cause is unknown, but the condition is probably inherited and cholestasis can be triggered by estrogen administration.

Other causes of intrahepatic cholestasis include total parenteral nutrition (TPN); nonhepatobiliary sepsis; benign postoperative cholestasis; and a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with a number of different malignancies, including Hodgkin's disease, medullary thyroid cancer, renal cell cancer, renal sarcoma, T cell lymphoma, prostate cancer, and several gastrointestinal malignancies. The term Stauffer's syndrome has been used for intrahepatic cholestasis specifically associated with renal cell cancer. In patients developing cholestasis in the intensive care unit, the major considerations should be sepsis, shock liver, and TPN jaundice. Jaundice occurring after bone marrow transplantation is most likely due to venoocclusive disease or graft-versus-host disease. Jaundice with associated liver dysfunction can be seen in severe cases of Plasmodium falciparum. The jaundice in these cases is a combination of indirect hyperbilirubinemia from hemolysis and both cholestatic and hepatocellular jaundice. Poor outcomes are seen in these cases when the jaundice is accompanied by encephalopathy and renal failure. Weil's disease, a severe presentation of leptospirosis, is marked by jaundice with renal failure, fever, headache, and muscle pain.

Causes of extrahepatic cholestasis can be split into malignant and benign (Table 42每3). Malignant causes include pancreatic, gallbladder, ampullary, and cholangiocarcinoma. The latter is most commonly associated with PSC and is exceptionally difficult to diagnose because its appearance is often identical to that of PSC. Pancreatic and gallbladder tumors, as well as cholangiocarcinoma, are rarely resectable and have poor prognoses. Ampullary carcinoma has the highest surgical cure rate of all the tumors that present as painless jaundice. Hilar lymphadenopathy due to metastases from other cancers may cause obstruction of the extrahepatic biliary tree.

Choledocholithiasis is the most common cause of extrahepatic cholestasis. The clinical presentation can range from mild right upper quadrant discomfort with only minimal elevations of the enzyme tests to ascending cholangitis with jaundice, sepsis, and circulatory collapse. PSC may occur with clinically important strictures limited to the extrahepatic biliary tree. In cases where there is a dominant stricture, patients can be effectively managed with serial endoscopic dilatations. Chronic pancreatitis rarely causes strictures of the distal common bile duct, where it passes through the head of the pancreas. AIDS cholangiopathy is a condition, usually due to infection of the bile duct epithelium with CMV or cryptosporidia, which has a cholangiographic appearance similar to that of PSC. These patients usually present with greatly elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels (mean, 800 IU/L), but the bilirubin is often near normal. These patients do not typically present with jaundice.

Summary

The goal of this chapter is not to provide an encyclopedic review of all of the conditions that can cause jaundice. Rather, it is intended to provide a framework that helps a physician to evaluate the patient with jaundice in a logical way (Fig. 42-1).

Simply stated, the initial step is to obtain appropriate blood tests to determine if the patient has an isolated elevation of serum bilirubin. If so, is the bilirubin elevation due to an increased unconjugated or conjugated fraction? If the hyperbilirubinemia is accompanied by other liver test abnormalities, is the disorder hepatocellular or cholestatic? If cholestatic, is it intra- or extrahepatic? All of these questions can be answered with a thoughtful history, physical examination, and interpretation of laboratory and radiologic tests and procedures.
 
Further Readings

Bosma PJ: Inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism. J Hepatol 38:107, 2003[PMID: 12480568] 

 
Ferenci P: Wilson's disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 3:726, 2005[PMID: 16233999] 

 
Glasova H, Beuers U: Extrahepatic manifestations of cholestasis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 9:938, 2002 

 
Pratt DS, Kaplan MM: Laboratory tests, in Schiff's Diseases of the Liver, 10th ed, ER Schiff et al (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006 

 
Trauner M et al: Molecular pathogenesis of cholestasis. N Engl J Med 339:1217, 1998[PMID: 9780343] 
 
^^
Abdominal Swelling

Abdominal swelling is a manifestation of numerous diseases. Patients may complain of bloating or abdominal fullness and may note increasing abdominal girth on the basis of increased clothing or belt size. Abdominal discomfort is often reported, but pain is less frequent. When abdominal pain does accompany swelling, it is frequently the result of an intraabdominal infection, peritonitis, or pancreatitis. Patients with abdominal distention from ascites (fluid in the abdomen) may report the new onset of an inguinal or umbilical hernia. Dyspnea may result from pressure against the diaphragm and the inability to expand the lungs fully.

The causes of abdominal swelling can be remembered conveniently by the six Fs: flatus, fat, fluid, fetus, feces, or a "fatal growth" (often a neoplasm).

Flatus

Abdominal swelling may be the result of increased intestinal gas. The normal small intestine contains approximately 200 mL of gas made up of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane. Nitrogen and oxygen are consumed (swallowed), whereas carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane are produced intraluminally by bacterial fermentation. Increased intestinal gas can occur in a number of conditions. Aerophagia, the swallowing of air, can result in increased amounts of oxygen and nitrogen in the small intestine and lead to abdominal swelling. Aerophagia typically results from gulping food; chewing gum; smoking; or as a response to anxiety, which leads to repetitive belching. In some cases, increased intestinal gas is the result of bacterial metabolism of excess fermentable substances such as lactose and other oligosaccharides that can lead to production of hydrogen, carbon dioxide, or methane. In many cases, the precise cause of abdominal distention cannot be determined. In some persons, particularly those with irritable bowel syndrome and bloating, the subjective sense of abdominal pressure is attributable to impaired intestinal transit of gas rather than increased gas volume. Abdominal distention, an objective increase in girth, is the result of a lack of coordination between diaphragmatic contraction and anterior abdominal wall relaxation in response to an increase in intraabdominal volume loads. Occasionally, increased lumbar lordosis accounts for apparent abdominal distention.

Fat

Weight gain with an increase in abdominal fat can result in an increase in abdominal girth and can be perceived as abdominal swelling. Abdominal fat may be the result of an imbalance between calorie intake and energy expenditure associated with a poor diet and sedentary lifestyle and also can be a manifestation of certain diseases such as Cushing's syndrome. Excess abdominal fat has been associated with an increased risk of insulin resistance and cardiovascular disease.

Fluid

Fluid within the abdominal cavity, or ascites, often results in abdominal distention and is discussed in detail below.

Fetus

Pregnancy results in increased abdominal girth. Typically, an increase in abdominal size is first noted at 12 to 14 weeks of gestation, when the uterus moves from the pelvis into the abdomen. Abdominal distention may be seen before this point as a result of fluid retention and relaxation of the abdominal muscles.

Feces

Increased stool in the colon, in the setting of severe constipation or intestinal obstruction, also leads to increased abdominal girth. These conditions often are accompanied by abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting and can be diagnosed by imaging studies.

Fatal Growth

An abdominal mass can result in abdominal swelling. Enlargement of the intraabdominal organs, specifically the liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly) or an abdominal aortic aneurysm, can result in abdominal distention. Bladder distention also may result in abdominal swelling. In addition, malignancies, abscesses, or cysts can grow to sizes that lead to increased abdominal girth.

History and Physical Examination

Determining the etiology of abdominal swelling begins with history-taking and a physical examination. Patients should be questioned regarding symptoms suggestive of malignancy, including weight loss, night sweats, and anorexia. Inability to pass stool or flatus together with nausea or vomiting suggest bowel obstruction, severe constipation, or an ileus (lack of peristalsis). Increased eructation and flatus may point toward aerophagia or increased intestinal production of gas. Patients should be questioned about risk factors for or symptoms of chronic liver disease, including excessive alcohol use and jaundice, which suggest ascites. Patients should also be asked about other symptoms of medical conditions, including heart failure and tuberculosis, which may cause ascites.

Physical examination should assess for signs of systemic disease. The presence of lymphadenopathy, especially supraclavicular lymphadenopathy (Virchow's node), suggests metastatic abdominal malignancy. Care also should be taken during the cardiac examination to evaluate for elevation of jugular venous pressure (JVP); Kussmaul's sign (elevation of the JVP during inspiration); or a pericardial knock, which may be seen in heart failure or constrictive pericarditis, as well as a murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. Spider angiomas, palmar erythema, dilated superficial veins around the umbilicus (caput medusae), and gynecomastia suggest chronic liver disease.

The abdominal examination should begin with inspection for the presence of uneven distention or an obvious mass. Auscultation should follow. The absence of bowel sounds or the presence of high-pitched localized bowel sounds point toward an ileus or intestinal obstruction. An umbilical venous hum may suggest the presence of portal hypertension, and a harsh bruit over the liver is heard rarely in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma or alcoholic hepatitis. Abdominal swelling caused by intestinal gas can be differentiated from swelling caused by fluid or a solid mass by percussion; an abdomen filled with gas is tympanic, whereas an abdomen containing a mass or fluid is dull to percussion. The absence of abdominal dullness, however, does not exclude ascites, because a minimum of 1500 mL of ascites is required for detection on physical examination. Finally, the abdomen should be palpated to assess for tenderness, a mass, enlargement of the spleen or liver, or presence of a nodular liver suggesting cirrhosis or tumor. Light palpation of the liver may detect pulsations suggesting retrograde vascular flow from the heart in patients with right-sided heart failure, particularly tricuspid regurgitation.

Imaging and Laboratory Evaluation

Abdominal x-rays can be used to detect dilated loops of bowel, suggesting intestinal obstruction or ileus. An abdominal ultrasound can detect as little as 100 mL of ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, a nodular liver, or a mass. Ultrasound is often inadequate to detect retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy or a pancreatic lesion because of overlying bowel gas. If malignancy or pancreatic disease is suspected, CT can be performed. CT may also detect changes associated with advanced cirrhosis and portal hypertension (Fig. 43-1).

Figure 43-1

 
 
 
CT of a patient with a cirrhotic, nodular liver (white arrow), splenomegaly (yellow arrow), and ascites (arrowheads).
 
 

Laboratory evaluation should include liver biochemical testing, a serum albumin level, a prothrombin time (international normalized ratio) to assess hepatic function, and a complete blood count to evaluate for the presence of cytopenias that may result from portal hypertension or leukocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytosis that may result from systemic infection. Serum amylase and lipase levels should be checked to evaluate the patient for acute pancreatitis. Urinary protein quantitation is indicated when nephrotic syndrome, which may cause ascites, is suspected.

In selected cases, measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (pressure across the liver between the portal and hepatic veins) can be obtained via cannulation of the hepatic vein to confirm that ascites is caused by cirrhosis (see Chapter 308). In some cases, a liver biopsy may be necessary to confirm cirrhosis.
 
Ascites

Pathogenesis in Cirrhosis

Ascites in patients with cirrhosis is the result of portal hypertension and renal salt and water retention. Portal hypertension signifies elevation of the pressure within the portal vein. According to Ohm's law, pressure is the product of resistance and flow. Increased hepatic resistance occurs by several mechanisms. First, the development of hepatic fibrosis, which defines cirrhosis, disrupts the normal architecture of the hepatic sinusoids and impedes normal blood flow through the liver. Second, activation of hepatic stellate cells, which mediate fibrogenesis, leads to smooth muscle contraction and fibrosis. Finally, cirrhosis is associated with a decrease in endothelial nitric oxide synthetase (eNOS) production, which results in decreased nitric oxide production and increased intrahepatic vasoconstriction.

The development of cirrhosis is also associated with increased systemic circulating levels of nitric oxide (contrary to the decrease seen intrahepatically) as well as increased levels of vascular endothelial growth factor and tumor necrosis factor that result in splanchnic arterial vasodilatation. Vasodilatation of the splanchnic circulation results in pooling of blood and a decrease in the effective circulating volume, which is perceived by the kidneys as hypovolemia. Compensatory vasoconstriction via release of antidiuretic hormone ensues, thereby leading to free water retention and activation of the sympathetic nervous system and renin angiotensin aldosterone system, leading in turn to renal sodium and water retention.

Pathogenesis in the Absence of Cirrhosis

Ascites in the absence of cirrhosis generally results from peritoneal carcinomatosis, peritoneal infection, or pancreatic disease. Peritoneal carcinomatosis can result from primary peritoneal malignancies such as mesothelioma or sarcoma, abdominal malignancies such as gastric or colonic adenocarcinoma, or metastatic disease from breast or lung carcinoma or melanoma (Fig. 43-2). The tumor cells lining the peritoneum produce a protein-rich fluid that contributes to the development of ascites. Fluid from the extracellular space is drawn into the peritoneum, further contributing to the development of ascites. Tuberculous peritonitis causes ascites via a similar mechanism; tubercles deposited on the peritoneum exude a proteinaceous fluid. Pancreatic ascites results from leakage of pancreatic enzymes into the peritoneum.

Figure 43-2

 
 
 
CT of a patient with peritoneal carcinomatosis (white arrow) and ascites (yellow arrow).
 
 

Causes

Cirrhosis accounts for 84% of cases of ascites. Cardiac ascites, peritoneal carcinomatosis, and "mixed" ascites resulting from cirrhosis and a second disease account for 10 to 15% of cases. Less common causes of ascites include massive hepatic metastasis, infection (tuberculosis, Chlamydia), pancreatitis, and renal disease (nephrotic syndrome). Rare causes of ascites include hypothyroidism and familial Mediterranean fever.

Evaluation

Once the presence of ascites has been confirmed, the etiology of the ascites is best determined by paracentesis. Paracentesis is a bedside procedure in which a needle or small catheter is passed transcutaneously to extract ascitic fluid from the peritoneum. The lower quadrants are the most frequent sites for paracentesis. Occasionally, an infraumbilical approach is used. The left lower quadrant is preferred because of the greater depth of ascites and thinner abdominal wall. Paracentesis is a safe procedure even in patients with coagulopathy; complications, including abdominal wall hematomas, hypotension, hepatorenal syndrome, and infection, are infrequent.

Once ascitic fluid has been extracted, its gross appearance should be examined. Turbid fluid can result from infection or tumor cells within the fluid. White, milky fluid indicates the presence of triglycerides in levels >200 mg/dL (and often >1000 mg/dL), which is the hallmark of chylous ascites. Chylous ascites results from lymphatic disruption that may occur with trauma, cirrhosis, tumor, tuberculosis, or certain congenital abnormalities. Dark brown fluid can reflect a high bilirubin concentration and indicates biliary tract perforation. Black fluid may indicate the presence of pancreatic necrosis or metastatic melanoma.

The ascitic fluid should be sent for measurement of the albumin and total protein levels, cell and differential counts, and, if infection is suspected, Gram's stain and culture, with inoculation of the fluid into blood culture bottles at the patient's bedside to maximize the yield. In addition, a serum albumin level should be sent simultaneously to permit calculation of the serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG).

The SAAG is useful for distinguishing ascites caused by portal hypertension from nonportal hypertensive ascites (Fig. 43-3). The SAAG reflects the pressure within the hepatic sinusoids and correlates with the hepatic venous pressure gradient. The SAAG is calculated by subtracting the ascitic albumin from the serum albumin and does not change with diuresis. A SAAG 1.1 g/dL reflects the presence of portal hypertension and indicates that the ascites is from an increased pressure in the hepatic sinusoids. According to Starling's law, a high SAAG reflects the oncotic pressure that counterbalances the portal pressure. Possible causes include cirrhosis, cardiac ascites, sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (venoocclusive disease), massive liver metastasis, or hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome). A SAAG <1.1 g/dL indicates that the ascites is not related to portal hypertension as in tuberculous peritonitis, peritoneal carcinomatosis, or pancreatic ascites.

Figure 43-3

 
 
 
Algorithm for the diagnosis of ascites according to the serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG). IVC, inferior vena cava.
 
 

For high-SAAG ( 1.1) ascites, the ascitic protein level can provide further clues to the etiology (see Fig. 43-3). An ascitic protein level of 2.5 g/dL indicates that the hepatic sinusoids are normal and allows passage of protein into the ascites, as occurs in cardiac ascites, sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, or early Budd-Chiari syndrome. An ascitic protein level <2.5 g/dL indicates that the hepatic sinusoids have been damaged and scarred and no longer allow passage of protein, as occurs with cirrhosis, late Budd-Chiari syndrome, or massive liver metastases. Pro-brain-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a natriuretic hormone released by the heart as a result of increased volume and ventricular wall stretch. High levels of BNP in serum occur in heart failure and may be useful in identifying congestive heart failure as the cause of high-SAAG ascites.

Further tests are indicated only in specific clinical circumstances. When secondary peritonitis resulting from a perforated hollow viscus is suspected, ascitic glucose and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels can be sent. In contrast to "spontaneous" bacterial peritonitis (SBP), which may complicate cirrhotic ascites, secondary peritonitis is suggested by an ascitic glucose level <50 mg/dL, an ascitic LDH greater than the serum LDH level, and multiple pathogens on ascitic fluid culture. When pancreatic ascites is suspected, an ascitic amylase should be measured and is typically >1000 mg/dL. Cytology can be useful in the diagnosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis. At least 50 mL of fluid should be obtained and sent for immediate processing. Tuberculous peritonitis can be difficult to diagnose by paracentesis. A smear for acid-fast bacilli has a sensitivity of only 0 to 3%, and a culture increases the sensitivity for diagnosis to 35 to 50%. In patients without cirrhosis, an elevated ascitic adenosine deaminase level has a sensitivity of more than 90% when a cut-off value of 30 to 45 U/L is used. When the cause of ascites remains uncertain, laparotomy or laparoscopy with peritoneal biopsies for histology and culture remains the gold standard.

Treatment: Ascites

The initial treatment of cirrhotic ascites is restriction of sodium intake to 2 g/d. When sodium restriction alone is inadequate to control ascites, oral diuretics, typically the combination of spironolactone and furosemide, are used. Spironolactone is an aldosterone antagonist that inhibits Na+ resorption in the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney. Use of spironolactone may be limited by hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and painful gynecomastia. If the gynecomastia is distressing, amiloride, 5每40 mg/d, may be substituted for spironolactone. Furosemide is a loop diuretic that is generally combined with spironolactone in a ratio of 40:100; maximal daily doses of spironolactone and furosemide are generally 400 mg and 160 mg, respectively.

Refractory cirrhotic ascites is defined by the persistence of ascites despite sodium restriction and maximal (or maximally tolerated) diuretic use. Refractory ascites can be managed by serial large volume paracentesis (LVP) or a transjugular intrahepatic peritoneal shunt (TIPS), a radiologically placed portosystemic shunt to decompress the hepatic sinusoids. TIPS is superior to LVP in reducing the reaccumulation of ascites but is associated with an increased frequency of hepatic encephalopathy with no difference in mortality rates.

Malignantascites does not respond to sodium restriction or diuretics. Patients must undergo serial LVPs, transcutaneous drainage catheter placement, or, rarely, creation of a peritovenous shunt (a shunt from the abdominal cavity to the vena cava).

Ascites caused by tuberculous peritonitis is treated with standard antituberculosis therapy. Noncirrhotic ascites of other causes is treated by correction of the precipitating condition.

Complications

Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is a common and potentially lethal complication of cirrhotic ascites. SBP also can occasionally complicate ascites caused by nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, acute hepatitis, and acute liver failure but is rare in malignant ascites. Patients with SBP generally note an increase in abdominal girth; however, abdominal tenderness is found in only 40% of patients, and rebound tenderness is rare. Patients may present with fever, nausea, vomiting, or the new onset of or exacerbation of preexisting hepatic encephalopathy.

SBP is defined by a polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) count of 250/mm3 in the ascitic fluid. Ascitic fluid cultures typically reveal one bacterial pathogen. The presence of multiple pathogens in the setting of an elevated ascitic PMN count suggests secondary peritonitis from a ruptured viscus or abscess. The presence of multiple pathogens without an elevated PMN count suggests bowel perforation from the paracentesis needle. SBP is generally the result of enteric bacteria that have translocated across an edematous bowel wall. The most common pathogens are Gram-negative rods, including Escherichia coli and Klebsiella, as well as streptococci and enterococci.

Treatment of SBP with an antibiotic such as intravenous cefotaxime is effective against gram-negative and Gram-positive aerobes. Five days of treatment are sufficient if the patient improves clinically.

Cirrhotic patients with a history of SBP, an ascitic fluid total protein concentration <1 g/dL, or active gastrointestinal bleeding should receive prophylactic antibiotics to prevent SBP; oral norfloxacin is commonly used. Diuresis increases the activity of ascitic fluid protein opsonins and may decrease the risk of SBP.

Hepatic hydrothorax occurs when ascites, often caused by cirrhosis, migrates via fenestrae in the diaphragm into the pleural space and can result in shortness of breath, hypoxia, and infection. Treatment is similar to that of cirrhotic ascites and includes sodium restriction, diuretics, and, if needed, thoracentesis or TIPS placement. Chest tube placement should be avoided.
 
Further Readings

Hoefs JC: Serum protein concentration and portal pressure determine the ascitic fluid protein concentration in patients with chronic liver disease. J Lab Clin Med 102:260, 1983[PMID: 6864073] 

 
Runyon BA: Cardiac ascites: A characterization. J Clin Gastroenterol 10:410, 1988[PMID: 3418089] 

 
〞〞〞: Management of adult patients with ascites due to cirrhosis: An update. Hepatology 49:2087, 2009 

 
〞〞〞, et al: Diuresis increases ascitic fluid opsonic activity in patients who survive spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. J Hepatol 14:249, 1992 

 
〞〞〞, et al: Ascitic fluid analysis in malignancy-related ascites. Hepatology 8:1104, 1988 

 
Sheer TA, et al: Usefulness of serum N-terminal-ProBNP in distinguishing ascites due to cirrhosis from ascites due to heart failure. J Clin Gastroenterol 44:e23, 2010 

 
Simr谷n M: Bloating and abdominal distention: Not so poorly understood anymore! Gastroenterology 136:1487, 2009[PMID: 21596195] 
 
 

^^
Azotemia and Urinary Abnormalities: Introduction

Normal kidney functions occur through numerous cellular processes to maintain body homeostasis. Disturbances in any of those functions can lead to a constellation of abnormalities that may be detrimental to survival. The clinical manifestations of those disorders depend on the pathophysiology of the renal injury and often are identified initially as a complex of symptoms, abnormal physical findings, and laboratory changes that together make possible the identification of specific syndromes. These renal syndromes (Table 44-1) may arise as a consequence of a systemic illness or can occur as a primary renal disease. Nephrologic syndromes usually consist of several elements that reflect the underlying pathologic processes. The duration and severity of the disease affect those findings and typically include one or more of the following: (1) reduction in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (azotemia), (2) abnormalities of urine sediment [red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells, casts, and crystals], (3) abnormal excretion of serum proteins (proteinuria), (4) disturbances in urine volume (oliguria, anuria, polyuria), (5) presence of hypertension and/or expanded total body fluid volume (edema), (6) electrolyte abnormalities, (7) in some syndromes, fever/pain. The combination of these findings should permit identification of one of the major nephrologic syndromes (Table 44-1) and will allow differential diagnoses to be narrowed and the appropriate diagnostic evaluation and therapeutic course to be determined. All these syndromes and their associated diseases are discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters. This chapter focuses on several aspects of renal abnormalities that are critically important for distinguishing among those processes: (1) reduction in GFR leading to azotemia, (2) alterations of the urinary sediment and/or protein excretion, and (3) abnormalities of urinary volume.

Table 44-1 Initial Clinical and Laboratory Data Base for Defining Major Syndromes in Nephrology

 
 
Syndromes Important Clues to Diagnosis Findings That Are Common Location of Discussion of Disease-Causing Syndrome 
Acute or rapidly progressive renal failure Anuria

Oliguria

Documented recent decline in GFR
 Hypertension, hematuria

Proteinuria, pyuria

Casts, edema
 Chaps. 279, 283, 285, 289 
Acute nephritis Hematuria, RBC casts

Azotemia, oliguria

Edema, hypertension
 Proteinuria

Pyuria

Circulatory congestion
 Chap. 283 
Chronic renal failure Azotemia for >3 months

Prolonged symptoms or signs of uremia

Symptoms or signs of renal osteodystrophy

Kidneys reduced in size bilaterally

Broad casts in urinary sediment
 Proteinuria

Casts

Polyuria, nocturia

Edema, hypertension

Electrolyte disorders
 Chaps. 278, 280 
Nephrotic syndrome Proteinuria >3.5 g per 1.73 m2 per 24 h

Hypoalbuminemia

Edema

Hyperlipidemia
 Casts

Lipiduria
 Chap. 283 
Asymptomatic urinary abnormalities Hematuria

Proteinuria (below nephrotic range)

Sterile pyuria, casts
   Chap. 283 
Urinary tract infection/pyelonephritis Bacteriuria >105 colonies per milliliter

Other infectious agent documented in urine

Pyuria, leukocyte casts

Frequency, urgency

Bladder tenderness, flank tenderness
 Hematuria

Mild azotemia

Mild proteinuria

Fever
 Chap. 288 
Renal tubule defects Electrolyte disorders

Polyuria, nocturia

Renal calcification

Large kidneys

Renal transport defects
 Hematuria

"Tubular" proteinuria (<1 g/24 h)

Enuresis
 Chaps. 284, 285 
Hypertension Systolic/diastolic hypertension Proteinuria

Casts

Azotemia
 Chaps. 247, 286 
Nephrolithiasis Previous history of stone passage or removal

Previous history of stone seen by x-ray

Renal colic
 Hematuria

Pyuria

Frequency, urgency
 Chap. 287 
Urinary tract obstruction Azotemia, oliguria, anuria

Polyuria, nocturia, urinary retention

Slowing of urinary stream

Large prostate, large kidneys

Flank tenderness, full bladder after voiding
 Hematuria

Pyuria

Enuresis, dysuria
 Chap. 289 
 


Abbreviations:GFR; glomerular filtration rate; RBC, red blood cell.
 
 
Azotemia

Assessment of Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)

Monitoring the GFR is important in both the hospital and outpatient settings, and several different methodologies are available. GFR is the primary metric for kidney "function," and its direct measurement involves administration of a radioactive isotope (such as inulin or iothalamate) that is filtered at the glomerulus but neither reabsorbed nor secreted throughout the tubule. Clearance of inulin or iothalamate in milliliters per minute equals the GFR and is calculated from the rate of removal from the blood and appearance in the urine over several hours. Direct GFR measurements are frequently available through nuclear radiology departments. In most clinical circumstances direct measurement of GFR is not available, and the serum creatinine level is used as a surrogate to estimate GFR. Serum creatinine is the most widely used marker for GFR, and the GFR is related directly to the urine creatinine excretion and inversely to the serum creatinine (UCr/PCr). Based on this relationship and some important caveats (discussed below), the GFR will fall in roughly inverse proportion to the rise in PCr. Failure to account for GFR reductions in drug dosing can lead to significant morbidity and mortality from drug toxicities (e.g., digoxin, aminoglycosides). In the outpatient setting, the serum creatinine serves as an estimate for GFR (although much less accurate; see below). In patients with chronic progressive renal disease, there is an approximately linear relationship between 1/PCr (y axis) and time (x axis). The slope of that line will remain constant for an individual patient, and when values are obtained that do not fall on the line, an investigation for a superimposed acute process (e.g., volume depletion, drug reaction) should be initiated. Signs and symptoms of uremia develop at significantly different levels of serum creatinine, depending on the patient (size, age, and sex), the underlying renal disease, the existence of concurrent diseases, and true GFR. In general, patients do not develop symptomatic uremia until renal insufficiency is quite severe (GFR <15 mL/min).

A significantly reduced GFR (either acute or chronic) usually is reflected in a rise in serum creatinine and leads to retention of nitrogenous waste products (azotemia) such as urea. Azotemia may result from reduced renal perfusion, intrinsic renal disease, or postrenal processes (ureteral obstruction; see below and Fig. 44-1). Precise determination of GFR is problematic as both commonly measured indices (urea and creatinine) have characteristics that affect their accuracy as markers of clearance. Urea clearance may underestimate GFR significantly because of urea reabsorption by the tubule. In contrast, creatinine is derived from muscle metabolism of creatine, and its generation varies little from day to day.

Figure 44-1

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with azotemia. FeNa, fractional excretion of sodium; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
 
 

Creatinine clearance, an approximation of GFR, is measured from plasma and urinary creatinine excretion rates for a defined time period (usually 24 h) and is expressed in milliliters per minute: CrCl = (Uvol x UCr)/(PCr x Tmin). Creatinine is useful for estimating GFR because it is a small, freely filtered solute that is not reabsorbed by the tubules. Serum creatinine levels can increase acutely from dietary ingestion of cooked meat, however, and creatinine can be secreted into the proximal tubule through an organic cation pathway (especially in advanced progressive chronic kidney disease), leading to overestimation of GFR. When a timed collection for creatinine clearance is not available, decisions about drug dosing must be based on serum creatinine alone. Two formulas are used widely to estimate kidney function from serum creatinine: (1) Cockcroft-Gault and (2) four-variable MDRD (Modification of Diet in Renal Disease).

Cockcroft-Gault: CrCl (mL/min) = (140 每 age (years) x weight (kg) x [0.85 if female])/(72 x sCr (mg/dL)

MDRD: eGFR (mL/min per 1.73 m2) = 186.3 x PCr (e每1.154) x age (e每0.203) x (0.742 if female) x (1.21 if black).

Numerous websites are available for making these calculations (www.kidney.org/professionals/kdoqi/gfr_calculator.cfm). A newer CKD-EPI eGFR was developed by pooling several cohorts with and without kidney disease who had data on directly measured GFR and appears to be more accurate:

CKD-EPI: eGFR = 141 x min (Scr/k, 1)a x max (Scr/k, 1)每1.209 x 0.993Age x 1.018 [if female] x 1.159 [if black]

where Scr is serum creatinine, k is 0.7 for females and 0.9 for males, a is 每0.329 for females and 每0.411 for males, min indicates the minimum of Scr/k or 1, and max indicates the maximum of Scr/k or 1 (http://www.qxmd.com/renal/Calculate-CKD-EPI-GFR.php).

Several limitations of using serum creatinine每based estimating equations must be acknowledged. Each equation, along with the 24-h urine collection for measurement of creatinine clearance, is based on the assumption that the patient is in steady state, without daily increases or decreases in serum creatinine levels as a result of rapidly changing GFR. The MDRD equation has poorer accuracy when GFR >60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. The gradual loss of muscle from chronic illness, chronic use of glucocorticoids, or malnutrition can mask significant changes in GFR with small or imperceptible changes in serum creatinine concentration. Cystatin C is a member of the cystatin superfamily of cysteineprotease inhibitors and is produced at a relatively constant rate from all nucleated cells. Serum cystatin C has been proposed to be a more sensitive marker of early GFR decline than is plasma creatinine; however, like serum creatinine, cystatin C is influenced by age, race, and sex and additionally is associated with diabetes, smoking, and markers of inflammation.

Approach to the Patient: Azotemia

Once it has been established that GFR is reduced, the physician must decide if this represents acute or chronic renal injury. The clinical situation, history, and laboratory data often make this an easy distinction. However, the laboratory abnormalities characteristic of chronic renal failure, including anemia, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia, often are also present in patients presenting with acute renal failure. Radiographic evidence of renal osteodystrophy (Chap. 280) can be seen only in chronic renal failure but is a very late finding, and these patients are usually on dialysis. The urinalysis and renal ultrasound occasionally can facilitate distinguishing acute from chronic renal failure. An approach to the evaluation of azotemic patients is shown in Fig. 44-1. Patients with advanced chronic renal insufficiency often have some proteinuria, nonconcentrated urine (isosthenuria; isoosmotic with plasma), and small kidneys on ultrasound, characterized by increased echogenicity and cortical thinning. Treatment should be directed toward slowing the progression of renal disease and providing symptomatic relief for edema, acidosis, anemia, and hyperphosphatemia, as discussed in Chap. 280. Acute renal failure (Chap. 279) can result from processes that affect renal blood flow (prerenal azotemia), intrinsic renal diseases (affecting small vessels, glomeruli, or tubules), or postrenal processes (obstruction to urine flow in ureters, bladder, or urethra) (Chap. 289).

Prerenal Failure

Decreased renal perfusion accounts for 40每80% of acute renal failure and, if appropriately treated, is readily reversible. The etiologies of prerenal azotemia include any cause of decreased circulating blood volume (gastrointestinal hemorrhage, burns, diarrhea, diuretics), volume sequestration (pancreatitis, peritonitis, rhabdomyolysis), or decreased effective arterial volume (cardiogenic shock, sepsis). Renal perfusion also can be affected by reductions in cardiac output from peripheral vasodilation (sepsis, drugs) or profound renal vasoconstriction [severe heart failure, hepatorenal syndrome, drugs such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)]. True or "effective" arterial hypovolemia leads to a fall in mean arterial pressure, which in turn triggers a series of neural and humoral responses that include activation of the sympathetic nervous and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone systems and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release. GFR is maintained by prostaglandin-mediated relaxation of afferent arterioles and angiotensin II每mediated constriction of efferent arterioles. Once the mean arterial pressure falls below 80 mmHg, there is a steep decline in GFR.

Blockade of prostaglandin production by NSAIDs can result in severe vasoconstriction and acute renal failure. Blocking angiotensin action with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) decreases efferent arteriolar tone and in turn decreases glomerular capillary perfusion pressure. Patients on NSAIDs and/or ACE inhibitors/ARBs are most susceptible to hemodynamically mediated acute renal failure when blood volume is reduced for any reason. Patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis (or stenosis in a solitary kidney) are dependent on efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction for maintenance of glomerular filtration pressure and are particularly susceptible to a precipitous decline in GFR when given ACE inhibitors or ARBs.

Prolonged renal hypoperfusion may lead to acute tubular necrosis (ATN), an intrinsic renal disease that is discussed below. The urinalysis and urinary electrolytes can be useful in distinguishing prerenal azotemia from ATN (Table 44-2). The urine of patients with prerenal azotemia can be predicted from the stimulatory actions of norepinephrine, angiotensin II, ADH, and low tubule fluid flow rate on salt and water reabsorption. In prerenal conditions, the tubules are intact, leading to a concentrated urine (>500 mosmol), avid Na retention (urine Na concentration <20 mM/L, fractional excretion of Na <1%), and UCr/PCr >40 (Table 44-2). The prerenal urine sediment is usually normal or has occasional hyaline and granular casts, whereas the sediment of ATN usually is filled with cellular debris and dark (muddy brown) granular casts.

Table 44-2 Laboratory Findings in Acute Renal Failure

 
 
Index Prerenal Azotemia Oliguric Acute Renal Failure 
BUN/PCr ratio
  >20:1 10-15:1 
Urine sodium (UNa), meq/L
  <20 >40 
Urine osmolality, mosmol/L H2O
  >500 <350 
Fractional excretion of sodium


 <1% >2% 
Urine/plasma creatinine (UCr/PCr)
  >40 <20 
 


Abbreviations:BUN, blood urea nitrogen; PCr, plasma creatinine; PNa, plasma sodium concentration; UCr, urine creatinine concentration; UNa, urine sodium concentration.
 

Postrenal Azotemia

Urinary tract obstruction accounts for <5% of cases of acute renal failure, but it is usually reversible and must be ruled out early in the evaluation (Fig. 44-1). Since a single kidney is capable of adequate clearance, obstructive acute renal failure requires obstruction at the urethra or bladder outlet, bilateral ureteral obstruction, or unilateral obstruction in a patient with a single functioning kidney. Obstruction usually is diagnosed by the presence of ureteral and renal pelvic dilation on renal ultrasound. However, early in the course of obstruction or if the ureters are unable to dilate (e.g., encasement by pelvic tumors or periureteral), the ultrasound examination may be negative. The specific urologic conditions that cause obstruction are discussed in Chap. 289.

Intrinsic Renal Disease

When prerenal and postrenal azotemia have been excluded as etiologies of renal failure, an intrinsic parenchymal renal disease is present. Intrinsic renal disease can arise from processes involving large renal vessels, intrarenal microvasculature and glomeruli, or the tubulointerstitium. Ischemic and toxic ATN account for 90% of cases of acute intrinsic renal failure. As outlined in Fig. 44-1, the clinical setting and urinalysis are helpful in separating the possible etiologies of acute intrinsic renal failure. Prerenal azotemia and ATN are part of a spectrum of renal hypoperfusion; evidence of structural tubule injury is present in ATN, whereas prompt reversibility occurs with prerenal azotemia upon restoration of adequate renal perfusion. Thus, ATN often can be distinguished from prerenal azotemia by urinalysis and urine electrolyte composition (Table 44-2 and Fig. 44-1). Ischemic ATN is observed most frequently in patients who have undergone major surgery, trauma, severe hypovolemia, overwhelming sepsis, or extensive burns. Nephrotoxic ATN complicates the administration of many common medications, usually by inducing a combination of intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct tubule toxicity, and/or tubule obstruction. The kidney is vulnerable to toxic injury by virtue of its rich blood supply (25% of cardiac output) and its ability to concentrate and metabolize toxins. A diligent search for hypotension and nephrotoxins usually will uncover the specific etiology of ATN. Discontinuation of nephrotoxins and stabilization of blood pressure often will suffice without the need for dialysis while the tubules recover. An extensive list of potential drugs and toxins implicated in ATN can be found in Chap. 279.

Processes that involve the tubules and interstitium can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI), a subtype of acute renal failure. These processes include drug-induced interstitial nephritis (especially antibiotics, NSAIDs, and diuretics), severe infections (both bacterial and viral), systemic diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), and infiltrative disorders (e.g., sarcoid, lymphoma, or leukemia). A list of drugs associated with allergic interstitial nephritis can be found in Chap. 285. The urinalysis usually shows mild to moderate proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria (75% of cases) and occasionally shows white blood cell casts. The finding of RBC casts in interstitial nephritis has been reported but should prompt a search for glomerular diseases (Fig. 44-1). Occasionally, renal biopsy will be needed to distinguish among these possibilities. The finding of eosinophils in the urine is suggestive of allergic interstitial nephritis or atheroembolic renal disease and is optimally observed by using a Hansel stain. The absence of eosinophiluria, however, does not exclude these etiologies.

Occlusion of large renal vessels including arteries and veins is an uncommon cause of acute renal failure. A significant reduction in GFR by this mechanism suggests bilateral processes or a unilateral process in a patient with a single functioning kidney. Renal arteries can be occluded with atheroemboli, thromboemboli, in situ thrombosis, aortic dissection, or vasculitis. Atheroembolic renal failure can occur spontaneously but most often is associated with recent aortic instrumentation. The emboli are cholesterol-rich and lodge in medium and small renal arteries, leading to an eosinophil-rich inflammatory reaction. Patients with atheroembolic acute renal failure often have a normal urinalysis, but the urine may contain eosinophils and casts. The diagnosis can be confirmed by renal biopsy, but this is often unnecessary when other stigmata of atheroemboli are present (livedo reticularis, distal peripheral infarcts, eosinophilia). Renal artery thrombosis may lead to mild proteinuria and hematuria, whereas renal vein thrombosis typically induces heavy proteinuria and hematuria. These vascular complications often require angiography for confirmation and are discussed in Chap. 286.

Diseases of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis and vasculitis) and the renal microvasculature (hemolytic-uremic syndromes, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and malignanthypertension) usually present with various combinations of glomerular injury: proteinuria, hematuria, reduced GFR, and alterations of sodium excretion that lead to hypertension, edema, and circulatory congestion (acute nephritic syndrome). These findings may occur as primary renal diseases or as renal manifestations of systemic diseases. The clinical setting and other laboratory data help distinguish primary renal diseases from systemic diseases. The finding of RBC casts in the urine is an indication for early renal biopsy (Fig. 44-1) as the pathologic pattern has important implications for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Hematuria without RBC casts also can be an indication of glomerular disease; this evaluation is summarized in Fig. 44-2. A detailed discussion of glomerulonephritis and diseases of the microvasculature can be found in Chap. 285.

Figure 44-2

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with hematuria. ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASLO, antistreptolysin O; CT, computed tomography; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; IVP, intravenous pyelography; RBC, red blood cell; UA, urinalysis; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; WBC, white blood cell.
 
 

Oliguria and Anuria

Oliguria refers to a 24-h urine output <400 mL, and anuria is the complete absence of urine formation (<100 mL). Anuria can be caused by total urinary tract obstruction, total renal artery or vein occlusion, and shock (manifested by severe hypotension and intense renal vasoconstriction). Cortical necrosis, ATN, and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis occasionally cause anuria. Oliguria can accompany any cause of acute renal failure and carries a more serious prognosis for renal recovery in all conditions except prerenal azotemia. Nonoliguria refers to urine output >400 mL/d in patients with acute or chronic azotemia. With nonoliguric ATN, disturbances of potassium and hydrogen balance are less severe than in oliguric patients, and recovery to normal renal function is usually more rapid.
 
Abnormalities of the Urine

Proteinuria

The evaluation of proteinuria is shown schematically in Fig. 44-3 and typically is initiated after detection of proteinuria by dipstick examination. The dipstick measurement detects only albumin and gives false-positive results when pH >7.0 and the urine is very concentrated or contaminated with blood. Because the dipstick relies on urinary albumin concentration, a very dilute urine may obscure significant proteinuria on dipstick examination. Quantification of urinary albumin on a spot urine sample (ideally from a first morning void) by measuring an albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) is helpful in approximating a 24-h albumin excretion rate (AER) where ACR (mg/g) AER (mg/24 h). Furthermore, proteinuria that is not predominantly albumin will be missed by dipstick screening. This is particularly important for the detection of Bence Jones proteins in the urine of patients with multiple myeloma. Tests to measure total urine protein concentration accurately rely on precipitation with sulfosalicylic or trichloracetic acid (Fig. 44-3).

Figure 44-3

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with proteinuria. Investigation of proteinuria is often initiated by a positive dipstick on routine urinalysis. Conventional dipsticks detect predominantly albumin and provide a semiquantitative assessment (trace, 1+, 2+, or 3+), which is influenced by urinary concentration as reflected by urine specific gravity (minimum <1.005, maximum 1.030). However, more exact determination of proteinuria should employ a spot morning protein/creatinine ratio (mg/g) or a 24-h urine collection (mg/24 h). FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; MPGN, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; RBC, red blood cell.
 
 

The magnitude of proteinuria and the protein composition of the urine depend on the mechanism of renal injury that leads to protein losses. Both charge and size selectivity normally prevent virtually all plasma albumin, globulins, and other high-molecular-weight proteins from crossing the glomerular wall; however, if this barrier is disrupted, plasma proteins may leak into the urine (glomerular proteinuria; Fig. 44-3). Smaller proteins (<20 kDa) are freely filtered but are readily reabsorbed by the proximal tubule. Traditionally, healthy individuals excrete <150 mg/d of total protein and <30 mg/d of albumin. However, even at albuminuria levels <30 mg/d, risk for progression to overt nephropathy or subsequent cardiovascular disease is increased. The remainder of the protein in the urine is secreted by the tubules (Tamm-Horsfall, IgA, and urokinase) or represents small amounts of filtered 2-microglobulin, apoproteins, enzymes, and peptide hormones. Another mechanism of proteinuria occurs when there is excessive production of an abnormal protein that exceeds the capacity of the tubule for reabsorption. This most commonly occurs with plasma cell dyscrasias, such as multiple myeloma, amyloidosis, and lymphomas that are associated with monoclonal production of immunoglobulin light chains.

The normal glomerular endothelial cell forms a barrier composed of pores of 100 nm that retain blood cells but offer little impediment to passage of most proteins. The glomerular basement membrane traps most large proteins (>100 kDa), and the foot processes of epithelial cells (podocytes) cover the urinary side of the glomerular basement membrane and produce a series of narrow channels (slit diaphragms) to allow molecular passage of small solutes and water but not proteins. Some glomerular diseases, such as minimal change disease, cause fusion of glomerular epithelial cell foot processes, resulting in predominantly "selective" (Fig. 44-3) loss of albumin. Other glomerular diseases can present with disruption of the basement membrane and slit diaphragms (e.g., by immune complex deposition), resulting in losses of albumin and other plasma proteins. The fusion of foot processes causes increased pressure across the capillary basement membrane, resulting in areas with larger pore sizes. The combination of increased pressure and larger pores results in significant proteinuria ("nonselective"; Fig. 44-3).

When the total daily excretion of protein is >3.5 g, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema (nephrotic syndrome; Fig. 44-3) are often present as well. However, total daily urinary protein excretion >3.5 g can occur without the other features of the nephrotic syndrome in a variety of other renal diseases (Fig. 44-3). Plasma cell dyscrasias (multiple myeloma) can be associated with large amounts of excreted light chains in the urine, which may not be detected by dipstick. The light chains produced from these disorders are filtered by the glomerulus and overwhelm the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule.. Renal failure from these disorders occurs through a variety of mechanisms, including tubule obstruction (cast nephropathy) and light chain deposition.

Hypoalbuminemia in nephrotic syndrome occurs through excessive urinary losses and increased proximal tubule catabolism of filtered albumin. Edema forms from renal sodium retention and reduced plasma oncotic pressure, which favors fluid movement from capillaries to interstitium. To compensate for the perceived decrease in effective intravascular volume, activation of the renin-angiotensin system, stimulation of ADH, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system occur that promote continued renal salt and water reabsorption and progressive edema. The urinary loss of regulatory proteins and changes in hepatic synthesis contribute to the other manifestations of the nephrotic syndrome. A hypercoagulable state may arise from urinary losses of antithrombin III, reduced serum levels of proteins S and C, hyperfibrinogenemia, and enhanced platelet aggregation. Hypercholesterolemia may be severe and results from increased hepatic lipoprotein synthesis. Loss of immunoglobulins contributes to an increased risk of infection. Many diseases (some listed in Fig. 44-3) and drugs can cause the nephrotic syndrome; a complete list can be found in Chap. 283.

Hematuria, Pyuria, and Casts

Isolated hematuria without proteinuria, other cells, or casts is often indicative of bleeding from the urinary tract. Hematuria is defined as two to five RBCs per high-power field (HPF) and can be detected by dipstick. A false-positive dipstick for hematuria (where no RBCs are seen on urine microscopy) may occur when myoglobinuria is present, often in the setting of rhabdomyolysis. Common causes of isolated hematuria include stones, neoplasms, tuberculosis, trauma, and prostatitis. Gross hematuria with blood clots is usually not an intrinsic renal process; rather, it suggests a postrenal source in the urinary collecting system. Evaluation of patients presenting with microscopic hematuria is outlined in Fig. 44-2. A single urinalysis with hematuria is common and can result from menstruation, viral illness, allergy, exercise, or mild trauma. Persistent or significant hematuria (>3 RBCs/HPF on three urinalyses, a single urinalysis with >100 RBCs, or gross hematuria) is associated with significant renal or urologic lesions in 9.1% of cases. Even patients who are chronically anticoagulated should be investigated as outlined in Fig. 44-2. The suspicion for urogenital neoplasms in patients with isolated painless hematuria and nondysmorphic RBCs increases with age. Neoplasms are rare in the pediatric population, and isolated hematuria is more likely to be "idiopathic" or associated with a congenital anomaly. Hematuria with pyuria and bacteriuria is typical of infection and should be treated with antibiotics after appropriate cultures. Acute cystitis or urethritis in women can cause gross hematuria. Hypercalciuria and hyperuricosuria are also risk factors for unexplained isolated hematuria in both children and adults. In some of these patients (50每60%), reducing calcium and uric acid excretion through dietary interventions can eliminate the microscopic hematuria.

Isolated microscopic hematuria can be a manifestation of glomerular diseases. The RBCs of glomerular origin are often dysmorphic when examined by phase-contrast microscopy. Irregular shapes of RBCs may also result from pH and osmolarity changes produced along the distal nephron. Observer variability in detecting dysmorphic RBCs is common. The most common etiologies of isolated glomerular hematuria are IgA nephropathy, hereditary nephritis, and thin basement membrane disease. IgA nephropathy and hereditary nephritis can lead to episodic gross hematuria. A family history of renal failure is often present in patients with hereditary nephritis, and patients with thin basement membrane disease often have other family members with microscopic hematuria. A renal biopsy is needed for the definitive diagnosis of these disorders, which are discussed in more detail in Chap. 283. Hematuria with dysmorphic RBCs, RBC casts, and protein excretion >500 mg/d is virtually diagnostic of glomerulonephritis. RBC casts form as RBCs that enter the tubule fluid become trapped in a cylindrical mold of gelled Tamm-Horsfall protein. Even in the absence of azotemia, these patients should undergo serologic evaluation and renal biopsy as outlined in Fig. 44-2.

Isolated pyuria is unusual since inflammatory reactions in the kidney or collecting system also are associated with hematuria. The presence of bacteria suggests infection, and white blood cell casts with bacteria are indicative of pyelonephritis. White blood cells and/or white blood cell casts also may be seen in acute glomerulonephritis as well as in tubulointerstitial processes such as interstitial nephritis and transplant rejection. In chronic renal diseases, degenerated cellular casts called waxy casts can be seen in the urine. Broad casts are thought to arise in the dilated tubules of enlarged nephrons that have undergone compensatory hypertrophy in response to reduced renal mass (i.e., chronic renal failure). A mixture of broad casts typically seen with chronic renal failure together with cellular casts and RBCs may be seen in smoldering processes such as chronic glomerulonephritis.
 
Abnormalities of Urine Volume

The volume of urine produced varies with the fluid intake, renal function, and physiologic demands of the individual. See "Azotemia," above, for discussion of decreased (oliguria) or absent urine production (anuria). The physiology of water formation and renal water conservation are discussed in Chap. 278.

Polyuria

By history, it is often difficult for patients to distinguish urinary frequency (often of small volumes) from true polyuria (>3 L/d), and a quantification of volume by 24-h urine collection may be needed (Fig. 44-4). Polyuria results from two potential mechanisms: (1) excretion of nonabsorbable solutes (such as glucose) or (2) excretion of water (usually from a defect in ADH production or renal responsiveness). To distinguish a solute diuresis from a water diuresis and to determine if the diuresis is appropriate for the clinical circumstances, a urine osmolality is measured. The average person excretes between 600 and 800 mosmol of solutes per day, primarily as urea and electrolytes. If the urine output is >3 L/d and the urine is dilute (<250 mosmol/L), total mosmol excretion is normal and a water diuresis is present. This circumstance could arise from polydipsia, inadequate secretion of vasopressin (central diabetes insipidus), or failure of renal tubules to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). If the urine volume is >3 L/d and urine osmolality is >300 mosmol/L, a solute diuresis is clearly present and a search for the responsible solute(s) is mandatory.

Figure 44-4

 
 
 
Approach to the patient with polyuria. ADH, antidiuretic hormone; ATN, acute tubular necrosis.
 
 

Excessive filtration of a poorly reabsorbed solute such as glucose, mannitol, or urea can depress reabsorption of NaCl and water in the proximal tubule and lead to enhanced excretion in the urine. Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus with glucosuria is the most common cause of a solute diuresis, leading to volume depletion and serum hypertonicity. Since the urine sodium concentration is less than that of blood, more water than sodium is lost, causing hypernatremia and hypertonicity. Common iatrogenic solute diuresis occurs from mannitol administration, radiocontrast media, and high-protein feedings (enterally or parenterally), leading to increased urea production and excretion. Less commonly, excessive sodium loss may result from cystic renal diseases or Bartter's syndrome or during the course of a tubulointerstitial process (such as resolving ATN). In these so-called salt-wasting disorders, the tubule damage results in direct impairment of sodium reabsorption and indirectly reduces the responsiveness of the tubule to aldosterone. Usually, the sodium losses are mild, and the obligatory urine output is <2 L/d (resolving ATN and postobstructive diuresis are exceptions and may be associated with significant natriuresis and polyuria).

Formation of large volumes of dilute urine is usually due to polydipsic states or diabetes insipidus. Primary polydipsia can result from habit, psychiatric disorders, neurologic lesions, or medications. During deliberate polydipsia, extracellular fluid volume is normal or expanded and plasma vasopressin levels are reduced because serum osmolality tends to be near the lower limits of normal. Urine osmolality should also be maximally dilute at 50 mosmol/L.

Central diabetes insipidus may be idiopathic in origin or secondary to a variety of hypothalamic conditions, including posthypophysectomy or trauma or neoplastic, inflammatory, vascular, or infectious hypothalamic diseases. Idiopathic central diabetes insipidus is associated with selective destruction of the vasopressin-secreting neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei and can be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait or occur spontaneously. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can occur in a variety of clinical situations, as summarized in Fig. 44-4.

A plasma vasopressin level is recommended as the best method for distinguishing between central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Alternatively, a water deprivation test plus exogenous vasopressin may distinguish primary polydipsia from central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. For a detailed discussion, see Chap. 340.
 
Further Readings

Anderson S et al: Renal and systemic manifestations of glomerular disease, in Brenner & Rector's The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008, pp. 820每838 

 
Israni AK, Kasiske BL: Laboratory assessment of renal disease: Clearance, urinalysis and renal biopsy, in Brenner & Rector's The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008, pp 724每756 

 
Rodrigo E et al: Measurement of renal function in pre-ESRD patients. Kidney Int Suppl 80:11, 2002 [PMID: 11982806] 

 
Sasaki S: Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus: Update of genetic and clinical aspects. Nephrol Dial Transplant 19:1351, 2004 [PMID: 15004257] 

 
Shrier RW et al: Acute renal failure: Definitions, diagnosis, pathogenesis and therapy. J Clin Invest 114:5, 2004 

 
Verbalis JG, Berl T: Disorders of water balance, in Brenner & Rector's The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008, pp 459每504 
 
 

^^
Sodium and Water

Composition of Body Fluids

Water is the most abundant constituent in the body, accounting for 50% of body weight in women and 60% in men. Total body water is distributed in two major compartments: 55每75% is intracellular [intracellular fluid (ICF)], and 25每45% is extracellular [extracellular fluid (ECF)]. ECF is subdivided into intravascular (plasma water) and extravascular (interstitial) spaces in a ratio of 1:3. Fluid movement between the intravascular and interstitial spaces occurs across the capillary wall and is determined by Starling forces, i.e., capillary hydraulic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure. The transcapillary hydraulic pressure gradient exceeds the corresponding oncotic pressure gradient, thus favoring the movement of plasma ultrafiltrate into the extravascular space. The return of fluid into the intravascular compartment occurs via lymphatic flow.

The solute or particle concentration of a fluid is known as its osmolality and is expressed as milliosmoles per kilogram of water (mosmol/kg). Water easily diffuses across most cell membranes to achieve osmotic equilibrium (ECF osmolality = ICF osmolality). Notably, the extracellular and intracellular solute compositions differ considerably owing to the activity of various transporters, channels, and ATP-driven membrane pumps. The major ECF particles are Na+ and its accompanying anions Cl每 and HCO3每, whereas K+ and organic phosphate esters (ATP, creatine phosphate, and phospholipids) are the predominant ICF osmoles. Solutes that are restricted to the ECF or the ICF determine the tonicity or effective osmolality of that compartment. Certain solutes, particularly urea, do not contribute to water shifts across most membranes and are thus known as ineffective osmoles.

Water Balance

Vasopressin secretion, water ingestion, and renal water transport collaborate to maintain human body fluid osmolality between 280 and 295 mosmol/kg. Vasopressin (AVP) is synthesized in magnocellular neurons within the hypothalamus; the distal axons of those neurons project to the posterior pituitary or neurohypophysis, from which AVP is released into the circulation. A network of central osmoreceptor neurons that includes the AVP-expressing magnocellular neurons themselves sense circulating osmolality via nonselective, stretch-activated cation channels. These osmoreceptor neurons are activated or inhibited by modest increases and decreases in circulating osmolality, respectively; activation leads to AVP release and thirst.

AVP secretion is stimulated as systemic osmolality increases above a threshold level of 285 mosmol/kg, above which there is a linear relationship between osmolality and circulating AVP (Fig. 45-1). Thirst and thus water ingestion also are activated at 285 mosmol/kg, beyond which there is an equivalent linear increase in the perceived intensity of thirst as a function of circulating osmolality. Changes in blood volume and blood pressure are also direct stimuli for AVP release and thirst, albeit with a less sensitive response profile. Of perhaps greater clinical relevance to the pathophysiology of water homeostasis, ECF volume strongly modulates the relationship between circulating osmolality and AVP release so that hypovolemia reduces the osmotic threshold and increases the slope of the response curve to osmolality;hypervolemia has the opposite effect, increasing the osmotic threshold and reducing the slope of the response curve (Fig. 45-1). Notably, AVP has a half-life in the circulation of only 10每20 min; thus, changes in extracellular fluid volume and/or circulating osmolality can affect water homeostasis rapidly. In addition to volume status, a number of nonosmotic stimuli have potent activating effects on osmosensitive neurons and AVP release, including nausea, intracerebral angiotensin II, serotonin, and multiple drugs.

Figure 45-1

 
 
 
Circulating levels of vasopressin (AVP) in response to changes in osmolality. Plasma vasopressin becomes detectable in euvolemic, healthy individuals at a threshold of 285 mOsm/Kg, above which there is a linear relationship between osmolality and circulating AVP. The vasopressin response to osmolality is modulated strongly by volume status. The osmotic threshold is thus slightly lower in hypovolemia, with a steeper response curve; hypervolemia reduces the sensitivity of circulating AVP levels to osmolality.
 
 


The excretion or retention of electrolyte-free water by the kidney is modulated by circulating AVP. AVP acts on renal V2-type receptors in the thick ascending limb of Henle and principal cells of the collecting duct (CD), increasing cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and activating protein kinase A (PKA)每dependent phosphorylation of multiple transport proteins. The AVP- and PKA-dependent activation of Na+-Cl每 and K+ transport by the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle (TALH) is a key participant in the countercurrent mechanism (Fig. 45-2). The countercurrent mechanism ultimately increases the interstitial osmolality in the inner medulla of the kidney, driving water absorption across the renal collecting duct. However, water, salt, and solute transport by both proximal and distal nephron segments participates in the renal concentrating mechanism (Fig. 45-2). Water transport across apical and basolateral aquaporin-1 water channels in the descending thin limb of the loop of Henle is thus involved, as is passive absorption of Na+-Cl每 by the thin ascending limb, via apical and basolateral CLC-K1 chloride channels and paracellular Na+ transport. Renal urea transport in turn plays important roles in the generation of the medullary osmotic gradient and the ability to excrete solute-free water under conditions of both high and low protein intake (Fig. 45-2).

Figure 45-2

 
 
 
The renal concentrating mechanism. Water, salt, and solute transport by both proximal and distal nephron segments participates in the renal concentrating mechanism (see text for details). Diagram showing the location of the major transport proteins involved; a loop of Henle is depicted on the left, a collecting duct on the right. UT, urea transporter; AQP, aquaporin; NKCC2, Na-K-2Cl cotransporter; ROMK, renal outer medullary K+ channel; CLC-K1, chloride channel. (From JM Sands: J Am Soc Nephrol 13:2795, 2002; with permission.)
 
 


AVP-induced, PKA-dependent phosphorylation of the aquaporin-2 water channel in principal cells stimulates the insertion of active water channels into the lumen of the collecting duct, resulting in transepithelial water absorption down the medullary osmotic gradient (Fig. 45-3). Under antidiuretic conditions, with increased circulating AVP, the kidney reabsorbs water filtered by the glomerulus, equilibrating the osmolality across the collecting duct epithelium to excrete a hypertonic, concentrated urine (osmolality of up to 1200 mosmol/kg). In the absence of circulating AVP, insertion of aquaporin-2 channels and water absorption across the collecting duct are essentially abolished, resulting in secretion of a hypotonic, dilute urine (osmolality as low as 30每50 mosmol/kg). Abnormalities in this final common pathway are involved in most disorders of water homeostasis, e.g., a reduced or absent insertion of active aquaporin-2 water channels into the membrane of principal cells in diabetes insipidus.

Figure 45-3

 
 
 
Vasopressin and the regulation of water permeability in the renal collecting duct. Vasopressin binds to the type 2 vasopressin receptor (V2R) on the basolateral membrane of principal cells, activates adenylyl cyclase (AC), increases intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphatase (cAMP), and stimulates protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Cytoplasmic vesicles carrying aquaporin-2 (AQP) water channel proteins are inserted into the luminal membrane in response to vasopressin, increasing the water permeability of this membrane. When vasopressin stimulation ends, water channels are retrieved by an endocytic process and water permeability returns to its low basal rate. The AQP3 and AQP4 water channels are expressed on the basolateral membrane and complete the transcellular pathway for water reabsorption. pAQP2 = phosphorylated aquaporin-2. (From JM Sands, DG Bichet: Ann Intern Med 144:186, 2006; with permission.)
 
 

Maintenance of Arterial Circulatory Integrity

Sodium is actively pumped out of cells by the Na+, K+-ATPase membrane pump. In consequence, 85每90% of body Na+ is extracellular, and the extracellular fluid volume (ECFV) is a function of total-body Na+ content. Arterial perfusion and circulatory integrity are, in turn, determined by renal Na+ retention or excretion, in addition to the modulation of systemic arterial resistance. Within the kidney, Na+ is filtered by the glomeruli and then sequentially reabsorbed by the renal tubules. The Na+ cation typically is reabsorbed with the chloride anion (Cl每); thus, chloride homeostasis also affects the ECFV. On a quantitative level, at a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 180 L/d and serum Na+ of 140 mM, the kidney filters some 25,200 mmol/d of Na+. This is equivalent to 1.5 kg of salt, which would occupy roughly 10 times the extracellular space; 99.6% of filtered Na+-Cl每 must be reabsorbed to excrete 100 mM per day. Minute changes in renal Na+-Cl每 excretion will thus have significant effects on the ECFV, leading to edema syndromes or hypovolemia.

Approximately two-thirds of filtered Na+-Cl每 is reabsorbed by the renal proximal tubule via both paracellular and transcellular mechanisms. The TALH subsequently reabsorbs another 25每30% of filtered Na+-Cl每 via the apical, furosemide-sensitive Na+-K+-2Cl每 cotransporter. The adjacent aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron, which encompasses the distal convoluted tubule (DCT), connecting tubule (CNT), and collecting duct, accomplishes the "fine-tuning" of renal Na+-Cl每 excretion. The thiazide-sensitive apical Na+-Cl每 cotransporter (NCC) reabsorbs 5每10% of filtered Na+-Cl每 in the DCT. Principal cells in the CNT and CD reabsorb Na+ via electrogenic, amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC); Cl每 ions are reabsorbed primarily by adjacent intercalated cells via apical Cl每 exchange (Cl每-OH每 and Cl每-HCO3每 exchange, mediated by the SLC26A4 anion exchanger) (Fig. 45-4).

Figure 45-4

 
 
 
Sodium, water, and potassium transport in principal cells (PC) and adjacent -intercalated cells (B-IC). The absorption of Na+ via the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) generates a lumen-negative potential difference that drives K+ excretion through the apical secretory K+ channel ROMK (renal outer medullary K+ channel) and/or the flow-dependent maxi-K channel. Transepithelial Cl每 transport occurs in adjacent -intercalated cells via apical Cl每-HCO3每 and Cl每-OH每 exchange (SLC26A4 anion exchanger, also known as pendrin) basolateral CLC chloride channels. Water is absorbed down the osmotic gradient by principal cells, through the apical aquaporin-2 (AQP-2) and basolateral aquaporin-3 and aquaporin-4 (Fig. 45-3).
 
 


Renal tubular reabsorption of filtered Na+-Cl每 is regulated by multiple circulating and paracrine hormones in addition to the activity of renal nerves. Angiotensin II activates proximal Na+-Cl每 reabsorption, as do adrenergic receptors under the influence of renal sympathetic innervation; locally generated dopamine, in contrast, has a natriuretic effect. Aldosterone primarily activates Na+-Cl每 reabsorption within the aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron. In particular, aldosterone activates the ENaC channel in principal cells, inducing Na+ absorption and promoting K+ excretion (see Fig. 45-4).

Figure 45-5.

 
 
 
The diagnostic approach to hyponatremia. [From S Kumar, T Berl: Diseases of water metabolism, in Atlas of Diseases of the Kidney, RW Schrier (ed). Philadelphia, Current Medicine, Inc, 1999; with permission.]
 
 

Circulatory integrity is critical for the perfusion and function of vital organs. Underfilling of the arterial circulation is sensed by ventricular and vascular pressure receptors, resulting in a neurohumoral activation (increased sympathetic tone, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis, and increased circulating AVP) that synergistically increases renal Na+-Cl每 reabsorption, vascular resistance, and renal water reabsorption. This occurs in the context of decreased cardiac output, as occurs in hypovolemic states, low-output cardiac failure, decreased oncotic pressure, and/or increased capillary permeability. Alternatively, excessive arterial vasodilation results in relative arterial underfilling, leading to neurohumoral activation in the defense of tissue perfusion. These physiologic responses play important roles in many of the disorders discussed in this chapter. In particular, it is important to appreciate that AVP functions in the defense of circulatory integrity, inducing vasoconstriction, increasing sympathetic nervous system tone, increasing renal retention of both water and Na+-Cl每, and modulating the arterial baroreceptor reflex. Most of these responses involve activation of systemic V1A AVP receptors, but concomitant activation of V2 receptors in the kidney can result in renal water retention and hyponatremia.

Hypovolemia

Etiology

True volume depletion, or hypovolemia, generally refers to a state of combined salt and water loss that leads to contraction of the ECFV. The loss of salt and water may be renal or nonrenal in origin.

Renal Causes

Excessive urinary Na+-Cl每 and water loss is a feature of several conditions. A high filtered load of endogenous solutes, such as glucose and urea, can impair tubular reabsorption of Na+-Cl每 and water, leading to an osmotic diuresis. Exogenous mannitol, which often is used to decrease intracerebral pressure, is filtered by glomeruli but not reabsorbed by the proximal tubule, thus causing an osmotic diuresis. Pharmacologic diuretics selectively impair Na+-Cl每 reabsorption at specific sites along the nephron, leading to increased urinary Na+-Cl每 excretion. Other drugs can induce natriuresis as a side effect. For example, acetazolamide can inhibit proximal tubular Na+-Cl每 absorption through its inhibition of carbonic anhydrase; other drugs, such as the antibiotics trimethroprim and pentamidine, inhibit distal tubular Na+ reabsorption through the amiloride-sensitive ENaC channel, leading to urinary Na+-Cl每 loss. Hereditary defects in renal transport proteins also are associated with reduced reabsorption of filtered Na+-Cl每 and/or water. Alternatively, mineralocorticoid deficiency, mineralocorticoid resistance, or inhibition of the mineralocorticoid receptor (MLR) can reduce Na+-Cl每 reabsorption by the aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron. Finally, tubulointerstitial injury, as occurs in interstitial nephritis, acute tubular injury, or obstructive uropathy, can reduce distal tubular Na+-Cl每 and/or water absorption.

Excessive excretion of free water, i.e., water without electrolytes, also can lead to hypovolemia. However, the effect on ECFV is usually less marked in light of the fact that two-thirds of the water volume is lost from the ICF. Excessive renal water excretion occurs in the setting of decreased circulating AVP or renal resistance to AVP (central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, respectively).

Extrarenal Causes

Nonrenal causes of hypovolemia include fluid loss from the gastrointestinal tract, skin, and respiratory system. Accumulations of fluid within specific tissue compartments〞typically the interstitium, peritoneum, or gastrointestinal tract〞also can cause hypovolemia.

Approximately 9 L of fluid enters the gastrointestinal tract daily, 2 L by ingestion and 7 L by secretion; almost 98% of this volume is absorbed so that daily fecal fluid loss is only 100每200 mL. Impaired gastrointestinal reabsorption or enhanced secretion of fluid can cause hypovolemia. Since gastric secretions have a low pH (high H+ concentration), whereas biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal secretions are alkaline (high HCO3每 concentration), vomiting and diarrhea often are accompanied by metabolic alkalosis and acidosis, respectively.

Evaporation of water from the skin and respiratory tract (so-called insensible losses) is the major route for loss of solute-free water, which is typically 500每650 mL/d in healthy adults. This evaporative loss can increase during febrile illness or prolonged heat exposure. Hyperventilation also can increase insensible losses via the respiratory tract, particularly in ventilated patients; the humidity of inspired air is another determining factor. In addition, increased exertion and/or ambient temperature will increase insensible losses via sweat, which is hypotonic to plasma. Profuse sweating without adequate repletion of water and Na+-Cl每 thus can lead to both hypovolemia and hypertonicity. Alternatively, replacement of these insensible losses with a surfeit of free water without adequate replacement of electrolytes may lead to hypovolemic hyponatremia.

Excessive fluid accumulation in interstitial and/or peritoneal spaces also can cause intravascular hypovolemia. Increases in vascular permeability and/or a reduction in oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia) alter Starling forces, resulting in excessive "third spacing" of the ECFV. This occurs in sepsis syndrome, burns, pancreatitis, nutritional hypoalbuminemia, and peritonitis. Alternatively, distributive hypovolemia can result from accumulation of fluid within specific compartments, for example, within the bowel lumen in gastrointestinal obstruction or ileus. Hypovolemia also can occur after extracorporeal hemorrhage or after significant hemorrhage into an expandable space, for example, the retroperitoneum.

Diagnostic Evaluation

A careful history usually determines the etiologic cause of hypovolemia. Symptoms of hypovolemia are nonspecific and include fatigue, weakness, thirst, and postural dizziness; more severe symptoms and signs include oliguria, cyanosis, abdominal and chest pain, and confusion or obtundation. Associated electrolyte disorders may cause additional symptoms, for example, muscle weakness in patients with hypokalemia. On examination, diminished skin turgor and dry oral mucous membranes are less than ideal markers of a decreased ECFV in adult patients; reliable signs of hypovolemia include a decreased jugular venous pressure (JVP), orthostatic tachycardia (an increase of >15每20 beats per minute upon standing), and orthostatic hypotension (a >10每20-mmHg drop in blood pressure on standing). More severe fluid loss leads to hypovolemic shock, with hypotension, tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, and peripheral hypoperfusion; these patients may exhibit peripheral cyanosis, cold extremities, oliguria, and altered mental status.

Routine chemistries may reveal an increase in blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, reflecting a decrease in GFR. Creatinine is the more dependable measure of GFR, since BUN levels may be influenced by an increase in tubular reabsorption (prerenal azotemia), an increase in urea generation in catabolic states, hyperalimentation, or gastrointestinal bleeding and/or a decreased urea generation in decreased protein intake. In hypovolemic shock, liver function tests and cardiac biomarkers may show evidence of hepatic and cardiac ischemia, respectively. Routine chemistries and/or blood gases may reveal evidence of acid-base disorders. For example, bicarbonate loss due to diarrheal illness is a very common cause of metabolic acidosis; alternatively, patients with severe hypovolemic shock may develop lactic acidosis with an elevated anion gap.

The neurohumoral response to hypovolemia stimulates an increase in renal tubular Na+ and water reabsorption. Therefore, the urine Na+ concentration is typically <20 mM in nonrenal causes of hypovolemia, with a urine osmolality of >450 mosmol/kg. The reduction in both GFR and distal tubular Na+ delivery may cause a defect in renal potassium excretion, with an increase in plasma K+ concentration. Of note, patients with hypovolemia and a hypochloremic alkalosis due to vomiting, diarrhea, or diuretics typically have a urine Na+ concentration >20 mM and urine pH >7.0 due to the increase in filtered HCO3每; the urine Cl每 concentration in this setting is a more accurate indicator of volume status, with a level <25 mM suggestive of hypovolemia. The urine Na+ concentration is often >20 mM in patients with renal causes of hypovolemia, such as acute tubular necrosis; similarly, patients with diabetes insipidus will have an inappropriately dilute urine.

Treatment: Hypovolemia

The therapeutic goals in hypovolemia are to restore normovolemia and replace ongoing fluid losses. Mild hypovolemia usually can be treated with oral hydration and resumption of a normal maintenance diet. More severe hypovolemia requires intravenous hydration, with the choice of solution tailored to the underlying pathophysiology. Isotonic, "normal" saline (0.9% NaCl, 154 mM Na+) is the most appropriate resuscitation fluid for normonatremic or hyponatremic patients with severe hypovolemia; colloid solutions such as intravenous albumin are not demonstrably superior for this purpose. Hypernatremic patients should receive a hypotonic solution: 5% dextrose if there has been only water loss (as in diabetes insipidus) or hypotonic saline (1/2 or 1/4 normal saline) if there has been water and Na+-Cl每 loss. Patients with bicarbonate loss and metabolic acidosis, as occurs frequently in diarrhea, should receive intravenous bicarbonate, either an isotonic solution (150 meq of Na+-HCO3每 in 5% dextrose) or a more hypotonic bicarbonate solution in dextrose or dilute saline. Patients with severe hemorrhage or anemia should receive red cell transfusions without increasing the hematocrit beyond 35%.
 
Sodium Disorders

Disorders of serum Na+ concentration are caused by abnormalities in water homeostasis that lead to changes in the relative ratio of Na+ to body water. Water intake and circulating AVP constitute the two key effectors in the defense of serum osmolality; defects in one or both of these defense mechanisms cause most cases of hyponatremia and hypernatremia. In contrast, abnormalities in sodium homeostasis per se lead to a deficit or surplus of whole-body Na+-Cl每 content, a key determinant of the ECFV and circulatory integrity. Notably, volume status also modulates the release of AVP by the posterior pituitary so that hypovolemia is associated with higher circulating levels of the hormone at each level of serum osmolality. Similarly, in hypervolemic causes of arterial underfilling, e.g., heart failure and cirrhosis, the associated neurohumoral activation is associated with an increase in circulating AVP, leading to water retention and hyponatremia. Therefore, a key concept in sodium disorders is that the absolute plasma Na+ concentration tells one nothing about the volume status of a specific patient; this must be taken into account in the diagnostic and therapeutic approach.

Hyponatremia

Hyponatremia, which is defined as a plasma Na+ concentration <135 mM, is a very common disorder, occurring in up to 22% of hospitalized patients. This disorder is almost always the result of an increase in circulating AVP and/or increased renal sensitivity to AVP, combined with any intake of free water; a notable exception is hyponatremia due to low solute intake (see below). The underlying pathophysiology for the exaggerated or inappropriate AVP response differs in patients with hyponatremia as a function of their ECFV. Hyponatremia thus is subdivided diagnostically into three groups, depending on clinical history and volume status: hypovolemic, euvolemic, and hypervolemic (Fig. 45-5).

Hypovolemic Hyponatremia

Hypovolemia causes a marked neurohumoral activation, increasing circulating levels of AVP. The increase in circulating AVP helps preserve blood pressure via vascular and baroreceptor V1A receptors and increases water reabsorption via renal V2 receptors; activation of V2 receptors can lead to hyponatremia in the setting of increased free-water intake. Nonrenal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia include gastrointestinal (GI) loss (vomiting, diarrhea, tube drainage, etc.) and insensible loss (sweating, burns) of Na+-Cl每 and water in the absence of adequate oral replacement; urine Na+ concentration is typically <20 mM. Notably, these patients may be clinically classified as euvolemic, with only the reduced urinary Na+ concentration to indicate the cause of their hyponatremia. Indeed, a urine Na+ concentration <20 mM in the absence of a cause of hypervolemic hyponatremia predicts a rapid increase in plasma Na+ concentration in response to intravenous normal saline; saline induces a water diuresis in this setting, as circulating AVP levels plummet.

The renal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia share an inappropriate loss of Na+-Cl每 in the urine, leading to volume depletion and an increase in circulating AVP; urine Na+ concentration is typically >20 mM (Fig. 45-5). A deficiency in circulating aldosterone and/or its renal effects can lead to hyponatremia in primary adrenal insufficiency and other causes of hypoaldosteronism; hyperkalemia and hyponatremia in a hypotensive and/or hypovolemic patient with high urine Na+ concentration (much >20 mM) should strongly suggest this diagnosis. Salt-losing nephropathies may lead to hyponatremia when sodium intake is reduced due to impaired renal tubular function; typical causes include reflux nephropathy, interstitial nephropathies, post-obstructive uropathy, medullary cystic disease, and the recovery phase of acute tubular necrosis. Thiazide diuretics cause hyponatremia via a number of mechanisms, including polydipsia and diuretic-induced volume depletion. Notably, thiazides do not inhibit the renal concentrating mechanism so that circulating AVP has a maximal effect on renal water retention. In contrast, loop diuretics, which are associated less frequently with hyponatremia, inhibit Na+-Cl每 and K+ absorption by the TALH, blunting the countercurrent mechanism and reducing the ability to concentrate the urine. Increased excretion of an osmotically active nonreabsorbable or poorly reabsorbable solute also can lead to volume depletion and hyponatremia; important causes include glycosuria, ketonuria (e.g., in starvation or in diabetic or alcoholic ketoacidosis), and bicarbonaturia (e.g., in renal tubular acidosis or metabolic alkalosis, in which the associated bicarbonaturia leads to loss of Na+).

Finally, the syndrome of "cerebral salt wasting" is a rare cause of hypovolemic hyponatremia, encompassing hyponatremia with clinical hypovolemia and inappropriate natriuresis in association with intracranial disease; associated disorders include subarachnoid hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, craniotomy, encephalitis, and meningitis. Distinction from the more common syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD) is critical, since cerebral salt wasting typically responds to aggressive Na+-Cl每 repletion.

Hypervolemic Hyponatremia

Patients with hypervolemic hyponatremia develop an increase in total body Na+-Cl每 that is accompanied by a proportionately greater increase in total body water, leading to a reduced plasma Na+ concentration. As in hypovolemic hyponatremia, the causative disorders can be separated by the effect on urine Na+ concentration, with acute or chronic renal failure uniquely associated with an increase in urine Na+ concentration (Fig. 45-5). The pathophysiology of hyponatremia in the sodium-avid edematous disorders [congestive heart failure (CHF), cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome] is similar to that in hypovolemic hyponatremia except that arterial filling and circulatory integrity are decreased due to the specific etiologic factors, e.g., cardiac dysfunction in CHF and peripheral vasodilation in cirrhosis. Urine Na+ concentration is typically very low, i.e., <10 mM, even after hydration with normal saline; this Na+-avid state may be obscured by diuretic therapy. The degree of hyponatremia provides an indirect index of the associated neurohumoral activation and is an important prognostic indicator in hypervolemic hyponatremia.

Euvolemic Hyponatremia

Euvolemic hyponatremia can occur in moderate to severe hypothyroidism, with correction after the achievement of a euthyroid state. Severe hyponatremia also can be a consequence of secondary adrenal insufficiency due to pituitary disease; whereas the deficit in circulating aldosterone in primary adrenal insufficiency causes hypovolemic hyponatremia, the predominant glucocorticoid deficiency in secondary adrenal failure is associated with euvolemic hyponatremia. Glucocorticoids exert a negative feedback on AVP release by the posterior pituitary so that hydrocortisone replacement in these patients will rapidly normalize the AVP response to osmolality, reducing circulating AVP.

The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis is the most common cause of euvolemic hyponatremia (Table 45-1). The generation of hyponatremia in SIAD requires an intake of free water, with persistent intake at serum osmolalities that are lower than the usual threshold for thirst; as one would expect, the osmotic threshold and osmotic response curves for the sensation of thirst are shifted downward in patients with SIAD. Four distinct patterns of AVP secretion have been recognized in patients with SIAD, independent for the most part of the underlying cause. Unregulated, erratic AVP secretion is seen in about a third of patients, with no obvious correlation between serum osmolality and circulating AVP levels. Other patients fail to suppress AVP secretion at lower serum osmolalities, with a normal response curve to hyperosmolar conditions; others have a reset osmostat, with a lower threshold osmolality and a left-shifted osmotic response curve. The fourth subset consists of patients who have essentially no detectable circulating AVP, suggesting either a gain in function in renal water reabsorption or a circulating antidiuretic substance that is distinct from AVP. Gain-in-function mutations of a single specific residue in the V2 vasopressin receptor have been described in some of these patients, leading to constitutive activation of the receptor in the absence of AVP and a nephrogenic subset of SIAD.

Table 45-1 Causes of the Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuresis

 
 
Malignant Diseases Pulmonary Disorders Disorders of the Central Nervous System Drugs Other Causes 
Carcinoma

Lung

Small cell

Mesothelioma

Oropharynx

Gastrointestinal tract

Stomach

Duodenum

Pancreas

Genitourinary tract

Ureter

Bladder

Prostate

Endometrium

Endocrine thymoma

Lymphomas

Sarcomas

Ewing's sarcoma
 Infections

Bacterial pneumonia

Viral pneumonia

Pulmonary abscess

Tuberculosis

Aspergillosis

Asthma

Cystic fibrosis

Respiratory failure associated with positive-pressure breathing
 Infection

Encephalitis

Meningitis

Brain abscess

Rocky Mountain spotted fever

AIDS

Bleeding and masses

Subdural hematoma

Subarachnoid hemorrhage

Cerebrovascular accident

Brain tumors

Head trauma

Hydrocephalus

Cavernous sinus

thrombosis

Other

Multiple sclerosis

Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome

Shy-Drager syndrome

Delerium tremens

Acute intermittent polyphyria
 Drugs that stimulate release of AVP or enhance its action

Chlorpropamide

SSRIs

Tricyclic antidepressants

Clofibrate

Carbamazepine

Vincristine

Nicotine

Narcotics

Antipsychotic drugs

Ifosfamide

Cyclophosphamide

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

MDMA (ecstasy)

AVP analogues

Desmopressin

Oxytocin

Vasopressin
 Hereditary (gain-of-function mutations in the vasopressin V2 receptor)

Idiopathic

Transient

Endurance exercise

General anesthesia

Nausea

Pain

Stress
 
 


Abbreviations:AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; AVP, vasopressin; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. 

Source: From Ellison and Berl.
 

Strictly speaking, patients with SIAD are not euvolemic but are subclinically volume expanded due to AVP-induced water and Na+-Cl每 retention; vasopressin escape mechanisms invoked by sustained increases in AVP serve to limit distal renal tubular transport, preserving a modestly hypervolemic steady state. Serum uric acid is often low (<4 mg/dL) in patients with SIAD, consistent with suppressed proximal tubular transport in the setting of increased distal tubular Na+-Cl每 and water transport; in contrast, patients with hypovolemic hyponatremia are often hyperuricemic due to a shared activation of proximal tubular Na+-Cl每 and urate transport.

Common causes of SIAD include pulmonary disease (pneumonia, tuberculosis, pleural effusion, etc.) and central nervous system (CNS) diseases (tumor, subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, etc.). SIAD also occurs with malignancies, most commonly with small cell lung carcinoma (75% of cases of malignancy-associated SIAD); 10% of patients with this tumor will have a plasma Na+ concentration <130 mM at presentation. SIAD is also a common complication of certain drugs, most commonly the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Other drugs can potentiate the renal effect of AVP without exerting direct effects on circulating AVP levels (Table 45-1).

Low Solute Intake and Hyponatremia

Hyponatremia occasionally can occur in patients with a very low intake of dietary solutes. Classically, this occurs in alcoholics whose sole nutrient is beer, hence the diagnostic label "beer potomania"; beer is very low in protein and salt content, containing only1每2 millimole per liter of Na+. The syndrome also has been described in nonalcoholic patients with highly restricted solute intake due to nutrient-restricted diets, e.g., extreme vegetarian diets. Patients with hyponatremia due to low solute intake typically present with a very low urine osmolality, <100每200 mosmol/kg, with a urine Na+ concentration that is <10每20 mM. The fundamental abnormality is the inadequate dietary intake of solutes; the reduced urinary solute excretion limits water excretion so that hyponatremia ensues after relatively modest polydipsia. The ability to excrete a free-water load is thus a function of urinary solute excretion; at a urine osmolality of 80 mosmol/kg, free-water clearance is 2.7 L daily for a solute excretion of 300 mosmol/d, 5.4 L daily at 600 mosmol/d, and 8.1 L at 900 mosmol/d. AVP levels have not been reported in patients with beer potomania but are expected to be suppressed or rapidly suppressible with saline hydration; this fits with the overly rapid correction in plasma Na+ concentration that can be seen with saline hydration. Resumption of a normal diet and/or saline hydration also will correct the causative deficit in urinary solute excretion so that patients with beer potomania typically correct their plasma Na+ concentration promptly after admission to the hospital.

Clinical Features of Hyponatremia

Hyponatremia induces generalized cellular swelling, a consequence of water movement down the osmotic gradient from the hypotonic ECF to the ICF. The symptoms of hyponatremia are primarily neurologic, reflecting the development of cerebral edema within a rigid skull. The initial CNS response to acute hyponatremia is an increase in interstitial pressure, leading to shunting of ECF and solutes from the interstitial space into the cerebrospinal fluid and then into the systemic circulation. This is accompanied by an efflux of the major intracellular ions, Na+, K+, and Cl每, from brain cells. Acute hyponatremic encephalopathy ensues when these volume regulatory mechanisms are overwhelmed by a rapid decrease in tonicity, resulting in acute cerebral edema. Early symptoms can include nausea, headache, and vomiting. However, severe complications can evolve rapidly, including seizure activity, brainstem herniation, coma, and death. A key complication of acute hyponatremia is normocapnic or hypercapnic respiratory failure; the associated hypoxemia may amplify the neurologic injury. Normocapnic respiratory failure in this setting typically is due to noncardiogenic, neurogenic pulmonary edema, with a normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.

Acute symptomatic hyponatremia is a medical emergency that occurs in a number of specific settings (Table 45-2). Women, particularly before menopause, are much more likely to develop encephalopathy and severe neurologic sequelae. Acute hyponatremia often has an iatrogenic component, e.g., when hypotonic intravenous fluids are given to postoperative patients with an increase in circulating AVP. Exercise-associated hyponatremia, an important clinical issue at marathons and other endurance events, similarly has been linked to both a nonosmotic increase in circulating AVP and excessive free-water intake. The recreational drug ecstasy (MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine) causes a rapid and potent induction of both thirst and AVP, leading to severe acute hyponatremia.

Table 45-2 Causes of Acute Hyponatremia

 
 
Iatrogenic 
  Postoperative: premenopausal women 
  Hypotonic fluids with cause of  vasopressin 
  Glycine irrigation: TURP, uterine surgery 
  Colonoscopy preparation 
  Recent institution of thiazides 
Polydipsia 
MDMA ingestion 
Exercise-induced 
Multifactorial, e.g., thiazide and polydipsia 
 


Abbreviations: MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); TURP, transurethral resection of the prostate.
 

Persistent, chronic hyponatremia results in an efflux of organic osmolytes (creatine, betaine, glutamate, myo-inositol, and taurine) from brain cells; this response reduces intracellular osmolality and the osmotic gradient, favoring water entry. This reduction in intracellular osmolytes is largely complete within 48 h, the time period that clinically defines chronic hyponatremia; this temporal definition has considerable relevance for the treatment of hyponatremia (see below). The cellular response to chronic hyponatremia does not fully protect patients from symptoms, which can include vomiting, nausea, confusion, and seizures, usually at a plasma Na+ concentration <125 mM. Even patients who are judged asymptomatic can manifest subtle gait and cognitive defects that reverse with correction of hyponatremia; notably, chronic asymptomatic hyponatremia increases the risk of falls. Chronic hyponatremia also increases the risk of bony fractures owing to the associated neurologic dysfunction and to a hyponatremia-associated reduction in bone density. Therefore, every attempt should be made to correct plasma Na+ concentration safely in patients with chronic hyponatremia, even in the absence of overt symptoms (see the section on treatment of hyponatremia, below).

The management of chronic hyponatremia is complicated significantly by the asymmetry of the cellular response to correction of plasma Na+ concentration. Specifically, the reaccumulation of organic osmolytes by brain cells is attenuated and delayed as osmolality increases after correction of hyponatremia, sometimes resulting in degenerative loss of oligodendrocytes and an osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS). Overly rapid correction of hyponatremia (>8每10 mM in 24 h or 18 mM in 48 h) also is associated with a disruption in integrity of the blood-brain barrier, allowing the entry of immune mediators that may contribute to demyelination. The lesions of ODS classically affect the pons, a structure in which the delay in the reaccumulation of osmotic osmolytes is particularly pronounced; clinically, patients with central pontine myelinolysis can present one or more days after overcorrection of hyponatremia with para- or quadraparesis, dysphagia, dysarthria, diplopia, a "locked-in syndrome," and/or loss of consciousness. Other regions of the brain also can be involved in ODS, most commonly in association with lesions of the pons but occasionally in isolation; in order of frequency, the lesions of extrapontine myelinolysis can occur in the cerebellum, lateral geniculate body, thalamus, putamen, and cerebral cortex or subcortex. The clinical presentation of ODS therefore can vary as a function of the extent and localization of extrapontine myelinolysis, with the reported development of ataxia, mutism, parkinsonism, dystonia, and catatonia. Relowering of plasma Na+ concentration after overly rapid correction can prevent or attenuate ODS (see the section on treatment of hyponatremia, below). However, even appropriately slow correction can be associated with ODS, particularly in patients with additional risk factors; these factors include alcoholism, malnutrition, hypokalemia, and liver transplantation.

Diagnostic Evaluation of Hyponatremia

Clinical assessment of hyponatremic patients should focus on the underlying cause; a detailed drug history is particularly crucial (Table 45-1). A careful clinical assessment of volume status is obligatory for the classical diagnostic approach to hyponatremia (Fig. 45-5). Hyponatremia is frequently multifactorial, particularly when severe; clinical evaluation should consider all the possible causes for excessive circulating AVP, including volume status, drugs, and the presence of nausea and/or pain. Radiologic imaging also may be appropriate to assess whether patients have a pulmonary or CNS cause for hyponatremia. A screening chest x-ray may fail to detect a small cell carcinoma of the lung; CT scanning of the thorax should be considered in patients at high risk for this tumor, e.g., patients with a history of smoking.

Laboratory investigation should include a measurement of serum osmolality to exclude pseudohyponatremia, which is defined as the coexistence of hyponatremia with a normal or increased plasma tonicity. Most clinical laboratories measure plasma Na+ concentration by testing diluted samples with automated ion-sensitive electrodes, correcting for this dilution by assuming that plasma is 93% water; this correction factor can be inaccurate in patients with pseudohyponatremia due to extreme hyperlipidemia and/or hyperproteinemia, in whom serum lipid or protein makes up a greater percentage of plasma volume. The measured osmolality also should be converted to the effective osmolality (tonicity) by subtracting the measured concentration of urea (divided by 2.8 if in mg/dL); patients with hyponatremia have an effective osmolality <275 mosmol/kg.

Elevated BUN and creatinine in routine chemistries also can indicate renal dysfunction as a potential cause of hyponatremia, whereas hyperkalemia may suggest adrenal insufficiency or hypoaldosteronism. Serum glucose also should be measured; plasma Na+ concentration falls by 1.6 to 2.4 mM for every 100-mg/dL increase in glucose due to glucose-induced water efflux from cells; this "true" hyponatremia resolves after correction of hyperglycemia. Measurement of serum uric acid also should be performed; whereas patients with SIAD-type physiology typically will be hypouricemic (serum uric acid <4 mg/dL), volume-depleted patients often will be hyperuricemic. In the appropriate clinical setting, thyroid, adrenal, and pituitary function should also be tested; hypothyroidism and secondary adrenal failure due to pituitary insufficiency are important causes of euvolemic hyponatremia, whereas primary adrenal failure causes hypovolemic hyponatremia. A cosyntropin stimulation test is necessary to assess for primary adrenal insufficiency.

Urine electrolytes and osmolality are crucial tests in the initial evaluation of hyponatremia. A urine Na+ concentration <20每30 mM is consistent with hypovolemic hyponatremia in the clinical absence of a hypervolemic, Na+-avid syndrome such as CHF (Fig. 45-5). In contrast, patients with SIAD typically excrete urine with a Na+ concentration that is >30 mM. However, there can be substantial overlap in urine Na+ concentration values in patients with SIAD and hypovolemic hyponatremia, particularly in the elderly; the ultimate "gold standard" for the diagnosis of hypovolemic hyponatremia is the demonstration that plasma Na+ concentration corrects after hydration with normal saline. Patients with thiazide-associated hyponatremia also may present with a higher than expected urine Na+ concentration and other findings suggestive of SIAD; one should defer making a diagnosis of SIAD in these patients until 1每2 weeks after discontinuation of the thiazide. A urine osmolality <100 mosmol/kg is suggestive of polydipsia; urine osmolality >400 mosmol/kg indicates that AVP excess is playing a more dominant role, whereas intermediate values are more consistent with multifactorial pathophysiology (e.g., AVP excess with a significant component of polydipsia). Patients with hyponatremia due to decreased solute intake (beer potomania) typically have urine Na+ concentration <20 mM and urine osmolality in the range of <100 to the low 200's. Finally, the measurement of urine K+ concentration is required to calculate the urine:plasma electrolyte ratio, which is useful to predict the response to fluid restriction (see the section on treatment of hyponatremia, below).

Treatment: Hyponatremia

Three major considerations guide therapy for hyponatremia. First, the presence and/or severity of symptoms determine the urgency and goals of therapy. Patients with acute hyponatremia (Table 45-2) present with symptoms that can range from headache, nausea, and/or vomiting to seizures, obtundation, and central herniation; patients with chronic hyponatremia that is present for >48 h are less likely to have severe symptoms. Second, patients with chronic hyponatremia are at risk for ODS if plasma Na+ concentration is corrected by >8每10 mM within the first 24 h and/or by >18 mM within the first 48 h. Third, the response to interventions such as hypertonic saline, isotonic saline, and vasopressin antagonists can be highly unpredictable, and so frequent monitoring of plasma Na+ concentration during corrective therapy is imperative.

Once the urgency in correcting the plasma Na+ concentration has been established and appropriate therapy instituted, the focus should be on treatment or withdrawal of the underlying cause. Patients with euvolemic hyponatremia due to SIAD, hypothyroidism, or secondary adrenal failure will respond to successful treatment of the underlying cause, with an increase in plasma Na+ concentration. However, not all causes of SIAD are immediately reversible, necessitating pharmacologic therapy to increase the plasma Na+ concentration (see below). Hypovolemic hyponatremia will respond to intravenous hydration with isotonic normal saline, with a rapid reduction in circulating AVP and a brisk water diuresis; it may be necessary to reduce the rate of correction if the history suggests that hyponatremia has been chronic, i.e., present for more than48 h (see below). Hypervolemic hyponatremia due to congestive heart failure often responds to improved therapy of the underlying cardiomyopathy, e.g., after the institution or intensification of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition. Finally, patients with hyponatremia due to beer potomania and low solute intake respond very rapidly to intravenous saline and the resumption of a normal diet. Notably, patients with beer potomania have a very high risk of developing ODS due to the associated hypokalemia, alcoholism, and malnutrition and the high risk of overcorrecting the plasma Na+ concentration.

Water deprivation has long been a cornerstone of therapy for chronic hyponatremia. However, patients who are excreting minimal electrolyte-free water will require aggressive fluid restriction; this can be very difficult for patients with SIAD to tolerate because their thirst is also inappropriately stimulated. The urine:plasma electrolyte ratio (urinary [Na+]+[K+]/plasma [Na+]) can be exploited as a quick indicator of electrolyte-free water excretion (Table 45-3); patients with a ratio >1 should be restricted more aggressively (<500 mL/d), those with a ratio 1 should be restricted to 500每700 mL/d, and those with a ratio <1 should be restricted to <1 L/d. In hypokalemic patients, potassium replacement will serve to increase plasma Na+ concentration in light of the fact that the plasma Na+ concentration is a function of both exchangeable Na+ and exchangeable K+ divided by total body water; a corollary is that aggressive repletion of K+ has the potential to overcorrect the plasma Na+ concentration even in the absence of hypertonic saline. Plasma Na+ concentration also tends to respond to an increase in dietary solute intake, which increases the ability to excrete free water; however, the use of oral urea and/or salt tablets for this purpose is generally not practical or well tolerated.

Table 45-3 Management of Hypernatremia

 
 
Water deficit 
1. Estimate total-body water (TBW): 50% of body weight in women and 60% in men

2. Calculate free-water deficit: {([Na+]-140)/140} x TBW

3. Administer deficit over 48每72 h, without increasing the plasma Na+ concentration by >10 mM/24 h
 
Ongoing water losses  
4. Calculate electrolyte-free water clearance, CeH2O:



where V is urinary volume, UNa is urinary [Na+], UK is urinary [K+], and PNa is plasma [Na+]
 
Insensible losses  
5. 10 mL/kg per day: less if ventilated, more if febrile 
Total  
6. Add components to determine water deficit and ongoing water loss; correct the water deficit over 48每72 h and replace daily water loss. Avoid correction of plasma [Na+] by >10 mM/d 
  
 

 

Patients in whom therapy with fluid restriction, potassium replacement, and/or increased solute intake fails may require pharmacologic therapy to increase their plasma Na+ concentration. Many patients with SIAD respond to combined therapy with oral furosemide, 20 mg twice a day (higher doses may be necessary in renal insufficiency), and oral salt tablets; furosemide serves to inhibit the renal countercurrent mechanism and blunt urinary concentrating ability, whereas the salt tablets counteract diuretic-associated natriuresis. Demeclocycline is a potent inhibitor of principal cells and can be utilized in patients whose Na+ levels do not increase in response to furosemide and salt tablets. However, this agent can be associated with a reduction in GFR due to excessive natriuresis and/or direct renal toxicity; it should be avoided in cirrhotic patients in particular, who are at higher risk of nephrotoxicity due to drug accumulation.

Vasopressin antagonists (vaptans) are highly effective in treating SIAD and hypervolemic hyponatremia due to heart failure or cirrhosis, reliably increasing plasma Na+ concentration as a result of their aquaretic effects (augmentation of free-water clearance). Most of these agents specifically antagonize theV2 vasopressin receptor; tolvaptan is currently the only oral V2 antagonist approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Conivaptan, the only available intravenous vaptan, is a mixed V1A/V2 antagonist with a modest risk of hypotension due to V1A receptor inhibition. Therapy with vaptans must be initiated in a hospital setting, with a liberalization of fluid restriction (>2 L/d) and close monitoring of plasma Na+ concentration. Although these agents are approved for the management of all but hypovolemic hyponatremia and acute hyponatremia, the clinical indications for them are not completely clear. Oral tolvaptan is perhaps most appropriate for the management of significant and persistent SIAD (e.g., in small cell lung carcinoma) that has not responded to water restriction and/or oral furosemide and salt tablets.

Treatment of acute symptomatic hyponatremia should include hypertonic 3% saline (513 mM) to acutely increase plasma Na+ concentration by 1每2 mM/h to a total of 4每6 mM; this modest increase is typically sufficient to alleviate severe acute symptoms, after which corrective guidelines for "chronic" hyponatremia are appropriate (see below). A number of equations have been developed to estimate the required rate of hypertonic saline. The traditional approach is to calculate a Na+ deficit, in which the Na+ deficit = 0.6 x body weight x (target plasma Na+ concentration 每 starting plasma Na+ concentration), followed by a calculation of the required rate. Regardless of the method used to determine the rate of administration, the increase in plasma Na+ concentration can be highly unpredictable during treatment with hypertonic saline due to rapid changes in the underlying physiology; plasma Na+ concentration should be monitored every 2每4 h during treatment, with appropriate changes in therapy based on the observed rate of change. The administration of supplemental oxygen and ventilatory support is also critical in the management of patients with acute hyponatremia who develop acute pulmonary edema or hypercapnic respiratory failure. Intravenous loop diuretics will help treat acute pulmonary edema and also increase free-water excretion by interfering with the renal countercurrent multiplication system. Vasopressin antagonists do not have an approved role in the management of acute hyponatremia.

The rate of correction should be comparatively slow in chronic hyponatremia (<8每10 mM in the first 24 h and <18 mM in the first 48 h) to avoid ODS. Overcorrection of the plasma Na+ concentration can occur when AVP levels rapidly normalize, for example, after treatment of patients with chronic hypovolemic hyponatremia with intravenous saline or after glucocorticoid replacement in patients with hypopituitarism and secondary adrenal failure. Approximately 10% of patients treated with vaptans will overcorrect; the risk is increased if water intake is not liberalized. If the plasma Na+ concentration overcorrects after therapy〞whether with hypertonic saline, isotonic saline, or a vaptan〞hyponatremia can be reinduced safely or stabilized by the administration of the vasopressin agonist desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) and/or the administration of free water, typically intravenous D5W; the goal is to prevent or reverse the development of ODS.

Hypernatremia

Etiology

Hypernatremia is defined as an increase in the plasma Na+ concentration to >145 mM. Considerably less common than hyponatremia, hypernatremia nonetheless is associated with mortality rates as high as 40每60%, mostly due to the severity of the associated underlying disease processes. Hypernatremia is usually the result of a combined water and electrolyte deficit, with losses of H2O in excess of those of Na+. Less frequently, the ingestion or iatrogenic administration of excess Na+ can be causative, for example, after IV administration of excessive hypertonic Na+-Cl每 or Na+-HCO3每 (Fig. 45-6).

Figure 45-6

 
 
 
The diagnostic approach to hypernatremia. ECF, extracellular fluid.
 
 

Elderly individuals with reduced thirst and/or diminished access to fluids are at the highest risk of developing hypernatremia. Patients with hypernatremia may rarely have a central defect in hypothalamic osmoreceptor function, with a mixture of both decreased thirst and reduced AVP secretion. Causes of this adipsic diabetes insipidus include primary or metastatic tumor, occlusion or ligation of the anterior communicating artery, trauma, hydrocephalus, and inflammation.

Hypernatremia can develop after the loss of water via both renal and nonrenal routes. Insensible losses of water may increase in the setting of fever, exercise, heat exposure, severe burns, or mechanical ventilation. Diarrhea is the most common gastrointestinal cause of hypernatremia. Notably, osmotic diarrhea and viral gastroenteritis typically generate stools with Na+ and K+ <100 mM, thus leading to water loss and hypernatremia; in contrast, secretory diarrhea typically results in isotonic stool and thus hypovolemia with or without hypovolemic hyponatremia.

Common causes of renal water loss include osmotic diuresis secondary to hyperglycemia, excess urea, postobstructive diuresis, and mannitol; these disorders share an increase in urinary solute excretion and urinary osmolality (see "Diagnostic Approach," below). Hypernatremia due to a water diuresis occurs in central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI).

Nephrogenic DI (NDI) is characterized by renal resistance to AVP, which can be partial or complete (see "Diagnostic Approach," below). Genetic causes include loss-of-function mutations in the X-linked V2 receptor; mutations in the AVP-responsive aquaporin-2 water channel can cause autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant nephrogenic DI, whereas recessive deficiency of the aquaporin-1 water channel causes a more modest concentrating defect (Fig. 45-2). Hypercalcemia also can cause polyuria and NDI; calcium signals directly through the calcium-sensing receptor to downregulate Na+, K+, and Cl每 transport by the TALH and water transport in principal cells, thus reducing renal concentrating ability in hypercalcemia. Another common acquired cause of NDI is hypokalemia, which inhibits the renal response to AVP and downregulates aquaporin-2 expression. Several drugs can cause acquired NDI, in particular lithium, ifosfamide, and several antiviral agents. Lithium causes NDI by multiple mechanisms, including direct inhibition of renal glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), a kinase thought to be the pharmacologic target of lithium in bipolar disease; GSK3 is required for the response of principal cells to AVP. The entry of lithium through the amiloride-sensitive Na+ channel ENaC (Fig. 45-4) is required for the effect of the drug on principal cells; thus, combined therapy with lithium and amiloride can mitigate lithium-associated NDI. However, lithium causes chronic tubulointerstitial scarring and chronic kidney disease after prolonged therapy so that patients may have a persistent NDI long after stopping the drug, with a reduced therapeutic benefit from amiloride.

Finally, gestational diabetes insipidus is a rare complication of late-term pregnancy in which increased activity of a circulating placental protease with vasopressinase activity leads to reduced circulating AVP and polyuria, often accompanied by hypernatremia. DDAVP is an effective therapy for this syndrome because of its resistance to the vasopressinase enzyme.

Clinical Features

Hypernatremia increases osmolality of the ECF, generating an osmotic gradient between the ECF and the ICF, an efflux of intracellular water, and cellular shrinkage. As in hyponatremia, the symptoms of hypernatremia are predominantly neurologic. Altered mental status is the most common manifestation, ranging from mild confusion and lethargy to deep coma. The sudden shrinkage of brain cells in acute hypernatremia may lead to parenchymal or subarachnoid hemorrhages and/or subdural hematomas; however, these vascular complications are encountered primarily in pediatric and neonatal patients. Osmotic damage to muscle membranes also can lead to hypernatremic rhabdomyolysis. Brain cells accommodate to a chronic increase in ECF osmolality (>48 h) by activating membrane transporters that mediate influx and intracellular accumulation of organic osmolytes (creatine, betaine, glutamate, myo-inositol, and taurine); this results in an increase in ICF water and normalization of brain parenchymal volume. In consequence, patients with chronic hypernatremia are less likely to develop severe neurologic compromise. However, the cellular response to chronic hypernatremia predisposes these patients to the development of cerebral edema and seizures during overly rapid hydration (overcorrection of plasma Na+ concentration by >10 mM/d).

Diagnostic Approach

The history should focus on the presence or absence of thirst, polyuria, and/or an extrarenal source for water loss, such as diarrhea. The physical examination should include a detailed neurologic exam and an assessment of the ECFV; patients with a particularly large water deficit and/or a combined deficit in electrolytes and water may be hypovolemic, with reduced JVP and orthostasis. Accurate documentation of daily fluid intake and daily urine output is also critical for the diagnosis and management of hypernatremia.

Laboratory investigation should include a measurement of serum and urine osmolality in addition to urine electrolytes. The appropriate response to hypernatremia and a serum osmolality >295 mosmol/kg is an increase in circulating AVP and the excretion of low volumes (<500 mL/d) of maximally concentrated urine, i.e., urine with osmolality >800 mosmol/kg; if this is the case, an extrarenal source of water loss is primarily responsible for the generation of hypernatremia. Many patients with hypernatremia are polyuric; if an osmotic diuresis is responsible, with excessive excretion of Na+-Cl每, glucose, and/or urea, solute excretion will be >750每1000 mosmol/d (>15 mosmol/kg body water per day) (Fig. 45-6). More commonly, patients with hypernatremia and polyuria will have a predominant water diuresis, with excessive excretion of hypotonic, dilute urine.

Adequate differentiation between nephrogenic and central causes of DI requires the measurement of the response in urinary osmolality to DDAVP, combined with measurement of circulating AVP in the setting of hypertonicity. By definition, patients with baseline hypernatremia are hypertonic, with an adequate stimulus for AVP by the posterior pituitary. Therefore, in contrast to polyuric patients with a normal or reduced baseline plasma Na+ concentration and osmolality, a water deprivation test (Chap. 44) is unnecessary in hypernatremia; indeed, water deprivation is absolutely contraindicated in this setting because of the risk for worsening the hypernatremia. Patients with NDI will fail to respond to DDAVP, with a urine osmolality that increases by <50% or <150 mosmol/kg from baseline, in combination with a normal or high circulating AVP level; patients with central DI will respond to DDAVP, with a reduced circulating AVP. Patients may exhibit a partial response to DDAVP, with a >50% rise in urine osmolality that nonetheless fails to reach 800 mosmol/kg; the level of circulating AVP will help differentiate the underlying cause, i.e., nephrogenic versus central DI. In pregnant patients, AVP assays should be drawn in tubes containing the protease inhibitor 1,10-phenanthroline to prevent in vitro degradation of AVP by placental vasopressinase.

For patients with hypernatremia due to renal loss of water it is critical to quantify ongoing daily losses using the calculated electrolyte-free water clearance in addition to calculation of the baseline water deficit (the relevant formulas are discussed in Table 45-3). This requires daily measurement of urine electrolytes, combined with accurate measurement of daily urine volume.

Treatment: Hypernatremia

The underlying cause of hypernatremia should be withdrawn or corrected, whether it is drugs, hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, or diarrhea. The approach to the correction of hypernatremia is outlined in Table 45-3. It is imperative tocorrect hypernatremia slowly to avoid cerebral edema, typically replacing the calculated free-water deficit over 48 h. Notably, the plasma Na+ concentration should be corrected by no more than 10 mM/d, which may take longer than 48 h in patients with severe hypernatremia (>160 mM). A rare exception is patients with acute hypernatremia (<48 h) due to sodium loading, who can safely be corrected rapidly at a rate of 1 mM/h.

Water ideally should be administered by mouth or by nasogastric tube as the most direct way to provide free water, i.e., water without electrolytes. Alternatively, patients can receive free water in dextrose-containing IV solutions such as 5% dextrose (D5W); blood glucose should be monitored to avoid hyperglycemia. Depending on the history, blood pressure, or clinical volume status, it may be appropriate to treat initially with hypotonic saline solutions (1/4 or 1/2 normal saline); normal saline is usually inappropriate in the absence of very severe hypernatremia, in which normal saline is proportionally more hypotonic relative to plasma, or frank hypotension. Calculation of urinary electrolyte-free water clearance (see Table 45-3) is required to estimate daily, ongoing loss of free water in patients with nephrogenic or central DI, which should be replenished daily.

Additional therapy may be feasible in specific cases. Patients with central DI should respond to the administration of intravenous, intranasal, or oral DDAVP. Patients with NDI due to lithium may reduce their polyuria with amiloride (2.5每10 mg/d), which decreases entry of lithium into principal cells by inhibiting ENaC (see above); in practice, however, most patients with lithium-associated DI are able to compensate for their polyuria simply by increasing their daily water intake. Thiazides may reduce polyuria due to NDI, ostensibly by inducing hypovolemia and increasing proximal tubular water reabsorption. Occasionally, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been used to treat polyuria associated with NDI, reducing the negative effect of intrarenal prostaglandins on urinary concentrating mechanisms; however, this creates the risk of NSAID-associated gastric and/or renal toxicity. Furthermore, it must be emphasized that thiazides, amiloride, and NSAIDs are appropriate only for chronic management of polyuria from NDI and have no role in the acute management of associated hypernatremia, in which the focus is on replacing free-water deficits and ongoing free-water loss.
 
Potassium Disorders

Homeostatic mechanisms maintain plasma K+ concentration between 3.5 and 5.0 mM despite marked variation in dietary K+ intake. In a healthy individual at steady state, the entire daily intake of potassium is excreted, approximately 90% in the urine and 10% in the stool; the kidney thus plays a dominant role in potassium homeostasis. However, more than 98% of total-body potassium is intracellular, chiefly in muscle; buffering of extracellular K+ by this large intracellular pool plays a crucial role in the regulation of plasma K+ concentration. Changes in the exchange and distribution of intra- and extracellular K+ thus can lead to marked hypo- or hyperkalemia. A corollary is that massive necrosis and the attendant release of tissue K+ can cause severe hyperkalemia, particularly in the setting of acute kidney injury and reduced excretion of K+.

Changes in whole-body K+ content are mediated primarily by the kidney, which reabsorbs filtered K+ in hypokalemic, K+-deficient states and secretes K+ in hyperkalemic, K+-replete states. Although K+ is transported along the entire nephron, it is the principal cells of the connecting tubule (CNT) and cortical collecting duct (CD) that play a dominant role in renal K+ secretion, whereas alpha-intercalated cells of the outer medullary CD function in renal tubular reabsorption of filtered K+ in K+-deficient states. In principal cells, apical Na+ entry via the amiloride-sensitive ENaC generates a lumen-negative potential difference that drives passive K+ exit through apical K+ channels (Fig. 45-4). Two major K+ channels mediate distal tubular K+ secretion: the secretory K+ channel ROMK (the renal outer medullary K+ channel, also known as Kir1.1 or KcnJ1) and the flow-sensitive maxi-K K+ channel (also known as the BK K+ channel). ROMK is thought to mediate the bulk of constitutive K+ secretion, whereas increases in distal flow rate and/or genetic absence of ROMK activate K+ secretion via the maxi-K channel.

An appreciation of the relationship between ENaC-dependent Na+ entry and distal K+ secretion (Fig. 45-4) is required for the bedside interpretation of potassium disorders. For example, decreased distal delivery of Na+, as occurs in hypovolemic, prerenal states, tends to blunt the ability to excrete K+, leading to hyperkalemia; in contrast, an increase in distal delivery of Na+ and distal flow rate, as occurs after treatment with thiazide and loop diuretics, can enhance K+ secretion and lead to hypokalemia. Hyperkalemia is also a predictable consequence of drugs that directly inhibit ENaC due to the role of this Na+ channel in generating a lumen-negative potential difference. Aldosterone in turn has a major influence on potassium excretion, increasing the activity of ENaC channels and thus amplifying the driving force for K+ secretion across the luminal membrane of principal cells. Abnormalities in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system thus can cause both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. Notably, however, potassium excess and potassium restriction have opposing, aldosterone-independent effects on the density and activity of apical K+ channels in the distal nephron; i.e., other factors modulate the renal capacity to secrete K+. In addition, potassium restriction and hypokalemia activate aldosterone-independent distal reabsorption of filtered K+, activating apical H+/K+-ATPase activity in intercalated cells within the outer medullary CD. Reflective perhaps of this physiology, changes in plasma K+ concentration are not universal in disorders associated with changes in aldosterone activity.

Hypokalemia

Hypokalemia, defined as a plasma K+ concentration <3.6 mM, occurs in up to 20% of hospitalized patients. Hypokalemia is associated with a tenfold increase in in-hospital mortality rates due to adverse effects on cardiac rhythm, blood pressure, and cardiovascular morbidity rate. Mechanistically, hypokalemia can be caused by redistribution of K+ between tissues and the ECF or by renal and nonrenal loss of K+ (Table 45-4). Systemic hypomagnesemia also can cause treatment-resistant hypokalemia due to a combination of reduced cellular uptake of K+ and exaggerated renal secretion. Spurious hypokalemia or pseudohypokalemia occasionally can result from in vitro cellular uptake of K+ after venipuncture, for example, due to profound leukocytosis in acute leukemia.

Table 45-4 Causes of Hypokalemia

 
 
I. Decreased intake 
  A. Starvation 
  B. Clay ingestion 
II. Redistribution into cells 
  A. Acid-base 
    1. Metabolic alkalosis 
  B. Hormonal 
    1. Insulin 
    2. Increased 2-adrenergic sympathetic activity: post-myocardial infarction, head injury
  
    3. 2-Adrenergic agonists: bronchodilators, tocolytics
  
    4. -Adrenergic antagonists 
    5. Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis 
    6. Downstream stimulation of Na+/K+-ATPase: theophylline, caffeine
  
  C. Anabolic state 
    1. Vitamin B12 or folic acid administration (red blood cell production) 
    2. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (white blood cell production) 
    3. Total parenteral nutrition 
  D. Other 
    1. Pseudohypokalemia 
    2. Hypothermia 
    3. Familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis 
    4. Barium toxicity: systemic inhibition of "leak" K+ channels
  
III. Increased loss 
  A. Nonrenal  
    1. Gastrointestinal loss (diarrhea) 
    2. Integumentary loss (sweat) 
  B. Renal 
    1. Increased distal flow and distal Na+ delivery: diuretics, osmotic diuresis, salt-wasting nephropathies
  
    2. Increased secretion of potassium 
       a. Mineralocorticoid excess: primary hyperaldosteronism [aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs)], primary or unilateral adrenal hyperplasia (PAH), idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA) due to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, and adrenal carcinoma], familial hyperaldosteronism (FH-I, FH-II, congenital adrenal hyperplasias), secondary hyperaldosteronism (malignanthypertension, renin-secreting tumors, renal arterystenosis, hypovolemia), Cushing's syndrome, Bartter's syndrome, Gitelman's syndrome 
       b. Apparent mineralocorticoid excess: genetic deficiency of 11-dehydrogenase-2 (syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess), inhibition of 11-dehydrogenase-2 (glycyrrhetinic/glycyrrhizinic acid and/or carbenoxolone; licorice, food products, drugs), Liddle's syndrome [genetic activation of epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC)] 
       c. Distal delivery of nonreabsorbed anions: vomiting, nasogastric suction, proximal renal tubular acidosis, diabetic ketoacidosis, glue sniffing (toluene abuse), penicillin derivatives (penicillin, nafcillin, dicloxacillin, ticarcillin, oxacillin, and carbenicillin)  
    3. Magnesium deficiency 
 

 

Redistribution and Hypokalemia

Insulin, 2-adrenergic activity, and thyroid hormone promote Na+,K+-ATPase-mediated cellular uptake of K+, leading to hypokalemia. Inhibition of passive efflux of K+ also can cause hypokalemia, albeit rarely; this typically occurs in the setting of systemic inhibition of K+ channels by toxic barium ions. Exogenous insulin can cause iatrogenic hypokalemia, particularly during the management of K+-deficient states such as diabetic ketoacidosis. Alternatively, the stimulation of endogenous insulin can provoke hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and/or hypophosphatemia in malnourished patients who are given a carbohydrate load. Alterations in the activity of the endogenous sympathetic nervous system can cause hypokalemia in several settings, including alcohol withdrawal, hyperthyroidism, acute myocardial infarction, and severe head injury. 2 agonists, including both bronchodilators and tocolytics (ritodrine), are powerful activators of cellular K+ uptake; "hidden" sympathomimetics such as pseudoephedrine and ephedrine in cough syrup or dieting agents also may cause unexpected hypokalemia. Finally, xanthine-dependent activation of cyclic AMP每dependent signaling downstream of the 2 receptor can lead to hypokalemia, usually in the setting of overdose (theophylline) or marked overingestion (dietary caffeine).

Redistributive hypokalemia also can occur in the setting of hyperthyroidism, with periodic attacks of hypokalemic paralysis[thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP)]. Similar episodes of hypokalemic weakness in the absence of thyroid abnormalities occur in familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis, usually caused by missense mutations of voltage sensor domains within the 1 subunit of L-type calcium channels or the skeletal Na+ channel; these mutations generate an abnormal gating pore current activated by hyperpolarization. TPP develops more frequently in patients of Asian or Hispanic origin; this shared predisposition has been linked to genetic variation in Kir2.6, a muscle-specific, thyroid hormone每responsive K+ channel. Patients typically present with weakness of the extremities and limb girdles, with paralytic episodes that occur most frequently between 1 and 6 a.m. Signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism are not invariably present. Hypokalemia is usually profound and almost invariably is accompanied by hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia. The hypokalemia in TPP is attributed to both direct and indirect activation of Na+,K+-ATPase, resulting in increased uptake of K+ by muscle and other tissues. Increases in -adrenergic activity play an important role in that high-dose propranolol (3 mg/kg) rapidly reverses the associated hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and paralysis.

Nonrenal Loss of Potassium

The loss of K+ in sweat is typically low except under extremes of physical exertion. Direct gastric losses of K+ due to vomiting or nasogastric suctioning are also minimal; however, the ensuing hypochloremic alkalosis results in persistent kaliuresis due to secondary hyperaldosteronism and bicarbonaturia, i.e., a renal loss of K+. Intestinal loss of K+ due to diarrhea is a globally important cause of hypokalemia in light of the worldwide prevalence of diarrheal disease. Noninfectious gastrointestinal processes such as celiac disease, ileostomy, villous adenomas, VIPomas, and chronic laxative abuse also can cause significant hypokalemia. Colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie's syndrome) can lead to hypokalemia from secretory diarrhea with an abnormally high potassium content caused by a marked activation of colonic K+ secrection.

Renal Loss of Potassium

Drugs can increase renal K+ excretion by a variety of different mechanisms. Diuretics are a particularly common cause due to associated increases in distal tubular Na+ delivery and distal tubular flow rate in addition to secondary hyperaldosteronism. Thiazides have an effect on plasma K+ concentration greater than that of loop diuretics despite their lesser natriuretic effect. The higher propensity of thiazides to cause hypokalemia may be secondary to thiazide-associated hypocalciuria versus the hypercalciuria seen with loop diuretics; increases in downstream luminal calcium in response to loop diuretics will inhibit ENaC in principal cells, thus reducing the lumen-negative potential difference and attenuating distal K+ excretion. High doses of penicillin-related antibiotics (nafcillin, dicloxacillin, ticarcillin, oxacillin, and carbenicillin) can increase obligatory K+ excretion by acting as nonreabsorbable anions in the distal nephron. Finally, several renal tubular toxins cause renalK+ and magnesium wasting, leading to hypokalemia andhypomagnesemia; these drugs include aminoglycosides, amphotericin, foscarnet, cisplatin, and ifosfamide (see also "Magnesium Deficiency and Hypokalemia," below).

Aldosterone activates the ENaC channel in principal cells via multiple synergistic mechanisms, thus increasing the driving force for K+ excretion. In consequence, increases in aldosterone bioactivity and/or gains in function of aldosterone-dependent signaling pathways are associated with hypokalemia. Increases in circulating aldosterone (hyperaldosteronism) may be primary or secondary. Increased levels of circulating renin in secondary forms of hyperaldosteronism lead to increased angiotensin II (AT-II) and thus aldosterone; renal artery stenosis is perhaps the most common cause (Table 45-4). Primary hyperaldosteronism may be genetic or acquired. Hypertension and hypokalemia due to increases in circulating 11-deoxycorticosterone occur in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by defects in either steroid 11-hydroxylase or steroid 17-hydroxylase; deficient 11-hydroxylase results in associated virilization and other signs of androgen excess, whereas reduced sex steroids in 17-hydroxylase deficiency lead to hypogonadism. The two major forms of isolated primary hyperaldosteronism are familial hyperaldosteronism type I [FH-I, also known as glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism (GRA)] and familial hyperaldosteronism type II (FH-II), in which aldosterone production is not repressible by exogenous glucocorticoids. FH-I is caused by a chimeric gene duplication between the homologous 11-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) genes, fusing the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-responsive 11-hydroxylase promoter to the coding region of aldosterone synthase; this chimeric gene is under the control of ACTH and thus is repressible by glucocorticoids.

Acquired causes of primary hyperaldosteronism include aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs), primary or unilateral adrenal hyperplasia (PAH), idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA) due to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia, and adrenal carcinoma; APA and IHA account for close to 60% and 40%, respectively, of diagnosed cases of hyperaldosteronism. Random testing of plasma renin activity (PRA) and aldosterone is a helpful screening tool in hypokalemic and/or hypertensive patients, with an aldosterone:PRA ratio >50 suggestive of primary hyperaldosteronism.

The glucocorticoid cortisol has affinity for the mineralocorticoid receptor (MLR) equal to that of aldosterone, with resultant mineralocorticoid-like activity. However, cells in the aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron are protected from this illicit activation by the enzyme 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2 (11HSD-2), which converts cortisol to cortisone; cortisone has minimal affinity for the MLR. Recessive loss-of-function mutations in the 11HSD-2 gene thus are associated with cortisol-dependent activation of the MLR and the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (SAME), encompassing hypertension, hypokalemia, hypercalciuria, and metabolic alkalosis, with suppressed PRA and suppressed aldosterone. A similar syndrome is caused by biochemical inhibition of 11HSD-2 by glycyrrhetinic/glycyrrhizinic acid and/or carbenoxolone. Glycyrrhizinic acid is a natural sweetener found in licorice root, typically encountered in licorice and its many guises or as a flavoring agent in tobacco and food products.

Finally, hypokalemia may occur with systemic increases in glucocorticoids. In Cushing's syndrome caused by increases in pituitary ACTH (Chap. 342) the incidence of hypokalemia is only 10%, whereas it is 60每100% in patients with ectopic secretion of ACTH despite a similar incidence of hypertension. Indirect evidence suggests that the activity of renal 11HSD-2 is reduced in patients with ectopic ACTH compared with Cushing's syndrome, resulting in a syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess.

Finally, defects in multiple renal tubular transport pathways are associated with hypokalemia. For example, loss-of-function mutations in subunits of the acidifying H+-ATPAse in alpha-intercalated cells cause hypokalemic distal renal tubular acidosis, as do many acquired disorders of the distal nephron. Liddle's syndrome is caused by autosomal dominant gain-in-function mutations of ENaC subunits. Disease-associated mutations either activate the channel directly or abrogate aldosterone-inhibited retrieval of ENaC subunits from the plasma membrane; the end result is increased expression of activated ENaC channels at the plasma membrane of principal cells. Patients classically manifest severe hypertension with hypokalemia that is unresponsive to spironolactone yet sensitive to amiloride. Hypertension and hypokalemia are, however, variable aspects of the Liddle's phenotype; more consistent features include a blunted aldosterone response to ACTH and reduced urinary aldosterone excretion.

Loss of the transport functions of the TALH and DCT nephron segments causes two distinct subtypes of hereditary hypokalemic alkalosis, with TALH dysfunction causing Bartter's syndrome (BS) and DCT dysfunction causing Gitelman's syndrome (GS). Patients with "classic" BS typically have polyuria and polydipsia due to the reduction in renal concentrating ability. They may have an increase in urinary calcium excretion, and 20% are hypomagnesemic. Other features include marked activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. Patients with "antenatal" BS have a severe systemic disorder characterized by marked electrolyte wasting, polyhydramnios, and hypercalciuria with nephrocalcinosis; renal prostaglandin synthesis and excretion are increased significantly, accounting for many of the systemic symptoms. There are five disease genes for BS, all of which function in some aspect of regulated Na+, K+, and Cl每 transport by the TALH. Gitelman's syndrome is, in contrast, genetically homogeneous, caused almost exclusively by loss-of-function mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl每 cotransporter of the DCT. Patients with GS are uniformly hypomagnesemic and exhibit marked hypocalciuria rather than the hypercalciuria typically seen in BS; urinary calcium excretion is thus a critical diagnostic test in GS. GS has a milder phenotype than BS; however, patients with GS may suffer from chondrocalcinosis, an abnormal deposition of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) in joint cartilage (Chap. 284).

Magnesium Deficiency and Hypokalemia

Magnesium depletion has inhibitory effects on muscle Na+,K+-ATPase activity, reducing influx into muscle cells and causing a secondary kaliuresis. In addition, magnesium depletion causes exaggerated K+ secretion by the distal nephron; this is attributed to a reduction in the magnesium-dependent, intracellular block of K+ efflux through the secretory K+ channel of principal cells (ROMK; Fig. 45-4). Regardless of the dominant mechanism(s), hypomagnesemic patients are clinically refractory to K+ replacement in the absence of Mg2+ repletion. Notably, magnesium deficiency is also a common concomitant of hypokalemia, since many disorders of the distal nephron may cause both potassium and magnesium wasting (Chap. 284).

Clinical Features

Hypokalemia has prominent effects on cardiac, skeletal, and intestinal muscle cells. In particular, it is a major risk factor for both ventricular and atrial arrhythmias. Hypokalemia predisposes to digoxin toxicity by a number of mechanisms, including reduced competition between K+ and digoxin for shared binding sites on cardiac Na+,K+-ATPase subunits. Electrocardiographic changes in hypokalemia include broad flat T waves, ST depression, and QT prolongation; these are most marked when serum K+ is <2.7 mmol/L. Hypokalemia also results in hyperpolarization of skeletal muscle, thus impairing the capacity to depolarize and contract; weakness and even paralysis may ensue. It also causes a skeletal myopathy and predisposes to rhabdomyolysis. Finally, the paralytic effects of hypokalemia on intestinal smooth muscle may cause intestinal ileus.

The functional effects of hypokalemia on the kidney include Na+-Cl每 and HCO3每 retention, polyuria, phosphaturia, hypocitraturia, and an activation of renal ammoniagenesis. Bicarbonate retention and other acid-base effects of hypokalemia can contribute to the generation of metabolic alkalosis. Hypokalemic polyuria is due to a combination of polydipsia and an AVP-resistant renal concentrating defect. Structural changes in the kidney due to hypokalemia include a relatively specific vacuolizing injury to proximal tubular cells, interstitial nephritis, and renal cysts. Hypokalemia also predisposes to acute kidney injury and can lead to end-stage renal disease in patients with long-standing hypokalemia due to eating disorders and/or laxative abuse.

Hypokalemia and/or reduced dietary K+ are implicated in the pathophysiology and progression of hypertension, heart failure, and stroke. For example, short-term K+ restriction in healthy humans and patients with essential hypertension induces Na+-Cl每 retention and hypertension. Correction of hypokalemia is particularly important in hypertensive patients treated with diuretics, in whom blood pressure improves with the establishment of normokalemia.

Diagnostic Approach

The cause of hypokalemia is usually evident from history, physical examination, and/or basic laboratory tests. The history should focus on medications (e.g., laxatives, diuretics, antibiotics), diet and dietary habits (e.g., licorice), and/or symptoms that suggest a particular cause (e.g., periodic weakness, diarrhea). The physical examination should pay particular attention to blood pressure, volume status, and signs suggestive of specific hypokalemic disorders, e.g., hyperthyroidism and Cushing's syndrome. Initial laboratory evaluation should include electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, serum osmolality, Mg2+, Ca2+, a complete blood count, and urinary pH (Fig. 45-7). The presence of a non-anion-gap acidosis suggests a distal, hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis or diarrhea; calculation of the urinary anion gap can help differentiate these two diagnoses. Renal K+ excretion can be assessed with a 24-h urine collection; a 24-h K+ excretion of <15 mM is indicative of an extrarenal cause of hypokalemia(Fig. 45-7). Alternatively, serum and urine osmolality can be used to calculate the transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG), which should be <3-4 in the presence of hypokalemia (see the section on hyperkalemia in this chapter). Urine Cl每 is usually decreased in patients with hypokalemia from a nonreabsorbable anion, such as antibiotics or HCO3每. Other causes of chronic, hypokalemic alkalosis are surreptitious vomiting, diuretic abuse, and GS. Hypokalemic patients with bulimia thus have a urinary Cl每 <10 mmol/L; urine Na+, K+, and Cl每 are persistently elevated in GS due to loss of function in the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl每 cotransporter but less elevated in diuretic abuse and with greater variability. Urine diuretic screens for loop diuretics and thiazides may be necessary to further exclude diuretic abuse.

Figure 45-7

 
 
 
The diagnostic approach to hypokalemia. See text for details. BP, blood pressure; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; FHPP, familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis; FH-I, familial hyperaldosteronism type I; GI, gastrointestinal; HTN, hypertension; PA, primary aldosteronism; RAS, renal artery stenosis; RST, renin-secreting tumor; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; SAME, syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Mount and Zandi-Nejad; with permission.)
 
 

Other tests, such as urinary Ca2+, thyroid function tests, and/or PRA and aldosterone levels, may be appropriate in specific cases. A plasma aldosterone:PRA ratio >50 is suggestive of hyperaldosteronism. Patients with hyperaldosteronism or apparent mineralocorticoid excess may require further testing, for example, adrenal vein sampling (Chap. 342) or the clinically available tests for specific genetic causes (FH-I, SAME, Liddle's syndrome, etc.). Patients with primary aldosteronism thus should be tested for the chimeric FH-I/GRA gene (see above) if they are younger than 20 years of age or have a family history of primary aldosteronism or stroke at a young age (<40 years). Preliminary differentiation of Liddle's syndrome due to mutant ENaC channels from SAME due to mutant 11HSD-2 (see above)〞both of which cause hypokalemia and hypertension with aldosterone suppression〞can be made on a clinical basis; patients with Liddle's syndrome should respond to amiloride (ENaC inhibition) but not spironolactone, whereas patients with SAME will respond to spironolactone.

Treatment: Hypokalemia

The goals of therapy for hypokalemia are to prevent life-threatening and/or chronic consequences, replace the associated K+ deficit, and correct the underlying cause and/or mitigate future hypokalemia. The urgency of therapy depends on the severity of hypokalemia, associated clinical factors (cardiac disease, digoxin therapy, etc.), and the rate of decline in serum K+. Urgent but cautious K+ replacement should be considered in patients with severe redistributive hypokalemia (plasma K+ concentration <2.5 mM) and/or when serious complications ensue; however, this creates a risk of rebound hyperkalemia after resolution of the underlying cause. When excessive activity of the sympathetic nervous system is thought to play a dominant role in redistributive hypokalemia, as in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, high-dose propranolol (3 mg/kg) should be considered; this nonspecific -adrenergic blocker will correct hypokalemia without the risk of rebound hyperkalemia.

Oral replacement with K+-Cl每 is the mainstay of therapy for hypokalemia. Potassium phosphate, oral or IV, may be appropriate in patients with combined hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. Potassium bicarbonate or potassium citrate should be considered in patients with concomitant metabolic acidosis. Notably, hypomagnesemic patients are refractory to K+ replacement alone, and so concomitant Mg2+ deficiency should always be corrected with oral or intravenous repletion. The deficit of K+ and the rate of correction should be estimated as accurately as possible; renal function, medications, and comorbid conditions such as diabetes should be considered to gauge the risk of overcorrection. In the absence of abnormal K+ redistribution, the total deficit correlates with serum K+ so that serum K+ drops by approximately 0.27 mM for every 100-mmol reduction in total-body stores; loss of 400 to 800 mmol of total-body K+ results in a reduction in serum K+ of approximately 2.0 mM. However, because of the difficulty in assessing the deficit accurately, plasma K+ concentration must be monitored carefully during repletion.

The use of intravenous administration should be limited to patients unable to utilize the enteral route or in the setting of severe complications (paralysis, arrhythmia, etc.). Intravenous K+-Cl每 should always be administered in saline solutions rather than dextrose since the dextrose-induced increase in insulin can acutely exacerbate hypokalemia. The peripheral intravenous dose is usually 20每40 mmol of K+-Cl每 per liter; higher concentrations can cause localized pain from chemical phlebitis, irritation, and sclerosis. If hypokalemia is severe (<2.5 mmol/L) and/or critically symptomatic, intravenous K+-Cl每 can be administered through a central vein with cardiac monitoring in an intensive care setting at rates of 10每20 mmol/h; higher rates should be reserved for acutely life-threatening complications. The absolute amount of administered K+ should be restricted (e.g., 20 mmol in 100 mL of saline solution) to prevent inadvertent infusion of a large dose. Femoral veins are preferable, since infusion through internal jugular or subclavian central lines can acutely increase the local concentration of K+ and affect cardiac conduction.

Strategies to minimize K+ losses also should be considered. These measures may include minimizing the dose of non-K+-sparing diuretics, restricting Na+ intake, and using clinically appropriate combinations of non-K+-sparing and K+-sparing medications (e.g., loop diuretics with ACE inhibitors).

Hyperkalemia

Hyperkalemia is defined as a plasma potassium level of 5.5 mM. It occurs in up to 10% of hospitalized patients; severe hyperkalemia (>6.0 mM) occurs in approximately 1%, with a significantly increased risk of mortality. Although redistribution and reduced tissue uptake can acutely cause hyperkalemia, a decrease in renal K+ excretion is the most common underlying cause (Table 45-5). Excessive intake of K+ is a rare cause because of the adaptive capacity to increase renal secretion; however, dietary intake can have a major effect in susceptible patients, e.g., diabetic patients with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism and chronic kidney disease. Drugs that have an impact on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis are also a major cause of hyperkalemia.

Table 45-5 Causes of Hyperkalemia

 
 
I. "Pseudo" hyperkalemia 
  A. Cellular efflux: thrombocytosis, erythrocytosis, leukocytosis, in vitro hemolysis 
  B. Hereditary defects in red cell membrane transport 
II. Intra- to extracellular shift 
  A. Acidosis 
  B. Hyperosmolality; radiocontrast, hypertonic dextrose, mannitol 
  C. -adrenergic antagonists (noncardioselective agents) 
  D. Digoxin and related glycosides (yellow oleander, foxglove, bufadienolide) 
  E. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis 
  F. Lysine, arginine, and -aminocaproic acid (structurally similar, positively charged) 
  G. Succinylcholine; thermal trauma, neuromuscular injury, disuse atrophy, mucositis, or prolonged immobilization  
  H. Rapid tumor lysis 
III. Inadequate excretion 
  A. Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis;  risk of hyperkalemia when used in combination 
    1. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
    2. Renin inhibitors: aliskiren [in combination with ACE-inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)] 
    3. ARBs 
    4. Blockade of the mineralocorticoid receptor: spironolactone, eplerenone, drospirenone 
    5. Blockade of ENaC: amiloride, triamterene, trimethoprim, pentamidine, nafamostat  
  B. Decreased distal delivery 
    1. Congestive heart failure 
    2. Volume depletion  
  C. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism 
    1. Tubulointerstitial diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), sickle cell anemia, obstructive uropathy 
    2. Diabetes, diabetic nephropathy 
    3. Drugs: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors, beta blockers, cyclosporine, tacrolimus 
    4. Chronic kidney disease, advanced age 
    5. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II: defects in WNK1 or WNK4 kinases  
  D. Renal resistance to mineralocorticoid 
    1. Tubulointerstitial diseases: SLE, amyloidosis, sickle cell anemia, obstructive uropathy, post-acute tubular necrosis 
    2. Hereditary: pseudohypoaldosteronism type I: defects in the mineralocorticoid receptor or ENaC  
  E. Advanced renal insufficiency 
    1. Chronic kidney disease 
    2. End-stage renal disease 
    3. Acute oliguric kidney injury 
  F. Primary adrenal insufficiency 
    1. Autoimmune: Addison's disease, polyglandular endocrinopathy 
    2. Infectious: HIV, cytomegalovirus, tuberculosis, disseminated fungal infection 
    3. Infiltrative: amyloidosis, malignancy, metastatic cancer 
    4. Drug-associated: heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin 
    5. Hereditary: adrenal hypoplasia congenita, congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, aldosterone synthase deficiency 
    6. Adrenal hemorrhage or infarction, including in antiphospholipid syndrome 
 

 

Pseudohyperkalemia

Hyperkalemia should be distinguished from factitious hyperkalemia or pseudohyperkalemia, an artifactual increase in serum K+ due to the release of K+ during or after venipuncture. Pseudohyperkalemia can occur in the setting of excessive muscle activity during venipuncture (fist clenching, etc.), a marked increase in cellular elements (thrombocytosis, leukocytosis, and/or erythrocytosis) with in vitro efflux of K+, and acute anxiety during venipuncture with respiratory alkalosis and redistributive hyperkalemia. Cooling of blood after venipuncture is another cause, due to reduced cellular uptake; the converse is the increased uptake of K+ by cells at high ambient temperatures, leading to normal values for hyperkalemic patients and/or to spurious hypokalemia in normokalemic patients. Finally, there are multiple genetic subtypes of hereditary pseudohyperkalemia caused by increases in the passive K+ permeability of erythrocytes. For example, causative mutations have been described in the red cell anion exchanger (AE1, encoded by the SLC4A1 gene), leading to reduced red cell anion transport, hemolytic anemia, the acquisition of a novel AE1-mediated K+ leak, and pseudohyperkalemia.

Redistribution and Hyperkalemia

Several different mechanisms can induce an efflux of intracellular K+ and hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia due to hypertonic mannitol, hypertonic saline, and intravenous immunoglobulin generally is attributed to a "solvent drag" effect as water moves out of cells along the osmotic gradient. Diabetic patients are also prone to osmotic hyperkalemia in response to intravenous hypertonic glucose when it is given without adequate insulin. Cationic amino acids〞specifically lysine, arginine, and the structurally related drug -aminocaproic acid〞cause efflux of K+ and hyperkalemia through an effective cation-K+ exchange of unknown identity and mechanism. Digoxin inhibits Na+,K+-ATPase and impairs the uptake of K+ by skeletal muscle so that digoxin overdose predictably results in hyperkalemia. Structurally related glycosides are found in specific plants (yellow oleander, foxglove, etc.) and in the cane toad, Bufo marinus (bufadienolide); ingestion of these substances and extracts from them also can cause hyperkalemia. Finally, fluoride ions also inhibit Na+,K+-ATPase, and so fluoride poisoning is typically associated with hyperkalemia.

Succinylcholine depolarizes muscle cells, causing an efflux of K+ through acetylcholine receptors (AChRs). The use of this agent is contraindicated in patients who have sustained thermal trauma, neuromuscular injury, disuse atrophy, mucositis, or prolonged immobilization. These disorders share a marked increase and redistribution of AChRs at the plasma membrane of muscle cells; depolarization of these upregulated AChRs by succinylcholine leads to an exaggerated efflux of K+ through the receptor-associated cation channels, resulting in acute hyperkalemia.

Hyperkalemia Due to Excess Intake or Tissue Necrosis

Increased intake of even small amounts of K+ may provoke severe hyperkalemia in patients with predisposing factors; hence, an assessment of dietary intake is crucial. Foods rich in potassium include tomatoes, bananas, and citrus fruits; occult sources of K+, particularly K+-containing salt substitutes, also may contribute significantly. Iatrogenic causes include simple overreplacement with K+-Cl每 and the administration of a potassium-containing medication (e.g., K+-penicillin) to a susceptible patient. Red cell transfusion is a well-described cause of hyperkalemia, typically in the setting of massive transfusions. Finally, tissue necrosis, as in acute tumor lysis syndrome and rhabdomyolysis, predictably causes hyperkalemia from the release of intracellular K+.

Hypoaldosteronism and Hyperkalemia

Aldosterone release from the adrenal gland may be reduced by hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, medications, or primary hypoaldosteronism or by isolated deficiency of ACTH (secondary hypoaldosteronism). Primary hypoaldosteronism may be genetic or acquired (Chap. 342) but is commonly caused by autoimmunity either in Addison's disease or in the context of a polyglandular endocrinopathy. HIV has surpassed tuberculosis as the most important infectious cause of adrenal insufficiency. The adrenal involvement in HIV disease is usually subclinical; however, adrenal insufficiency may be precipitated by stress, drugs such as ketoconazole that inhibit steroidogenesis, or the acute withdrawal of steroid agents such as megestrol.

Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is a very common predisposing factor in several overlapping subsets of hyperkalemic patients: diabetic patients, the elderly, and patients with renal insufficiency. Classically, these patients should have suppressed PRA and aldosterone; approximately 50% have an associated acidosis with a reduced renal excretion of NH4+, a positive urinary anion gap, and urine pH <5.5. Most patients are volume expanded, with secondary increases in circulating atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) that inhibit both renal renin release and adrenal aldosterone release.

Renal Disease and Hyperkalemia

Chronic kidney disease and end-stage kidney disease are very common causes of hyperkalemia because of the associated deficit or absence of functioning nephrons. Hyperkalemia is more common in oliguric acute kidney injury; distal tubular flow rate and Na+ delivery is less of a limiting factor in nonoliguric patients. Hyperkalemia out of proportion to GFR can also be seen in the context of tubulointerstitial disease that affects the distal nephron, such as amyloidosis, sickle cell anemia, interstitial nephritis, and obstructive uropathy.

Hereditary renal causes of hyperkalemia have overlapping clinical features with hypoaldosteronism, hence the diagnostic label pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA). PHA-I has both an autosomal recessive and an autosomal dominant form. The autosomal dominant form is due to loss-of-function mutations in MLR; the recessive form is caused by various combinations of mutations in the three subunits of ENaC, resulting in impaired Na+ channel activity in principal cells and other tissues. Patients with recessive PHA-I experience lifelong salt wasting, hypotension, and hyperkalemia, whereas the phenotype of autosomal dominant PHA-I due to MLR dysfunction improves in adulthood. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA-II, also known as hereditary hypertension with hyperkalemia) is in every respect the mirror image of GS caused by loss of function in NCC, the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl每 cotransporter (see above); the clinical phenotype includes hypertension, hyperkalemia, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, suppressed PRA and aldosterone, hypercalciuria, and reduced bone density. PHA-II thus behaves like a gain of function in NCC, and treatment with thiazides results in resolution of the entire clinical phenotype; however, PHA-II is caused by mutations in the WNK1 and WNK4 serine-threonine kinases, which regulate NCC activity.

Medication-Associated Hyperkalemia

Most medications associated with hyperkalemia cause inhibition of some component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, renin inhibitors, and mineralocorticoid receptors are predictable and common causes of hyperkalemia, particularly when prescribed in combination. The oral contraceptive agent Yasmin-28 contains the progestin drospirenone, which inhibits the MLR and can cause hyperkalemia in susceptible patients. Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, NSAIDs, and cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors cause hyperkalemia by multiple mechanisms but share the ability to cause hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. Notably, most drugs that affect the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis also block the local adrenal response to hyperkalemia, thus attenuating the direct stimulation of aldosterone release by increased plasma K+ concentration.

Inhibition of apical ENaC activity in the distal nephron by amiloride and other K+-sparing diuretics results in hyperkalemia, often with a voltage-dependent hyperchloremic acidosis and/or hypovolemic hyponatremia. Amiloride is structurally similar to the antibiotics trimethoprim (TMP) and pentamidine, which also block ENaC; risk factors for TMP-associated hyperkalemia include the administered dose, renal insufficiency, and hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. Indirect inhibition of ENaC at the plasma membrane is also a cause of hyperkalemia; nafamostat, a protease inhibitor utilized in the management of pancreatitis, inhibits aldosterone-induced proteases that activate ENaC by proteolytic cleavage.

Clinical Features

Hyperkalemia is a medical emergency because of its effects on the heart. Cardiac arrhythmias associated with hyperkalemia include sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, slow idioventricular rhythms, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and asystole. Mild increases in extracellular K+ affect the repolarization phase of the cardiac action potential, resulting in changes in T-wave morphology; further increase in plasma K+ concentration depresses intracardiac conduction, with progressive prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals. Severe hyperkalemia results in loss of the P wave and a progressive widening of the QRS complex; development of a sine-wave sinoventricular rhythm suggests impending ventricular fibrillation or asystole. Classically, the electrocardiographic manifestations in hyperkalemia progress from tall peaked T waves (5.5每6.5 mM), to a loss of P waves (6.5每7.5 mM), to a widened QRS complex (7每8 mM), and ultimately to a sine wave pattern (8 mM). However, these changes are notoriously insensitive, particularly in patients with chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease.

Hyperkalemia from a variety of causes can also present with ascending paralysis; this is denoted secondary hyperkalemic paralysis to differentiate it from familial hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP). The presentation may include diaphragmatic paralysis and respiratory failure. Patients with familial HYPP develop myopathic weakness during hyperkalemia induced by increased K+ intake or rest after heavy exercise. Depolarization of skeletal muscle by hyperkalemia unmasks an inactivation defect in skeletal Na+ channels; autosomal dominant mutations in the SCN4A gene encoding this channel are the predominant cause.

Within the kidney, hyperkalemia has negative effects on the ability to excrete an acid load, and so hyperkalemia per se can contribute to metabolic acidosis. This defect appears to be due in part to competition between K+ and NH4+ for reabsorption by the TALH and subsequent countercurrent multiplication, ultimately reducing the medullary gradient for NH3/NH4 excretion by the distal nephron. Regardless of the underlying mechanism, restoration of normokalemia can in many instances correct hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis.

Diagnostic Approach

The first priority in the management of hyperkalemia is to assess the need for emergency treatment, followed by a comprehensive workup to determine the cause (Fig. 45-8). History and physical examination should focus on medications, diet and dietary supplements, risk factors for kidney failure, reduction in urine output, blood pressure, and volume status. Initial laboratory tests should include electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, serum osmolality, Mg2+ and Ca2+, a complete blood count, and urinary pH. A urine Na+ concentration <20 mM indicates that distal Na+ delivery is a limiting factor in K+ excretion; volume repletion with 0.9% saline or treatment with furosemide may be effective in reducing plasma K+ concentration. Serum and urine osmolality is required for calculation of the TTKG (Fig. 45-8). The expected values of the TTKG are largely based on historic data and are <3-4 in the presence of hypokalemia and >6-7 in the presence of hyperkalemia. TTKG is measured as follows:



Figure 45-8

 
 
 
The diagnostic approach to hyperkalemia. See text for details. ACE-I, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; acute GN, acute glomerulonephritis; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; ECG, electrocardiogram; ECV, effective circulatory volume; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LMW heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PHA, pseudohypoaldosteronism; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Mount and Zandi-Nejad; with permission.)
 
 

Treatment: Hyperkalemia

Electrocardiographic manifestations of hyperkalemia should be considered a medical emergency and treated urgently. However, patients with significant hyperkalemia (plasma K+ concentration 6.5每7 mM) in the absence of ECG changes should be aggressively managed because of the limitations of ECG changes as a predictor of cardiac toxicity. Urgent management of hyperkalemia includes admission to the hospital, continuous cardiac monitoring, and immediate treatment. The treatment of hyperkalemia is divided into three stages:

Immediate antagonism of the cardiac effects of hyperkalemia. Intravenous calcium serves to protect the heart while measures are taken to correct hyperkalemia. Calcium raises the action potential threshold and reduces excitability without changing the resting membrane potential. By restoring the difference between the resting and threshold potentials, calcium reverses the depolarization blockade caused by hyperkalemia. The recommended dose is 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate (3每4 mL of calcium chloride), infused intravenously over 2 to 3 min with cardiac monitoring. The effect of the infusion starts in 1每3 min and lasts 30每60 min; the dose should be repeated if there is no change in ECG findings or if they recur after initial improvement. Hypercalcemia potentiates the cardiac toxicity of digoxin; hence, intravenous calcium should be used with extreme caution in patients taking this medication. If judged necessary,10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate can be added to 100 mL of5% dextrose in water and infused over 20每30 min to avoid acute hypercalcemia.

Rapid reduction in plasma K+ concentration by redistribution into cells. Insulin lowers plasma K+ concentration by shifting K+ into cells. The recommended dose is 10 units of IV regular insulin followed immediately by 50 mL of 50% dextrose (D50W, 25 g of glucose total); the effect begins in 10每20 min, peaks at 30每60 min, and lasts 4 to 6 h. Bolus D50W without insulin is never appropriate because of the risk of acutely worsening hyperkalemia due to the osmotic effect of hypertonic glucose. Hypoglycemia is common with insulin plus glucose; hence, this should be followed by an infusion of 10% dextrose at 50 to 75 mL/h, with close monitoring of plasma glucose concentration. In hyperkalemic patients with glucose concentrations 200每250 mg/dL, insulin should be administered without glucose, again with close monitoring of glucose concentrations.

2-agonists, most commonly albuterol, are effective but underutilized agents for the acute management of hyperkalemia. Albuterol and insulin with glucose have an additive effect on plasma K+ concentration; however, 20% of patients with end-stage renal disease are resistant to the effect of 2-agonists; hence, these drugs should not be used without insulin. The recommended dose for inhaled albuterol is 10每20 mg of nebulized albuterol in 4 mL of normal saline, inhaled over 10 min; the effect starts at about 30 min, reaches its peak at about 90 min, and lasts 2每6 h. Hyperglycemia is a side effect, along with tachycardia; 2-agonists should be used with caution in hyperkalemic patients with known cardiac disease.

Intravenous bicarbonate has no role in the routine treatment of hyperkalemia. It should be reserved for patients with hyperkalemia and concomitant metabolic acidosis, and only if judged appropriate for management of the acidosis. It should not be given as a hypertonic intravenous bolus in light of the risk of hypernatremia but should be infused in an isotonic or hypotonic fluid (e.g., 150 meq in 1 L of D5W).

Removal of potassium. This typically is accomplished by using cation exchange resins, diuretics, and/or dialysis. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) exchanges Na+ for K+ in the gastrointestinal tract and increases the fecal excretion of K+. The recommended dose of SPS is 15-30 g, typically given in a premade suspension with 33% sorbitol to avoid constipation. The effect of SPS on plasma K+ concentration is slow; the full effect may take up to 24 hours and usually requires repeated doses every 4每6 hours. Intestinal necrosis is the most serious complication of SPS. Studies in experimental animals suggest that sorbitol is required for the intestinal injury; however, SPS crystals can often be detected in the injured human intestine, suggesting a direct role for SPS crystals in this complication. Regardless, in light of the risk of intestinal necrosis, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has recently stated that the administration of sorbitol with SPS is no longer recommended; however, administering SPS without sorbitol might not eliminate the risk of intestinal necrosis, given the evident role for the SPS resin. Therefore, clinicians must carefully consider whether emergency treatment with SPS is necessary and appropriate for the treatment of hyperkalemia; for example, SPS is unnecessary if acute dialysis is appropriate and immediately available. If SPS is administered, the preparation should ideally not contain sorbitol. Reasonable substitutes for the laxative effect of sorbitol include lactulose and some preparations of polyethylene glycol 3350; however, data demonstrating the efficacy and safety of these laxatives with SPS are not available. SPS should not be administered in patients at higher risk for intestinal necrosis, including postoperative patients, patients with a history of bowel obstruction, patients with slow intestinal transit, patients with ischemic bowel disease, and renal transplant patients. Loop and thiazide diuretics can be utilized to reduce plasma K+ concentration in volume-replete or hypervolemic patients with sufficient renal function for a diuretic response. Finally, hemodialysis is the most effective and reliable method to reduce plasma K+ concentration; peritoneal dialysis is considerably less effective. The amount of K+ removed during hemodialysis depends on the relative distribution of K+ between ICF and ECF (potentially affected by prior therapy for hyperkalemia), the type and surface area of the dialyzer used, dialysate and blood flow rates, the dialysate flow rate, dialysis duration, and the plasma to dialysate K+ gradient.
 
Further Readings

Adrogue HJ, Madias NE: Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med 342:1493, 2000 [PMID: 10816188] 

 
Ellison DH, Berl T: Clinical practice: The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. N Engl J Med 356:2064, 2007 [PMID: 17507705] 

 
Mohmand HK et al: Hypertonic saline for hyponatremia: Risk of inadvertent overcorrection. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2:1110, 2007 [PMID: 17913972] 

 
Mount DB, Zandi-Nejad K: Disorders of potassium balance, in Brenner and Rector'sThe Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 2008, pp 547每587 

 
Perianayagam A et al: DDAVP is effective in preventing and reversing inadvertent overcorrection of hyponatremia. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3:331, 2008 [PMID: 18235152] 

 
Schrier RW: Decreased effective blood volume in edematous disorders: What does this mean? J Am Soc Nephrol 18:2028, 2007 [PMID: 17568020] 

 
〞〞〞 et al: Tolvaptan, a selective oral vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist, for hyponatremia. N Engl J Med 355:2099, 2006 

 
Sterns RH et al: Ion-exchange resins for the treatment of hyperkalemia: Are they safe and effective? J Am Soc Nephrol 21:733, 2010 [PMID: 20167700] 
 
 

^^
Hypercalcemia and Hypocalcemia: Introduction

The calcium ion plays a critical role in normal cellular function and signaling, regulating diverse physiologic processes such as neuromuscular signaling, cardiac contractility, hormone secretion, and blood coagulation. Thus, extracellular calcium concentrations are maintained within an exquisitely narrow range through a series of feedback mechanisms that involve parathyroid hormone (PTH) and the active vitamin D metabolite 1,25-dihydroxyvitmin D [1,25(OH)2D]. These feedback mechanisms are orchestrated by integrating signals between the parathyroid glands, kidney, intestine, and bone (Fig. 46-1; Chap. 352).

Figure 46-1

 
 
 
Feedback mechanisms maintaining extracellular calcium concentrations within a narrow, physiologic range [8.9每10.1 mg/dL (2.2每2.5 mM)]. A decrease in extracellular (ECF) calcium (Ca2+) triggers an increase in parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion (1) via the calcium sensor receptor on parathyroid cells. PTH, in turn, results in increased tubular reabsorption of calcium by the kidney (2) and resorption of calcium from bone (2) and also stimulates renal 1,25(OH)2D production (3). 1,25(OH)2D, in turn, acts principally on the intestine to increase calcium absorption (4). Collectively, these homeostatic mechanisms serve to restore serum calcium levels to normal.
 
 

Disorders of serum calcium concentration are relatively common and often serve as a harbinger of underlying disease. This chapter provides a brief summary of the approach to patients with altered serum calcium levels. See Chap. 353 for a detailed discussion of this topic.
 
Hypercalcemia

Etiology

The causes of hypercalcemia can be understood and classified based on derangements in the normal feedback mechanisms that regulate serum calcium (Table 46-1). Excess PTH production, which is not appropriately suppressed by increased serum calcium concentrations, occurs in primary neoplastic disorders of the parathyroid glands (parathyroid adenomas; hyperplasia; or, rarely, carcinoma) that are associated with increased parathyroid cell mass and impaired feedback inhibition by calcium. Inappropriate PTH secretion for the ambient level of serum calcium also occurs with heterozygous inactivating calcium sensor receptor (CaSR) mutations, which impair extracellular calcium sensing by the parathyroid glands and the kidneys, resulting in familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH). Although PTH secretion by tumors is extremely rare, many solid tumors produce PTH-related peptide (PTHrP), which shares homology with PTH in the first 13 amino acids and binds the PTH receptor, thus mimicking effects of PTH on bone and the kidney. In PTHrP-mediated hypercalcemia of malignancy, PTH levels are suppressed by the high serum calcium levels. Hypercalcemia associated with granulomatous disease (e.g., sarcoidosis) or lymphomas is caused by enhanced conversion of 25(OH)D to the potent 1,25(OH)2D. In these disorders, 1,25(OH)2D enhances intestinal calcium absorption, resulting in hypercalcemia and suppressed PTH. Disorders that directly increase calcium mobilization from bone, such as hyperthyroidism or osteolytic metastases, also lead to hypercalcemia with suppressed PTH secretion as does exogenous calcium overload, as in milk-alkali syndrome, or total parenteral nutrition with excessive calcium supplementation.

Table 46-1 Causes of Hypercalcemia

 
 
Excessive PTH production 
  Primary hyperparathyroidism (adenoma, hyperplasia, rarely carcinoma)  
  Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (long-term stimulation of PTH secretion in renal insufficiency) 
  Ectopic PTH secretion (very rare)  
  Inactivating mutations in the CaSR (FHH) 
  Alterations in CaSR function (lithium therapy) 
Hypercalcemia of malignancy 
  Overproduction of PTHrP (many solid tumors)  
  Lytic skeletal metastases (breast, myeloma) 
Excessive 1,25(OH)2D production 
  Granulomatous diseases (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, silicosis) 
  Lymphomas 
  Vitamin D intoxication 
Primary increase in bone resorption 
  Hyperthyroidism 
  Immobilization 
Excessive calcium intake 
  Milk-alkali syndrome 
  Total parenteral nutrition 
Other causes 
  Endocrine disorders (adrenal insufficiency, pheochromocytoma, VIPoma) 
  Medications (thiazides, vitamin A, antiestrogens) 
 


Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; FHH, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; PTH, parathyroid hormone; PTHrP, PTH-related peptide.
 

Clinical Manifestations

Mild hypercalcemia (up to 11每11.5 mg/dL) is usually asymptomatic and recognized only on routine calcium measurements. Some patients may complain of vague neuropsychiatric symptoms, including trouble concentrating, personality changes, or depression. Other presenting symptoms may include peptic ulcer disease or nephrolithiasis, and fracture risk may be increased. More severe hypercalcemia (>12每13 mg/dL), particularly if it develops acutely, may result in lethargy, stupor, or coma, as well as gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, anorexia, constipation, or pancreatitis). Hypercalcemia decreases renal concentrating ability, which may cause polyuria and polydipsia. With long-standing hyperparathyroidism, patients may present with bone pain or pathologic fractures. Finally, hypercalcemia can result in significant electrocardiographic changes, including bradycardia, AV block, and short QT interval; changes in serum calcium can be monitored by following the QT interval (Fig. 228-16).

Diagnostic Approach

The first step in the diagnostic evaluation of hyper- or hypocalcemia is to ensure that the alteration in serum calcium levels is not due to abnormal albumin concentrations. About 50% of total calcium is ionized, and the rest is bound principally to albumin. Although direct measurements of ionized calcium are possible, they are easily influenced by collection methods and other artifacts; thus, it is generally preferable to measure total calcium and albumin to "correct" the serum calcium. When serum albumin concentrations are reduced, a corrected calcium concentration is calculated by adding 0.2 mM (0.8 mg/dL) to the total calcium level for every decrement in serum albumin of 1.0 g/dL below the reference value of 4.1 g/dL for albumin, and, conversely, for elevations in serum albumin.

A detailed history may provide important clues regarding the etiology of the hypercalcemia (Table 46-1). Chronic hypercalcemia is most commonly caused by primary hyperparathyroidism, as opposed to the second most common etiology of hypercalcemia, an underlying malignancy. The history should include medication use, previous neck surgery, and systemic symptoms suggestive of sarcoidosis or lymphoma.

Once true hypercalcemia is established, the second most important laboratory test in the diagnostic evaluation is a PTH level using a two-site assay for the intact hormone. Increases in PTH are often accompanied by hypophosphatemia. In addition, serum creatinine should be measured to assess renal function; hypercalcemia may impair renal function, and renal clearance of PTH may be altered depending on the fragments detected by the assay. If the PTH level is increased (or "inappropriately normal") in the setting of elevated calcium and low phosphorus, the diagnosis is almost always primary hyperparathyroidism. Because individuals with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH) may also present with mildly elevated PTH levels and hypercalcemia, this diagnosis should be considered and excluded because parathyroid surgery is ineffective in this condition. A calcium/creatinine clearance ratio (calculated as urine calcium/serum calcium divided by urine creatinine/serum creatinine) of <0.01 is suggestive of FHH, particularly when there is a family history of mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia. In addition, a number of laboratories are now offering sequence analysis of the CaSR gene for the definitive diagnosis of FHH. Ectopic PTH secretion is extremely rare.

A suppressed PTH level in the face of hypercalcemia is consistent with non-parathyroid-mediated hypercalcemia, most often due to underlying malignancy. Although a tumor that causes hypercalcemia is generally overt, a PTHrP level may be needed to establish the diagnosis of hypercalcemia of malignancy. Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are increased in granulomatous disorders, and clinical evaluation in combination with laboratory testing will generally provide a diagnosis for the various disorders listed in Table 46-1.

Treatment: Hypercalcemia

Mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia does not require immediate therapy, and management should be dictated by the underlying diagnosis. By contrast, significant, symptomatic hypercalcemia usually requires therapeutic intervention independent of the etiology of hypercalcemia. Initial therapy of significant hypercalcemia begins with volume expansion because hypercalcemia invariably leads to dehydration; 4每6 L of intravenous saline may be required over the first 24 h, keeping in mind that underlying comorbidities (e.g., congestive heart failure) may require the use of loop diuretics to enhance sodium and calcium excretion. However, loop diuretics should not be initiated until the volume status has been restored to normal. If there is increased calcium mobilization from bone (as in malignancy or severe hyperparathyroidism), drugs that inhibit bone resorption should be considered. Zoledronic acid (e.g., 4 mg intravenously over 30 min), pamidronate (e.g., 60每90 mg intravenously over 2每4 h), and etidronate (e.g., 7.5 mg/kg per day for 3每7 consecutive days) are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy in adults. Onset of action is within 1每3 days, with normalization of serum calcium levels occurring in 60每90% of patients. Bisphosphonate infusions may need to be repeated if hypercalcemia relapses. Because of their effectiveness, bisphosphonates have replaced calcitonin or plicamycin, which are rarely used in current practice for the management of hypercalcemia. In rare instances, dialysis may be necessary. Finally, while intravenous phosphate chelates calcium and decreases serum calcium levels, this therapy can be toxic because calcium-phosphate complexes may deposit in tissues and cause extensive organ damage.

In patients with 1,25(OH)2D-mediated hypercalcemia, glucocorticoids are the preferred therapy, as they decrease 1,25(OH)2D production. Intravenous hydrocortisone (100每300 mg daily) or oral prednisone (40每60 mg daily) for 3每7 days are used most often. Other drugs, such as ketoconazole, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine, may also decrease 1,25(OH)2D production and are used occasionally.
 
Hypocalcemia

Etiology

The causes of hypocalcemia can be differentiated according to whether serum PTH levels are low (hypoparathyroidism) or high (secondary hyperparathyroidism). Although there are many potential causes of hypocalcemia, impaired PTH or vitamin D production are the most common etiologies ( Table 46-2 ) (Chap. 353). Because PTH is the main defense against hypocalcemia, disorders associated with deficient PTH production or secretion may be associated with profound, life-threatening hypocalcemia. In adults, hypoparathyroidism most commonly results from inadvertent damage to all four glands during thyroid or parathyroid gland surgery. Hypoparathyroidism is a cardinal feature of autoimmune endocrinopathies (Chap. 351); rarely, it may be associated with infiltrative diseases such as sarcoidosis. Impaired PTH secretion may be secondary to magnesium deficiency or to activating mutations in the CaSR, which suppress PTH, leading to effects that are opposite to those that occur in FHH.

Table 46-2 Causes of Hypocalcemia

 
 
Low Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Hypoparathyroidism)  
Parathyroid agenesis  
  Isolated  
  DiGeorge syndrome  
Parathyroid destruction  
  Surgical  
  Radiation  
  Infiltration by metastases or systemic diseases  
  Autoimmune  
Reduced parathyroid function  
  Hypomagnesemia 
  Activating CaSR mutations 
High Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Secondary Hyperparathyroidism)  
Vitamin D deficiency or impaired 1,25(OH)2D production/action 
  
  Nutritional vitamin D deficiency (poor intake or absorption)  
  Renal insufficiency with impaired 1,25(OH)2D production 
  
  Vitamin D resistance, including receptor defects  
Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes  
  PTH receptor mutations  
  Pseudohypoparathyroidism (G protein mutations)  
Drugs  
  Calcium chelators  
  Inhibitors of bone resorption (bisphosphonates, plicamycin)  
  Altered vitamin D metabolism (phenytoin, ketoconazole)  
Miscellaneous causes  
  Acute pancreatitis 
  Acute rhabdomyolysis 
  Hungry bone syndrome after parathyroidectomy  
  Osteoblastic metastases with marked stimulation of bone formation (prostate cancer) 
 


Abbreviations: CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
 

Vitamin D deficiency, impaired 1,25(OH)2D production (primarily secondary to renal insufficiency), or vitamin D resistance also cause hypocalcemia. However, the degree of hypocalcemia in these disorders is generally not as severe as that seen with hypoparathyroidism because the parathyroids are capable of mounting a compensatory increase in PTH secretion. Hypocalcemia may also occur in conditions associated with severe tissue injury such as burns, rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, or pancreatitis. The cause of hypocalcemia in these settings may include a combination of low albumin, hyperphosphatemia, tissue deposition of calcium, and impaired PTH secretion.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with hypocalcemia may be asymptomatic if the decreases in serum calcium are relatively mild and chronic, or they may present with life-threatening complications. Moderate to severe hypocalcemia is associated with paresthesias, usually of the fingers, toes, and circumoral regions, and is caused by increased neuromuscular irritability. On physical examination, a Chvostek's sign (twitching of the circumoral muscles in response to gentle tapping of the facial nerve just anterior to the ear) may be elicited, although it is also present in 10% of normal individuals. Carpal spasm may be induced by inflation of a blood pressure cuff to 20 mmHg above the patient's systolic blood pressure for 3 min (Trousseau's sign). Severe hypocalcemia can induce seizures, carpopedal spasm, bronchospasm, laryngospasm, and prolongation of the QT interval.

Diagnostic Approach

In addition to measuring serum calcium, it is useful to determine albumin, phosphorus, and magnesium levels. As for the evaluation of hypercalcemia, determining the PTH level is central to the evaluation of hypocalcemia. A suppressed (or "inappropriately low") PTH level in the setting of hypocalcemia establishes absent or reduced PTH secretion (hypoparathyroidism) as the cause of the hypocalcemia. Further history will often elicit the underlying cause (i.e., parathyroid agenesis vs. destruction). By contrast, an elevated PTH level (secondary hyperparathyroidism) should direct attention to the vitamin D axis as the cause of the hypocalcemia. Nutritional vitamin D deficiency is best assessed by obtaining serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels, which reflect vitamin D stores. In the setting of renal insufficiency or suspected vitamin D resistance, serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are informative.

Treatment: Hypocalcemia

The approach to treatment depends on the severity of the hypocalcemia, the rapidity with which it develops, and the accompanying complications (e.g., seizures, laryngospasm). Acute, symptomatic hypocalcemia is initially managed with calcium gluconate, 10 mL 10% wt/vol (90 mg or 2.2 mmol) intravenously, diluted in 50 mL of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 5 min. Continuing hypocalcemia often requires a constant intravenous infusion (typically 10 ampuls of calcium gluconate or 900 mg of calcium in 1 L of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride administered over 24 h). Accompanying hypomagnesemia, if present, should be treated with appropriate magnesium supplementation.

Chronic hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism is treated with calcium supplements (1000每1500 mg/d elemental calcium in divided doses) and either vitamin D2 or D3 (25,000每100,000 U daily) or calcitriol [1,25(OH)2D, 0.25每2 g/d]. Other vitamin D metabolites (dihydrotachysterol, alfacalcidiol) are now used less frequently. Vitamin D deficiency, however, is best treated using vitamin D supplementation, with the dose depending on the severity of the deficit and the underlying cause. Thus, nutritional vitamin D deficiency generally responds to relatively low doses of vitamin D (50,000 U, 2每3 times per week for several months), while vitamin D deficiency due to malabsorption may require much higher doses (100,000 U/d or more). The treatment goal is to bring serum calcium into the low normal range and to avoid hypercalciuria, which may lead to nephrolithiasis.
 
Further Readings

Bilezikian JP: Primary hyperparathyroidism and hypoparathyroidism, in Conn's Current Therapy, RE Rakel, ET Bope (eds), Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2009 

 
Bilezikian JP, Khan AA et al: Guidelines for the management of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: Summary statement from the third international workship. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:335, 2009 [PMID: 19193908] 

 
Egbuna OI, Brown EM: Hypercalcaemic and hypocalcaemic conditions due to calcium-sensing receptor mutations. Best Pract Clin Rheumatol 22:129, 2008 [PMID: 18328986] 

 
Shoback D: Clinical practice. Hypoparathyroidism. N Engl J Med 359:391, 2008 [PMID: 18650515] 

 
Stewart AF: Hypercalcemia associated with cancer. N Engl J Med 352:373, 2005 [PMID: 15673803] 
 
 

^^
Normal Acid-Base Homeostasis

Systemic arterial pH is maintained between 7.35 and 7.45 by extracellular and intracellular chemical buffering together with respiratory and renal regulatory mechanisms. The control of arterial CO2 tension (Paco2) by the central nervous system (CNS) and respiratory systems and the control of the plasma bicarbonate by the kidneys stabilize the arterial pH by excretion or retention of acid or alkali. The metabolic and respiratory components that regulate systemic pH are described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:



Under most circumstances, CO2 production and excretion are matched, and the usual steady-state Paco2 is maintained at 40 mmHg. Underexcretion of CO2 produces hypercapnia, and overexcretion causes hypocapnia. Nevertheless, production and excretion are again matched at a new steady-state Paco2. Therefore, the Paco2 is regulated primarily by neural respiratory factors and is not subject to regulation by the rate of CO2 production. Hypercapnia is usually the result of hypoventilation rather than of increased CO2 production. Increases or decreases in Paco2 represent derangements of neural respiratory control or are due to compensatory changes in response to a primary alteration in the plasma [HCO3每].

The kidneys regulate plasma [HCO3每] through three main processes: (1) "reabsorption" of filtered HCO3每, (2) formation of titratable acid, and (3) excretion of NH4+ in the urine. The kidney filters 4000 mmol of HCO3每 per day. To reabsorb the filtered load of HCO3每, the renal tubules must therefore secrete 4000 mmol of hydrogen ions. Between 80 and 90% of HCO3每 is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. The distal nephron reabsorbs the remainder and secretes H+ to defend systemic pH. While this quantity of protons, 40每60 mmol/d, is small, it must be secreted to prevent chronic positive H+ balance and metabolic acidosis. This quantity of secreted protons is represented in the urine as titratable acid and NH4+. Metabolic acidosis in the face of normal renal function increases NH4+ production and excretion. NH4+ production and excretion are impaired in chronic renal failure, hyperkalemia, and renal tubular acidosis.
 
Diagnosis of General Types of Disturbances

The most common clinical disturbances are simple acid-base disorders; i.e., metabolic acidosis or alkalosis or respiratory acidosis or alkalosis. Because compensation is not complete, the pH is abnormal in simple disturbances. More complicated clinical situations can give rise to mixed acid-base disturbances.

Simple Acid-Base Disorders

Primary respiratory disturbances (primary changes in Paco2) invoke compensatory metabolic responses (secondary changes in [HCO3每]), and primary metabolic disturbances elicit predictable compensatory respiratory responses (secondary changes in Paco2). Physiologic compensation can be predicted from the relationships displayed in Table 47-1. Metabolic acidosis due to an increase in endogenous acids (e.g., ketoacidosis) lowers extracellular fluid [HCO3每] and decreases extracellular pH. This stimulates the medullary chemoreceptors to increase ventilation and to return the ratio of [HCO3每] to Paco2, and thus pH, toward, but not to, normal. The degree of respiratory compensation expected in a simple form of metabolic acidosis can be predicted from the relationship: Paco2 = (1.5 x [HCO3每]) + 8 ㊣ 2. Thus, a patient with metabolic acidosis and [HCO3每] of 12 mmol/L would be expected to have a Paco2 between 24 and 28 mmHg. Values for Paco2 <24 or >28 mmHg define a mixed disturbance (metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis or metabolic alkalosis and respiratory acidosis, respectively). Another way to judge the appropriateness of the response in [HCO3每] or Paco2 is to use an acid-base nomogram (Fig. 47-1). While the shaded areas of the nomogram show the 95% confidence limits for normal compensation in simple disturbances, finding acid-base values within the shaded area does not necessarily rule out a mixed disturbance. Imposition of one disorder over another may result in values lying within the area of a third. Thus, the nomogram, while convenient, is not a substitute for the equations in Table 47-1.

Table 47-1 Prediction of Compensatory Responses on Simple Acid-Base Disturbances and Pattern of Changes

 
 
    Range of Values     
Disorder Prediction of Compensation pH HCO3每
  Paco2
  
Metabolic acidosis Paco2 = (1.5X HCO3每) + 8 ㊣ 2
  Low Low Low 
  or        
  Paco2 will  1.25 mmHg per mmol/L  in [HCO3每]
        
  or        
  Paco2 = [HCO3每] + 15
        
Metabolic alkalosis Paco2 will  0.75 mmHg per mmol/L  in [HCO3每]
  High High High 
  or        
  Paco2 will  6 mmHg per 10 mmol/L  in [HCO3每]
        
  or        
  Paco2 = [HCO3每] + 15
        
Respiratory alkalosis   High Low Low 
  Acute [HCO3每] will  0.2 mmol/L per mmHg  in Paco2
        
  Chronic [HCO3每] will  0.4 mmol/L per mmHg  in Paco2
        
Respiratory acidosis   Low High High 
  Acute [HCO3每] will  0.1 mmol/L per mmHg  in Paco2
        
  Chronic [HCO3每] will  0.4 mmol/L per mmHg  in Paco2
        
 

 
Figure 47-1

 
 
 
Acid-base nomogram. Shown are the 90% confidence limits (range of values) of the normal respiratory and metabolic compensations for primary acid-base disturbances. (From DuBose, used with permission.)
 
 

Mixed Acid-Base Disorders

Mixed acid-base disorders〞defined as independently coexisting disorders, not merely compensatory responses〞are often seen in patients in critical care units and can lead to dangerous extremes of pH (Table 47-2). A patient with diabetic ketoacidosis (metabolic acidosis) may develop an independent respiratory problem (e.g., pneumonia) leading to respiratory acidosis or alkalosis. Patients with underlying pulmonary disease (e.g., COPD) may not respond to metabolic acidosis with an appropriate ventilatory response because of insufficient respiratory reserve. Such imposition of respiratory acidosis on metabolic acidosis can lead to severe acidemia. When metabolic acidosis and metabolic alkalosis coexist in the same patient, the pH may be normal or near normal. When the pH is normal, an elevated anion gap (AG; see below) reliably denotes the presence of an AG metabolic acidosis. A discrepancy in the AG (prevailing minus normal AG) and the HCO3每 (normal minus prevailing HCO3每) indicates the presence of a mixed high-gap acidosis〞metabolic alkalosis (see example below). A diabetic patient with ketoacidosis may have renal dysfunction resulting in simultaneous metabolic acidosis. Patients who have ingested an overdose of drug combinations such as sedatives and salicylates may have mixed disturbances as a result of the acid-base response to the individual drugs (metabolic acidosis mixed with respiratory acidosis or respiratory alkalosis, respectively). Triple acid-base disturbances are more complex. For example, patients with metabolic acidosis due to alcoholic ketoacidosis may develop metabolic alkalosis due to vomiting and superimposed respiratory alkalosis due to the hyperventilation of hepatic dysfunction or alcohol withdrawal.

Table 47-2 Examples of Mixed Acid-Base Disorders

 
 
Mixed Metabolic and Respiratory 
Metabolic acidosis〞respiratory alkalosis 
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing Paco2below predicted value (Table 47-1)
  
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl每, 106; HCO3每, 14; AG, 20; Paco2, 24; pH, 7.39 (lactic acidosis, sepsis in ICU)
  
Metabolic acidosis〞respiratory acidosis 
Key: High- or normal-AG metabolic acidosis; prevailing Paco2above predicted value (Table 47-1)
  
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl每, 102; HCO3每, 18; AG, 20; Paco2, 38; pH, 7.30 (severe pneumonia, pulmonary edema)
  
Metabolic alkalosis〞respiratory alkalosis 
Key: Paco2 does not increase as predicted; pH higher than expected
  
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 4.0; Cl每, 91; HCO3每, 33; AG, 16; Paco2, 38; pH, 7.55 (liver disease and diuretics)
  
Metabolic alkalosis〞respiratory acidosis 
Key: Paco2 higher than predicted; pH normal
  
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.5; Cl每, 88; HCO3每, 42; AG, 10; Paco2, 67; pH, 7.42 (COPD on diuretics)
  
Mixed Metabolic Disorders 
Metabolic acidosis〞metabolic alkalosis 
Key: Only detectable with high-AG acidosis; AG >> HCO3每
  
Example: Na+, 140; K+, 3.0; Cl每, 95; HCO3每, 25; AG, 20; Paco2, 40; pH, 7.42 (uremia with vomiting)
  
Metabolic acidosis〞metabolic acidosis 
Key: Mixed high-AG〞normal-AG acidosis; HCO3每 accounted for by
  
combined change in AG and Cl每
  
Example: Na+, 135; K+, 3.0; Cl每, 110; HCO3每, 10; AG, 15; Paco2, 25; pH, 7.20 (diarrhea and lactic acidosis, toluene toxicity, treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis)
  
 


Abbreviations: AG, anion gap; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ICU, intensive care unit.
 

Approach to the Patient: Acid-Base Disorders

A stepwise approach to the diagnosis of acid-base disorders follows (Table 47-3). Care should be taken when measuring blood gases to obtain the arterial blood sample without using excessive heparin. Blood for electrolytes and arterial blood gases should be drawn simultaneously prior to therapy, because an increase in [HCO3每] occurs with metabolic alkalosis and respiratory acidosis. Conversely, a decrease in [HCO3每] occurs in metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis. In the determination of arterial blood gases by the clinical laboratory, both pH and Paco2 are measured, and the [HCO3每] is calculated from the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. This calculated value should be compared with the measured [HCO3每] (total CO2) on the electrolyte panel. These two values should agree within 2 mmol/L. If they do not, the values may not have been drawn simultaneously, a laboratory error may be present, or an error could have been made in calculating the [HCO3每]. After verifying the blood acid-base values, the precise acid-base disorder can then be identified.

Table 47-3 Steps in Acid-Base Diagnosis

 
 
Obtain arterial blood gas (ABG) and electrolytes simultaneously.

Compare [HCO3每] on ABG and electrolytes to verify accuracy.

Calculate anion gap (AG).

Know four causes of high-AG acidosis (ketoacidosis, lactic acid acidosis, renal failure, and toxins).

Know two causes of hyperchloremic or nongap acidosis (bicarbonate loss from GI tract, renal tubular acidosis).

Estimate compensatory response (Table 47-1).

Compare AG and HCO3每.

Compare change in [Cl每 with change in [Na+].
 
 

 

Calculate the Anion Gap

All evaluations of acid-base disorders should include a simple calculation of the AG; it represents those unmeasured anions in plasma (normally 10 to 12 mmol/L) and is calculated as follows: AG = Na+ 每 (Cl每 + HCO3每). The unmeasured anions include anionic proteins, (e.g., albumin), phosphate, sulfate, and organic anions. When acid anions, such as acetoacetate and lactate, accumulate in extracellular fluid, the AG increases, causing a high-AG acidosis. An increase in the AG is most often due to an increase in unmeasured anions and, less commonly, is due to a decrease in unmeasured cations (calcium, magnesium, potassium). In addition, the AG may increase with an increase in anionic albumin, because of either increased albumin concentration or alkalosis, which alters albumin charge. A decrease in the AG can be due to (1) an increase in unmeasured cations; (2) the addition to the blood of abnormal cations, such as lithium (lithium intoxication) or cationic immunoglobulins (plasma cell dyscrasias); (3) a reduction in the major plasma anion albumin concentration (nephrotic syndrome); (4) a decrease in the effective anionic charge on albumin by acidosis; or (5) hyperviscosity and severe hyperlipidemia, which can lead to an underestimation of sodium and chloride concentrations. A fall in serum albumin by 1 g/dL from the normal value (4.5 g/dL) decreases the AG by 2.5 meq/L. Know the common causes of a high-AG acidosis (Table 47-3).

In the face of a normal serum albumin, a high AG is usually due to non-chloride containing acids that contain inorganic (phosphate, sulfate), organic (ketoacids, lactate, uremic organic anions), exogenous (salicylate or ingested toxins with organic acid production), or unidentified anions. The high AG is significant even if an additional acid-base disorder is superimposed to modify the [HCO3每] independently. Simultaneous metabolic acidosis of the high-AG variety plus either chronic respiratory acidosis or metabolic alkalosis represents such a situation in which [HCO3每] may be normal or even high (Table 47-3). Compare the change in [HCO3每] (HCO3每) and the change in the AG (AG).

Similarly, normal values for [HCO3每], Paco2, and pH do not ensure the absence of an acid-base disturbance. For instance, an alcoholic who has been vomiting may develop a metabolic alkalosis with a pH of 7.55, Paco2 of 47 mmHg, [HCO3每] of 40 mmol/L, [Na+] of 135, [Cl每] of 80, and [K+] of 2.8. If such a patient were then to develop a superimposed alcoholic ketoacidosis with a -hydroxybutyrate concentration of 15 mM, arterial pH would fall to 7.40, [HCO3每] to 25 mmol/L, and the Paco2 to 40 mmHg. Although these blood gases are normal, the AG is elevated at 30 mmol/L, indicating a mixed metabolic alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. A mixture of high-gap acidosis and metabolic alkalosis is recognized easily by comparing the differences ( values) in the normal to prevailing patient values. In this example, the HCO3每 is 0 (25 每 25 mmol/L) but the AG is 20 (30 每 10 mmol/L). Therefore, 20 mmol/L is unaccounted for in the / value (AG to HCO3每).
 
Metabolic Acidosis

Metabolic acidosis can occur because of an increase in endogenous acid production (such as lactate and ketoacids), loss of bicarbonate (as in diarrhea), or accumulation of endogenous acids (as in renal failure). Metabolic acidosis has profound effects on the respiratory, cardiac, and nervous systems. The fall in blood pH is accompanied by a characteristic increase in ventilation, especially the tidal volume (Kussmaul respiration). Intrinsic cardiac contractility may be depressed, but inotropic function can be normal because of catecholamine release. Both peripheral arterial vasodilation and central venoconstriction can be present; the decrease in central and pulmonary vascular compliance predisposes to pulmonary edema with even minimal volume overload. CNS function is depressed, with headache, lethargy, stupor, and, in some cases, even coma. Glucose intolerance may also occur.

There are two major categories of clinical metabolic acidosis: high-AG and normal-AG, or hyperchloremic acidosis (Table 47-3 and Table 47-4).

Table 47-4 Causes of High Anion每Gap Metabolic Acidosis

 
 
Lactic acidosis Toxins 
Ketoacidosis   Ethylene glycol 
  Diabetic   Methanol 
  Alcoholic   Salicylates 
  Starvation   Propylene glycol 
    Pyroglutamic acid 
  Renal failure (acute and chronic) 
 

 

Treatment: Metabolic Acidosis

Treatment of metabolic acidosis with alkali should be reserved for severe acidemia except when the patient has no "potential HCO3每" in plasma. Potential [HCO3每] can be estimated from the increment () in the AG (AG = patient's AG 每 10). It must be determined if the acid anion in plasma is metabolizable (i.e., -hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and lactate) or nonmetabolizable (anions that accumulate in chronic renal failure and after toxin ingestion). The latter requires return of renal function to replenish the [HCO3每] deficit, a slow and often unpredictable process. Consequently, patients with a normal AG acidosis (hyperchloremic acidosis), a slightly elevated AG (mixed hyperchloremic and AG acidosis), or an AG attributable to a nonmetabolizable anion in the face of renal failure should receive alkali therapy, either PO (NaHCO3 or Shohl's solution) or IV (NaHCO3), in an amount necessary to slowly increase the plasma [HCO3每] into the 20每22 mmol/L range.

Controversy exists, however, in regard to the use of alkali in patients with a pure AG acidosis owing to accumulation of a metabolizable organic acid anion (ketoacidosis or lactic acidosis). In general, severe acidosis (pH < 7.10) warrants the IV administration of 50每100 meq of NaHCO3 , over 30每45 min, during the initial 1每2 h of therapy. Provision of such modest quantities of alkali in this situation seems to provide an added measure of safety, but it is essential to monitor plasma electrolytes during the course of therapy, because the [K+] may decline as pH rises. The goal is to increase the [HCO3每] to 10 meq/L and the pH to 7.20, not to increase these values to normal.

High每Anion Gap Acidoses

Approach to the Patient: High〞Anion Gap Acidoses

There are four principal causes of a high-AG acidosis: (1) lactic acidosis, (2) ketoacidosis, (3) ingested toxins, and (4) acute and chronic renal failure (Table 47-4). Initial screening to differentiate the high-AG acidoses should include (1) a probe of the history for evidence of drug and toxin ingestion and measurement of arterial blood gas to detect coexistent respiratory alkalosis (salicylates); (2) determination of whether diabetes mellitus is present (diabetic ketoacidosis); (3) a search for evidence of alcoholism or increased levels of -hydroxybutyrate (alcoholic ketoacidosis); (4) observation for clinical signs of uremia and determination of the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (uremic acidosis); (5) inspection of the urine for oxalate crystals (ethylene glycol); and (6) recognition of the numerous clinical settings in which lactate levels may be increased (hypotension, shock, cardiac failure, leukemia, cancer, and drug or toxin ingestion).

Lactic Acidosis

An increase in plasma l-lactate may be secondary to poor tissue perfusion (type A)〞circulatory insufficiency (shock, cardiac failure), severe anemia, mitochondrial enzyme defects, and inhibitors (carbon monoxide, cyanide)〞or to aerobic disorders (type B)〞malignancies, nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors in HIV, diabetes mellitus, renal or hepatic failure, thiamine deficiency, severe infections (cholera, malaria), seizures, or drugs/toxins (biguanides, ethanol, methanol, propylene glycol, isoniazid, and fructose). Propylene glycol may be used as a vehicle for IV medications including lorazepam, and toxicity has been reported in several settings. Unrecognized bowel ischemia or infarction in a patient with severe atherosclerosis or cardiac decompensation receiving vasopressors is a common cause of lactic acidosis. Pyroglutamic acidemia has been reported in critically ill patients receiving acetaminophen, which is associated with depletion of glutathione. D-Lactic acid acidosis, which may be associated with jejunoileal bypass, short bowel syndrome, or intestinal obstruction, is due to formation of d-lactate by gut bacteria.

Approach to the Patient: Lactic Acid Acidosis

The underlying condition that disrupts lactate metabolism must first be corrected; tissue perfusion must be restored when inadequate. Vasoconstrictors should be avoided, if possible, because they may worsen tissue perfusion. Alkali therapy is generally advocated for acute, severe acidemia (pH < 7.15) to improve cardiac function and lactate use. However, NaHCO3 therapy may paradoxically depress cardiac performance and exacerbate acidosis by enhancing lactate production (HCO3每 stimulates phosphofructokinase). While the use of alkali in moderate lactic acidosis is controversial, it is generally agreed that attempts to return the pH or [HCO3每] to normal by administration of exogenous NaHCO3 are deleterious. A reasonable approach is to infuse sufficient NaHCO3 to raise the arterial pH to no more than 7.2 over 30每40 min.

NaHCO3 therapy can cause fluid overload and hypertension because the amount required can be massive when accumulation of lactic acid is relentless. Fluid administration is poorly tolerated because of central venoconstriction, especially in the oliguric patient. When the underlying cause of the lactic acidosis can be remedied, blood lactate will be converted to HCO3每 and may result in an overshoot alkalosis.

Ketoacidosis

Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA)

This condition is caused by increased fatty acid metabolism and the accumulation of ketoacids (acetoacetate and -hydroxybutyrate). DKA usually occurs in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in association with cessation of insulin or an intercurrent illness such as an infection, gastroenteritis, pancreatitis, or myocardial infarction, which increases insulin requirements temporarily and acutely. The accumulation of ketoacids accounts for the increment in the AG and is accompanied most often by hyperglycemia [glucose > 17 mmol/L (300 mg/dL)]. The relationship between the AG and HCO3每 is typically 1:1 in DKA. It should be noted that, because insulin prevents production of ketones, bicarbonate therapy is rarely needed except with extreme acidemia (pH < 7.1), and then in only limited amounts. Patients with DKA are typically volume depleted and require fluid resuscitation with isotonic saline. Volume overexpansion with IV-fluid administration is not uncommon, however, and contributes to the development of a hyperchloremic acidosis during treatment of DKA. The mainstay for treatment of this condition is IV regular insulin and is described in Chap. 344 in more detail.

Alcoholic Ketoacidosis (AKA)

Chronic alcoholics can develop ketoacidosis when alcohol consumption is abruptly curtailed and nutrition is poor. AKA is usually associated with binge drinking, vomiting, abdominal pain, starvation, and volume depletion. The glucose concentration is variable, and acidosis may be severe because of elevated ketones, predominantly -hydroxybutyrate. Hypoperfusion may enhance lactic acid production, chronic respiratory alkalosis may accompany liver disease, and metabolic alkalosis can result from vomiting (refer to the relationship between AG and HCO3每). Thus, mixed acid-base disorders are common in AKA. As the circulation is restored by administration of isotonic saline, the preferential accumulation of -hydroxybutyrate is then shifted to acetoacetate. This explains the common clinical observation of an increasingly positive nitroprusside reaction as the patient improves. The nitroprusside ketone reaction (Acetest) can detect acetoacetic acid but not -hydroxybutyrate, so that the degree of ketosis and ketonuria can not only change with therapy, but can be underestimated initially. Patients with AKA usually present with relatively normal renal function, as opposed to DKA, where renal function is often compromised because of volume depletion (osmotic diuresis) or diabetic nephropathy. The AKA patient with normal renal function may excrete relatively large quantities of ketoacids in the urine, therefore, and may have a relatively normal AG and a discrepancy in the AG/HCO3每 relationship.

Treatment: Alcoholic Ketoacidosis

Extracellular fluid deficits almost always accompany AKA and should be repleted by IV administration of saline and glucose (5% dextrose in 0.9% NaCl). Hypophosphatemia, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia may coexist and should be corrected. Hypophosphatemia usually emerges 12每24 h after admission, may be exacerbated by glucose infusion, and, if severe, may induce rhabdomyolysis. Upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, pancreatitis, and pneumonia may accompany this disorder.

Drug- and Toxin-Induced Acidosis

Salicylates

(See also Chap. e49) Salicylateintoxication in adults usually causes respiratory alkalosis or a mixture of high-AG metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis. Only a portion of the AG is due to salicylates. Lactic acid production is also often increased.

Treatment: Salicylate-Induced Acidosis

Vigorous gastric lavage with isotonic saline (not NaHCO3 ) should be initiated immediately, followed by administration of activated charcoal per NG tube. In the acidotic patient, to facilitate removal of salicylate, intravenous NaHCO3 is administered in amounts adequate to alkalinize the urine and to maintain urine output (urine pH > 7.5). While this form of therapy is straightforward in acidotic patients, a coexisting respiratory alkalosis may make this approach hazardous. Alkalemic patients should not receive NaHCO3. Acetazolamide may be administered in the face of alkalemia, when an alkaline diuresis cannot be achieved, or to ameliorate volume overload associated with NaHCO3 administration, but this drug can cause systemic metabolic acidosis if HCO3每 is not replaced. Hypokalemia should be anticipated with an alkaline diuresis and should be treated promptly and aggressively. Glucose-containing fluids should be administered because of the danger of hypoglycemia. Excessive insensible fluid losses may cause severe volume depletion and hypernatremia. If renal failure prevents rapid clearance of salicylate, hemodialysis can be performed against a bicarbonate dialysate.

Alcohols

Under most physiologic conditions, sodium, urea, and glucose generate the osmotic pressure of blood. Plasma osmolality is calculated according to the following expression: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu + BUN (all in mmol/L), or, using conventional laboratory values in which glucose and BUN are expressed in milligrams per deciliter: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu/18 + BUN/2.8. The calculated and determined osmolality should agree within 10每15 mmol/kg H2O. When the measured osmolality exceeds the calculated osmolality by >15每20 mmol/kg H2O, one of two circumstances prevails. Either the serum sodium is spuriously low, as with hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia (pseudohyponatremia), or osmolytes other than sodium salts, glucose, or urea have accumulated in plasma. Examples of such osmolytes include mannitol, radiocontrast media, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, methanol, and acetone. In this situation, the difference between the calculated osmolality and the measured osmolality (osmolar gap) is proportional to the concentration of the unmeasured solute. With an appropriate clinical history and index of suspicion, identification of an osmolar gap is helpful in identifying the presence of poison-associated AG acidosis. Three alcohols may cause fatal intoxications: ethylene glycol, methanol, and isopropyl alcohol. All cause an elevated osmolal gap, but only the first two cause a high-AG acidosis.

Ethylene Glycol

(See also Chap. e49) Ingestion of ethylene glycol (commonly used in antifreeze) leads to a metabolic acidosis and severe damage to the CNS, heart, lungs, and kidneys. The increased AG and osmolar gap are attributable to ethylene glycol and its metabolites, oxalic acid, glycolic acid, and other organic acids. Lactic acid production increases secondary to inhibition of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and altered intracellular redox state. Diagnosis is facilitated by recognizing oxalate crystals in the urine, the presence of an osmolar gap in serum, and a high-AG acidosis. Treatment should not be delayed while awaiting measurement of ethylene glycol levels in this setting.

Treatment: Ethylene Glycol〞Induced Acidosis

This includes the prompt institution of a saline or osmotic diuresis, thiamine and pyridoxine supplements, fomepizole or ethanol, and hemodialysis. The IV administration of the alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole; 15 mg/kg as a loading dose) or ethanol IV to achieve a level of 22 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) serves to lessen toxicity because they compete with ethylene glycol for metabolism by alcohol dehydrogenase. Fomepizole, although expensive, is the agent of choice and offers the advantages of a predictable decline in ethylene glycol levels without excessive obtundation during ethyl alcohol infusion. Hemodialysis is indicated when the arterial pH is <7.3, or the osmolar gap exceeds 20 mOsm/kg.

Methanol

(See also Chap. e49) The ingestion of methanol (wood alcohol) causes metabolic acidosis, and its metabolites formaldehyde and formic acid cause severe optic nerve and CNS damage. Lactic acid, ketoacids, and other unidentified organic acids may contribute to the acidosis. Due to its low molecular mass (32 Da), an osmolar gap is usually present.

Treatment: Methanol-Induced Acidosis

This is similar to that for ethylene glycol intoxication, including general supportive measures, fomepizole, and hemodialysis (as above).

Isopropyl Alcohol

Ingested isopropanol is absorbed rapidly and may be fatal when as little as 150 mL of rubbing alcohol, solvent, or de-icer is consumed. A plasma level >400 mg/dL is life-threatening. Isopropyl alcohol differs from ethylene glycol and methanol in that the parent compound, not the metabolites, causes toxicity, and an AG acidosis is not present because acetone is rapidly excreted.

Treatment: Isopropyl Alcohol Toxicity

Isopropanol alcohol toxicity is treated by watchful waiting and supportive therapy; IV fluids, pressors, ventilatory support if needed, and occasionally hemodialysis for prolonged coma or levels >400 mg/dL.

Renal Failure

(See also Chap. 280) The hyperchloremic acidosis of moderate renal insufficiency is eventually converted to the high-AG acidosis of advanced renal failure. Poor filtration and reabsorption of organic anions contribute to the pathogenesis. As renal disease progresses, the number of functioning nephrons eventually becomes insufficient to keep pace with net acid production. Uremic acidosis is characterized, therefore, by a reduced rate of NH4+ production and excretion. The acid retained in chronic renal disease is buffered by alkaline salts from bone. Despite significant retention of acid (up to 20 mmol/d), the serum [HCO3每] does not decrease further, indicating participation of buffers outside the extracellular compartment. Chronic metabolic acidosis results in significant loss of bone mass due to reduction in bone calcium carbonate. Chronic acidosis also increases urinary calcium excretion, proportional to cumulative acid retention.

Treatment: Renal Failure

Because of the association of renal failure acidosis with muscle catabolism and bone disease, both uremic acidosis and the hyperchloremic acidosis of renal failure require oral alkali replacement to maintain the [HCO3每] between 20 and 24 mmol/L. This can be accomplished with relatively modest amounts of alkali (1.0每1.5 mmol/kg body weight per day). Sodium citrate (Shohl's solution) or NaHCO3 tablets (650-mg tablets contain 7.8 meq) are equally effective alkalinizing salts. Citrate enhances the absorption of aluminum from the gastrointestinal tract and should never be given together with aluminum-containing antacids because of the risk of aluminum intoxication. When hyperkalemia is present, furosemide (60每80 mg/d) should be added.

Non每Anion Gap Metabolic Acidoses

Alkali can be lost from the gastrointestinal tract in diarrhea or from the kidneys (renal tubular acidosis, RTA). In these disorders (Table 47-5), reciprocal changes in [Cl每] and [HCO3每] result in a normal AG. In pure non每AG acidosis, therefore, the increase in [Cl每] above the normal value approximates the decrease in [HCO3每]. The absence of such a relationship suggests a mixed disturbance.

Table 47-5 Causes of Non每Anion Gap Acidosis

 
 
I. Gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss

   A. Diarrhea

   B. External pancreatic or small-bowel drainage

   C. Ureterosigmoidostomy, jejunal loop, ileal loop

   D. Drugs

      1. Calcium chloride (acidifying agent)

      2. Magnesium sulfate (diarrhea)

      3. Cholestyramine (bile acid diarrhea)

II. Renal acidosis

   A. Hypokalemia

      1. Proximal RTA (type 2)

      Drug-induced: acetazolamide, topiramate

      2. Distal (classic) RTA (type 1)

      Drug induced: amphotericin B, ifosfamide

   B. Hyperkalemia

      1. Generalized distal nephron dysfunction (type 4 RTA)

         a. Mineralocorticoid deficiency

         b. Mineralocorticoid resistance (autosomal dominant PHA I)

         c. Voltage defect (autosomal dominant PHA I and PHA II)

         d. Tubulointerstitial disease

III. Drug-induced hyperkalemia (with renal insufficiency)

   A. Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride, triamterene, spironolactone)

   B. Trimethoprim

   C. Pentamidine

   D. ACE-Is and ARBs

   E. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

   F. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus

IV. Other

   A. Acid loads (ammonium chloride, hyperalimentation)

   B. Loss of potential bicarbonate: ketosis with ketone excretion

   C. Expansion acidosis (rapid saline administration)

   D. Hippurate

   E. Cation exchange resins
 
 


Abbreviations: ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; PHA, pseudohypoaldosteronism; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
 

Treatment: Non每Anion Gap Metabolic Acidoses

In diarrhea, stools contain a higher [HCO3每] and decomposed HCO3每 than plasma so that metabolic acidosis develops along with volume depletion. Instead of an acid urine pH (as anticipated with systemic acidosis), urine pH is usually around 6 because metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia increase renal synthesis and excretion of NH4+, thus providing a urinary buffer that increases urine pH. Metabolic acidosis due to gastrointestinal losses with a high urine pH can be differentiated from RTA because urinary NH4+ excretion is typically low in RTA and high with diarrhea. Urinary NH4+ levels can be estimated by calculating the urine anion gap (UAG): UAG = [Na+ + K+]u 每 [Cl每]u. When [Cl每]u > [Na+ + K+]u, the UAG is negative by definition. This indicates that the urine ammonium level is appropriately increased, suggesting an extrarenal cause of the acidosis. Conversely, when the UAG is positive, the urine ammonium level is low, suggesting a renal cause of the acidosis.

Loss of functioning renal parenchyma by progressive renal disease leads to hyperchloremic acidosis when the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is between 20 and 50 mL/min and to uremic acidosis with a high AG when the GFR falls to <20 mL/min. In advanced renal failure, ammoniagenesis is reduced in proportion to the loss of functional renal mass, and ammonium accumulation and trapping in the outer medullary collecting tubule may also be impaired. Because of adaptive increases in K+ secretion by the collecting duct and colon, the acidosis of chronic renal insufficiency is typically normokalemic.

Proximal RTA (type 2 RTA) (Chap. 284) is most often due to generalized proximal tubular dysfunction manifested by glycosuria, generalized aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia (Fanconi syndrome). With a low plasma [HCO3每], the urine pH is acid (pH < 5.5). The fractional excretion of [HCO3每] may exceed 10每15% when the serum HCO3每 > 20 mmol/L. Because HCO3每 is not reabsorbed normally in the proximal tubule, therapy with NaHCO3 will enhance renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia.

The typical findings in acquired or inherited forms of classic distal RTA (type 1 RTA) include hypokalemia, non-AG metabolic acidosis, low urinary NH4+ excretion (positive UAG, low urine [NH4+]), and inappropriately high urine pH (pH > 5.5). Most patients have hypocitraturia and hypercalciuria, so nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and bone disease are common. In generalized distal nephron dysfunction (type 4 RTA), hyperkalemia is disproportionate to the reduction in GFR because of coexisting dysfunction of potassium and acid secretion. Urinary ammonium excretion is invariably depressed, and renal function may be compromised, for example, due to diabetic nephropathy, obstructive uropathy, or chronic tubulointerstitial disease.

Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism typically causes non-AG metabolic acidosis, most commonly in older adults with diabetes mellitus or tubulointerstitial disease and renal insufficiency. Patients usually have mild to moderate CKD (GFR, 20每50 mL/min) and acidosis, with elevation in serum [K+] (5.2每6.0 mmol/L), concurrent hypertension, and congestive heart failure. Both the metabolic acidosis and the hyperkalemia are out of proportion to impairment in GFR. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, trimethoprim, pentamidine, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can also cause non-AG metabolic acidosis in patients with renal insufficiency (Table 47-5).
 
Metabolic Alkalosis

Metabolic alkalosis is manifested by an elevated arterial pH, an increase in the serum [HCO3每], and an increase in Paco2 as a result of compensatory alveolar hypoventilation (Table 47-1). It is often accompanied by hypochloremia and hypokalemia. The arterial pH establishes the diagnosis, because it is increased in metabolic alkalosis and decreased or normal in respiratory acidosis. Metabolic alkalosis frequently occurs in association with other disorders such as respiratory acidosis or alkalosis or metabolic acidosis.

Pathogenesis

Metabolic alkalosis occurs as a result of net gain of [HCO3每] or loss of nonvolatile acid (usually HCl by vomiting) from the extracellular fluid. For HCO3每 to be added to the extracellular fluid, it must be administered exogenously or synthesized endogenously, in part or entirely by the kidneys. Because it is unusual for alkali to be added to the body, the disorder involves a generative stage, in which the loss of acid usually causes alkalosis, and a maintenance stage, in which the kidneys fail to compensate by excreting HCO3每.

Under normal circumstances, the kidneys have an impressive capacity to excrete HCO3每. Continuation of metabolic alkalosis represents a failure of the kidneys to eliminate HCO3每 in the usual manner. The kidneys will retain, rather than excrete, the excess alkali and maintain the alkalosis if (1) volume deficiency, chloride deficiency, and K+ deficiency exist in combination with a reduced GFR, which augments distal tubule H+ secretion; or (2) hypokalemia exists because of autonomous hyperaldosteronism. In the first example, alkalosis is corrected by administration of NaCl and KCl, whereas, in the latter, it is necessary to repair the alkalosis by pharmacologic or surgical intervention, not with saline administration.

Differential Diagnosis

To establish the cause of metabolic alkalosis (Table 47-6), it is necessary to assess the status of the extracellular fluid volume (ECFV), the recumbent and upright blood pressure, the serum [K+], and the renin-aldosterone system. For example, the presence of chronic hypertension and chronic hypokalemia in an alkalotic patient suggests either mineralocorticoid excess or that the hypertensive patient is receiving diuretics. Low plasma renin activity and normal urine [Na+] and [Cl每] in a patient who is not taking diuretics indicate a primary mineralocorticoid excess syndrome. The combination of hypokalemia and alkalosis in a normotensive, nonedematous patient can be due to Bartter's or Gitelman's syndrome, magnesium deficiency, vomiting, exogenous alkali, or diuretic ingestion. Determination of urine electrolytes (especially the urine [Cl每]) and screening of the urine for diuretics may be helpful. If the urine is alkaline, with an elevated [Na+] and [K+] but low [Cl每], the diagnosis is usually either vomiting (overt or surreptitious) or alkali ingestion. If the urine is relatively acid and has low concentrations of Na+, K+, and Cl每, the most likely possibilities are prior vomiting, the posthypercapnic state, or prior diuretic ingestion. If, on the other hand, neither the urine sodium, potassium, nor chloride concentrations are depressed, magnesium deficiency, Bartter's or Gitelman's syndrome, or current diuretic ingestion should be considered. Bartter's syndrome is distinguished from Gitelman's syndrome because of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia in the latter disorder.

Table 47-6 Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis

 
 
I. Exogenous HCO3每 loads
  
  A. Acute alkali administration 
  B. Milk-alkali syndrome 
II. Effective ECFV contraction, normotension, K+ deficiency, and secondary hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism
  
  A. Gastrointestinal origin 
    1. Vomiting 
    2. Gastric aspiration 
    3. Congenital chloridorrhea 
    4. Villous adenoma 
  B. Renal origin 
    1. Diuretics 
    2. Posthypercapnic state 
    3. Hypercalcemia/hypoparathyroidism 
    4. Recovery from lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis 
    5. Nonreabsorbable anions including penicillin, carbenicillin 
    6. Mg2+ deficiency
  
    7. K+ depletion
  
    8. Bartter's syndrome (loss of function mutations in TALH) 
    9. Gitelman's syndrome (loss of function mutation in Na+-Cl每 cotransporter in DCT)
  
III. ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deficiency, and mineralocorticoid excess
  
  A. High renin 
    1. Renal artery stenosis 
    2. Accelerated hypertension 
    3. Renin-secreting tumor 
    4. Estrogen therapy 
  B. Low renin 
    1. Primary aldosteronism 
       a. Adenoma 
       b. Hyperplasia 
       c. Carcinoma 
    2. Adrenal enzyme defects 
       a. 11 -Hydroxylase deficiency 
       b. 17 -Hydroxylase deficiency 
    3. Cushing's syndrome or disease 
    4. Other 
       a. Licorice 
       b. Carbenoxolone 
       c. Chewer's tobacco 
IV. Gain-of-function mutation of renal sodium channel with ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deficiency, and hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism
  
  A. Liddle's syndrome 
 


Abbreviations: DCT, distal convoluted tubule; ECFV, extracellular fluid volume; TALH, thick ascending limb of Henle's loop.
 

Alkali Administration

Chronic administration of alkali to individuals with normal renal function rarely causes alkalosis. However, in patients with coexistent hemodynamic disturbances, alkalosis can develop because the normal capacity to excrete HCO3每 may be exceeded or there may be enhanced reabsorption of HCO3每. Such patients include those who receive HCO3每 (PO or IV), acetate loads (parenteral hyperalimentation solutions), citrate loads (transfusions), or antacids plus cation-exchange resins (aluminum hydroxide and sodium polystyrene sulfonate). Nursing-home patients receiving tube feedings have a higher incidence of metabolic alkalosis than nursing-home patients receiving oral feedings.

Metabolic Alkalosis Associated with ECFV Contraction, K+ Depletion, and Secondary Hyperreninemic Hyperaldosteronism

Gastrointestinal Origin

Gastrointestinal loss of H+ from vomiting or gastric aspiration results in retention of HCO3每. The loss of fluid and NaCl in vomitus or nasogastric suction results in contraction of the ECFV and an increase in the secretion of renin and aldosterone. Volume contraction through a reduction in GFR results in an enhanced capacity of the renal tubule to reabsorb HCO3每. During active vomiting, however, the filtered load of bicarbonate is acutely increased to the point that the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule for HCO3每 is exceeded. The excess NaHCO3 issuing out of the proximal tubule reaches the distal tubule, where H+ secretion is enhanced by an aldosterone and the delivery of the poorly reabsorbed anion, HCO3每. Correction of the contracted ECFV with NaCl and repair of K+ deficits corrects the acid-base disorder, and chloride deficiency.

Renal Origin

Diuretics

(See also Chap. 234) Drugs that induce chloruresis, such as thiazides and loop diuretics (furosemide, bumetanide, torsemide, and ethacrynic acid), acutely diminish the ECFV without altering the total body bicarbonate content. The serum [HCO3每] increases because the reduced ECFV "contracts" the [HCO3每] in the plasma (contraction alkalosis). The chronic administration of diuretics tends to generate an alkalosis by increasing distal salt delivery, so that K+ and H+ secretion are stimulated. The alkalosis is maintained by persistence of the contraction of the ECFV, secondary hyperaldosteronism, K+ deficiency, and the direct effect of the diuretic (as long as diuretic administration continues). Repair of the alkalosis is achieved by providing isotonic saline to correct the ECFV deficit.

Solute Losing Disorders: Bartter's Syndrome and Gitelman's Syndrome

See Chap. 284.

Nonreabsorbable Anions and Magnesium Deficiency

Administration of large quantities of nonreabsorbable anions, such as penicillin or carbenicillin, can enhance distal acidification and K+ secretion by increasing the transepithelial potential difference. Mg2+ deficiency results in hypokalemic alkalosis by enhancing distal acidification through stimulation of renin and hence aldosterone secretion.

Potassium Depletion

Chronic K+ depletion may cause metabolic alkalosis by increasing urinary acid excretion. Both NH4+ production and absorption are enhanced and HCO3每 reabsorption is stimulated. Chronic K+ deficiency upregulates the renal H+, K+-ATPase to increase K+ absorption at the expense of enhanced H+ secretion. Alkalosis associated with severe K+ depletion is resistant to salt administration, but repair of the K+ deficiency corrects the alkalosis.

After Treatment of Lactic Acidosis or Ketoacidosis

When an underlying stimulus for the generation of lactic acid or ketoacid is removed rapidly, as with repair of circulatory insufficiency or with insulin therapy, the lactate or ketones are metabolized to yield an equivalent amount of HCO3每. Other sources of new HCO3每 are additive with the original amount generated by organic anion metabolism to create a surfeit of HCO3每. Such sources include (1) new HCO3每 added to the blood by the kidneys as a result of enhanced acid excretion during the preexisting period of acidosis, and (2) alkali therapy during the treatment phase of the acidosis. Acidosis-induced contraction of the ECFV and K+ deficiency act to sustain the alkalosis.

Posthypercapnia

Prolonged CO2 retention with chronic respiratory acidosis enhances renal HCO3每 absorption and the generation of new HCO3每 (increased net acid excretion). If the Paco2 is returned to normal, metabolic alkalosis results from the persistently elevated [HCO3每]. Alkalosis develops if the elevated Paco2 is abruptly returned toward normal by a change in mechanically controlled ventilation. Associated ECFV contraction does not allow complete repair of the alkalosis by correction of the Paco2 alone, and alkalosis persists until Cl每 supplementation is provided.

Metabolic Alkalosis Associated with ECFV Expansion, Hypertension, and Hyperaldosteronism

Increased aldosterone levels may be the result of autonomous primary adrenal overproduction or of secondary aldosterone release due to renal overproduction of renin. Mineralocorticoid excess increases net acid excretion and may result in metabolic alkalosis, which may be worsened by associated K+ deficiency. ECFV expansion from salt retention causes hypertension. The kaliuresis persists because of mineralocorticoid excess and distal Na+ absorption causing enhanced K+ excretion, continued K+ depletion with polydipsia, inability to concentrate the urine, and polyuria.

Liddle's syndrome (Chap. 284) results from increased activity of the collecting duct Na+ channel (ENaC) and is a rare monogenic form of hypertension due to volume expansion manifested as hypokalemic alkalosis and normal aldosterone levels.

Symptoms

With metabolic alkalosis, changes in CNS and peripheral nervous system function are similar to those of hypocalcemia (Chap. 352); symptoms include mental confusion; obtundation; and a predisposition to seizures, paresthesia, muscular cramping, tetany, aggravation of arrhythmias, and hypoxemia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Related electrolyte abnormalities include hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia.

Treatment: Metabolic Alkalosis

This is primarily directed at correcting the underlying stimulus for HCO3每 generation. If primary aldosteronism, renal artery stenosis, or Cushing's syndrome is present, correction of the underlying cause will reverse the alkalosis. [H+] loss by the stomach or kidneys can be mitigated by the use of proton pump inhibitors or the discontinuation of diuretics. The second aspect of treatment is to remove the factors that sustain the inappropriate increase in HCO3每 reabsorption, such as ECFV contraction or K+ deficiency. K+ deficits should always be repaired. Isotonic saline is usually sufficient to reverse the alkalosis if ECFV contraction is present.

If associated conditions preclude infusion of saline, renal HCO3每 loss can be accelerated by administration of acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, which is usually effective in patients with adequate renal function but can worsen K+ losses. Dilute hydrochloric acid (0.1 N HCl) is also effective but can cause hemolysis, and must be delivered centrally and slowly. Hemodialysis against a dialysate low in [HCO3每] and high in [Cl每] can be effective when renal function is impaired.
 
Respiratory Acidosis

Respiratory acidosis can be due to severe pulmonary disease, respiratory muscle fatigue, or abnormalities in ventilatory control and is recognized by an increase in Paco2 and decrease in pH (Table 47-7). In acute respiratory acidosis, there is an immediate compensatory elevation (due to cellular buffering mechanisms) in HCO3每, which increases 1 mmol/L for every 10-mmHg increase in Paco2. In chronic respiratory acidosis (>24 h), renal adaptation increases the [HCO3每] by 4 mmol/L for every 10-mmHg increase in Paco2. The serum HCO3每 usually does not increase above 38 mmol/L.

Table 47-7 Respiratory Acid-Base Disorders

 
 
I. Alkalosis

   A. Central nervous system stimulation

      1. Pain

      2. Anxiety, psychosis

      3. Fever

      4. Cerebrovascular accident

      5. Meningitis, encephalitis

      6. Tumor

      7. Trauma

   B. Hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia

      1. High altitude

      2. Pneumonia, pulmonary edema

      3. Aspiration

      4. Severe anemia

   C. Drugs or hormones

      1. Pregnancy, progesterone

      2. Salicylates

      3. Cardiac failure

   D. Stimulation of chest receptors

      1. Hemothorax

      2. Flail chest

      3. Cardiac failure

      4. Pulmonary embolism

   E. Miscellaneous

      1. Septicemia

      2. Hepatic failure

      3. Mechanical hyperventilation

      4. Heat exposure

      5. Recovery from metabolic acidosis
 
II. Acidosis

   A. Central

      1. Drugs (anesthetics, morphine, sedatives)

      2. Stroke

      3. Infection

   B. Airway

      1. Obstruction

      2. Asthma

   C. Parenchyma

      1. Emphysema

      2. Pneumoconiosis

      3. Bronchitis

      4. Adult respiratory distress syndrome

      5. Barotrauma

   D. Neuromuscular

      1. Poliomyelitis

      2. Kyphoscoliosis

      3. Myasthenia

      4. Muscular dystrophies

   E. Miscellaneous

      1. Obesity

      2. Hypoventilation

      3. Permissive hypercapnia
 
 

 

The clinical features vary according to the severity and duration of the respiratory acidosis, the underlying disease, and whether there is accompanying hypoxemia. A rapid increase in Paco2 may cause anxiety, dyspnea, confusion, psychosis, and hallucinations and may progress to coma. Lesser degrees of dysfunction in chronic hypercapnia include sleep disturbances; loss of memory; daytime somnolence; personality changes; impairment of coordination; and motor disturbances such as tremor, myoclonic jerks, and asterixis. Headaches and other signs that mimic raised intracranial pressure, such as papilledema, abnormal reflexes, and focal muscle weakness, are due to vasoconstriction secondary to loss of the vasodilator effects of CO2.

Depression of the respiratory center by a variety of drugs, injury, or disease can produce respiratory acidosis. This may occur acutely with general anesthetics, sedatives, and head trauma or chronically with sedatives, alcohol, intracranial tumors, and the syndromes of sleep-disordered breathing including the primary alveolar and obesity-hypoventilation syndromes (Chaps. 264 and 265). Abnormalities or disease in the motor neurons, neuromuscular junction, and skeletal muscle can cause hypoventilation via respiratory muscle fatigue. Mechanical ventilation, when not properly adjusted and supervised, may result in respiratory acidosis, particularly if CO2 production suddenly rises (because of fever, agitation, sepsis, or overfeeding) or alveolar ventilation falls because of worsening pulmonary function. High levels of positive end-expiratory pressure in the presence of reduced cardiac output may cause hypercapnia as a result of large increases in alveolar dead space (Chap. 252). Permissive hypercapnia is being used with increasing frequency because of studies suggesting lower mortality rates than with conventional mechanical ventilation, especially with severe CNS or heart disease. The respiratory acidosis associated with permissive hypercapnia may require administration of NaHCO3 to increase the arterial pH to 7.25 but overcorrection of the acidemia may be deleterious.

Acute hypercapnia follows sudden occlusion of the upper airway or generalized bronchospasm as in severe asthma, anaphylaxis, inhalational burn, or toxin injury. Chronic hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis occur in end-stage obstructive lung disease. Restrictive disorders involving both the chest wall and the lungs can cause respiratory acidosis because the high metabolic cost of respiration causes ventilatory muscle fatigue. Advanced stages of intrapulmonary and extrapulmonary restrictive defects present as chronic respiratory acidosis.

The diagnosis of respiratory acidosis requires the measurement of Paco2 and arterial pH. A detailed history and physical examination often indicate the cause. Pulmonary function studies (Chap. 252), including spirometry, diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide, lung volumes, and arterial Paco2 and O2 saturation, usually make it possible to determine if respiratory acidosis is secondary to lung disease. The workup for nonpulmonary causes should include a detailed drug history, measurement of hematocrit, and assessment of upper airway, chest wall, pleura, and neuromuscular function.

Treatment: Respiratory Acidosis

The management of respiratory acidosis depends on its severity and rate of onset. Acute respiratory acidosis can be life-threatening, and measures to reverse the underlying cause should be undertaken simultaneously with restoration of adequate alveolar ventilation. This may necessitate tracheal intubation and assisted mechanical ventilation. Oxygen administration should be titrated carefully in patients with severe obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic CO2 retention who are breathing spontaneously (Chap. 260). When oxygen is used injudiciously, these patients may experience progression of the respiratory acidosis. Aggressive and rapid correction of hypercapnia should be avoided, because the falling Paco2 may provoke the same complications noted with acute respiratory alkalosis (i.e., cardiac arrhythmias, reduced cerebral perfusion, and seizures). The Paco2 should be lowered gradually in chronic respiratory acidosis, aiming to restore the Paco2 to baseline levels and to provide sufficient Cl每 and K+ to enhance the renal excretion of HCO3每.

Chronic respiratory acidosis is frequently difficult to correct, but measures aimed at improving lung function (Chap. 260) can help some patients and forestall further deterioration in most.
 
Respiratory Alkalosis

Alveolar hyperventilation decreases Paco2 and increases the HCO3每/Paco2 ratio, thus increasing pH (Table 47-7). Nonbicarbonate cellular buffers respond by consuming HCO3每. Hypocapnia develops when a sufficiently strong ventilatory stimulus causes CO2 output in the lungs to exceed its metabolic production by tissues. Plasma pH and [HCO3每] appear to vary proportionately with Paco2 over a range from 40每15 mmHg. The relationship between arterial [H+] concentration and Paco2 is 0.7 mmol/L per mmHg (or 0.01 pH unit/mmHg), and that for plasma [HCO3每] is 0.2 mmol/L per mmHg. Hypocapnia sustained for >2每6 h is further compensated by a decrease in renal ammonium and titratable acid excretion and a reduction in filtered HCO3每 reabsorption. Full renal adaptation to respiratory alkalosis may take several days and requires normal volume status and renal function. The kidneys appear to respond directly to the lowered Paco2 rather than to alkalosis per se. In chronic respiratory alkalosis a 1-mmHg fall in Paco2 causes a 0.4- to 0.5-mmol/L drop in [HCO3每] and a 0.3-mmol/L fall (or 0.003 rise in pH) in [H+].

The effects of respiratory alkalosis vary according to duration and severity but are primarily those of the underlying disease. Reduced cerebral blood flow as a consequence of a rapid decline in Paco2 may cause dizziness, mental confusion, and seizures, even in the absence of hypoxemia. The cardiovascular effects of acute hypocapnia in the conscious human are generally minimal, but in the anesthetized or mechanically ventilated patient, cardiac output and blood pressure may fall because of the depressant effects of anesthesia and positive-pressure ventilation on heart rate, systemic resistance, and venous return. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur in patients with heart disease as a result of changes in oxygen unloading by blood from a left shift in the hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve (Bohr effect). Acute respiratory alkalosis causes intracellular shifts of Na+, K+, and PO42每 and reduces free [Ca2+] by increasing the protein-bound fraction. Hypocapnia-induced hypokalemia is usually minor.

Chronic respiratory alkalosis is the most common acid-base disturbance in critically ill patients and, when severe, portends a poor prognosis. Many cardiopulmonary disorders manifest respiratory alkalosis in their early to intermediate stages, and the finding of normocapnia and hypoxemia in a patient with hyperventilation may herald the onset of rapid respiratory failure and should prompt an assessment to determine if the patient is becoming fatigued. Respiratory alkalosis is common during mechanical ventilation.

The hyperventilation syndrome may be disabling. Paresthesia; circumoral numbness; chest wall tightness or pain; dizziness; inability to take an adequate breath; and, rarely, tetany may be sufficiently stressful to perpetuate the disorder. Arterial blood-gas analysis demonstrates an acute or chronic respiratory alkalosis, often with hypocapnia in the range of 15每30 mmHg and no hypoxemia. CNS diseases or injury can produce several patterns of hyperventilation and sustained Paco2 levels of 20每30 mmHg. Hyperthyroidism, high caloric loads, and exercise raise the basal metabolic rate, but ventilation usually rises in proportion so that arterial blood gases are unchanged and respiratory alkalosis does not develop. Salicylates are the most common cause of drug-induced respiratory alkalosis as a result of direct stimulation of the medullary chemoreceptor (Chap. e49). The methylxanthines, theophylline, and aminophylline stimulate ventilation and increase the ventilatory response to CO2. Progesterone increases ventilation and lowers arterial Paco2 by as much as 5每10 mmHg. Therefore, chronic respiratory alkalosis is a common feature of pregnancy. Respiratory alkalosis is also prominent in liver failure, and the severity correlates with the degree of hepatic insufficiency. Respiratory alkalosis is often an early finding in gram-negative septicemia, before fever, hypoxemia, or hypotension develops.

The diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis depends on measurement of arterial pH and Paco2. The plasma [K+] is often reduced and the [Cl每] increased. In the acute phase, respiratory alkalosis is not associated with increased renal HCO3每 excretion, but within hours net acid excretion is reduced. In general, the HCO3每 concentration falls by 2.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in Paco2. Chronic hypocapnia reduces the serum [HCO3每] by 4.0 mmol/L for each 10-mmHg decrease in Paco2. It is unusual to observe a plasma HCO3每 < 12 mmol/L as a result of a pure respiratory alkalosis.

When a diagnosis of respiratory alkalosis is made, its cause should be investigated. The diagnosis of hyperventilation syndrome is made by exclusion. In difficult cases, it may be important to rule out other conditions such as pulmonary embolism, coronary artery disease, and hyperthyroidism.

Treatment: Respiratory Alkalosis

The management of respiratory alkalosis is directed toward alleviation of the underlying disorder. If respiratory alkalosis complicates ventilator management, changes in dead space, tidal volume, and frequency can minimize the hypocapnia. Patients with the hyperventilation syndrome may benefit from reassurance, rebreathing from a paper bag during symptomatic attacks, and attention to underlying psychological stress. Antidepressants and sedatives are not recommended. -Adrenergic blockers may ameliorate peripheral manifestations of the hyperadrenergic state.
 
Further Readings

DuBose TD: Metabolic alkalosis, in Primer on Kidney Diseases, 5th ed, A Greenberg (ed). Saunders Elsevier, 2009, pp 84-90 

 
Dubose TD Jr: Acid-base disorders, in Brenner and Rector's The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner (ed). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008, pp 505-546 

 
〞〞〞, Alpern RJ: Renal tubular acidosis, in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th ed, CR Scriver et al (eds). New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001 

 
Kraut JA, Madias NE: Metabolic acidosis: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management. Nat Rev Nephrol. 6:274, 2010 [PMID: 20308999] 

 
Laski ME, Wesson DE: Lactic acidosis, in Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders〞A Companion to Brenner and Rector's The Kidney, TD DuBose, LL Hamm (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, pp 83每107 

 
Madias NE: Respiratory alkalosis, in Acid-Base and Electrolyte Disorders〞A Companion to Brenner and Rector's The Kidney, TD DuBose, LL Hamm (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, pp 147每164 
 
 

^^
Sexual Dysfunction: Introduction

Male sexual dysfunction affects 10每25% of middle-aged and elderly men, and female sexual dysfunction occurs with a similar frequency. Demographic changes, the popularity of newer treatments, and greater awareness of sexual dysfunction by patients and society have led to increased diagnosis and associated health care expenditures for the management of this common disorder. Because many patients are reluctant to initiate discussion of their sex lives, physicians should address this topic directly to elicit a history of sexual dysfunction.
 
Male Sexual Dysfunction

Physiology of Male Sexual Response

Normal male sexual function requires (1) an intact libido, (2) the ability to achieve and maintain penile erection, (3) ejaculation, and (4) detumescence. Libido refers to sexual desire and is influenced by a variety of visual, olfactory, tactile, auditory, imaginative, and hormonal stimuli. Sex steroids, particularly testosterone, act to increase libido. Libido can be diminished by hormonal or psychiatric disorders and by medications.

Penile tumescence leading to erection depends on an increased flow of blood into the lacunar network accompanied by complete relaxation of the arteries and corporal smooth muscle. The microarchitecture of the corpora is composed of a mass of smooth muscle (trabecula) that contains a network of endothelial-lined vessels (lacunar spaces). Subsequent compression of the trabecular smooth muscle against the fibroelastic tunica albuginea causes a passive closure of the emissary veins and accumulation of blood in the corpora. In the presence of a full erection and a competent valve mechanism, the corpora become noncompressible cylinders from which blood does not escape.

The central nervous system (CNS) exerts an important influence by either stimulating or antagonizing spinal pathways that mediate erectile function and ejaculation. The erectile response is mediated by a combination of central (psychogenic) innervation and peripheral (reflexogenic) innervation. Sensory nerves that originate from receptors in the penile skin and glans converge to form the dorsal nerve of the penis, which travels to the S2-S4 dorsal root ganglia via the pudendal nerve. Parasympathetic nerve fibers to the penis arise from neurons in the intermediolateral columns of the S2-S4 sacral spinal segments. Sympathetic innervation originates from the T-11 to the L-2 spinal segments and descends through the hypogastric plexus.

Neural input to smooth-muscle tone is crucial to the initiation and maintenance of an erection. There is also an intricate interaction between the corporal smooth-muscle cell and its overlying endothelial cell lining (Fig. 48-1A). Nitric oxide, which induces vascular relaxation, promotes erection and is opposed by endothelin 1 (ET-1) and Rho kinase, which mediate vascular contraction. Nitric oxide is synthesized from l-arginine by nitric oxide synthase and is released from the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) autonomic nerve supply to act postjunctionally on smooth-muscle cells. Nitric oxide increases the production of cyclic 3',5'-guanosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP), which induces relaxation of smooth muscle (Fig. 48-1B). Cyclic GMP is gradually broken down by phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5). Inhibitors of PDE-5 such as the oral medications sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil maintain erections by reducing the breakdown of cyclic GMP. However, if nitric oxide is not produced at some level, PDE-5 inhibitors are ineffective, as these drugs facilitate, but do not initiate, the initial enzyme cascade. In addition to nitric oxide, vasoactive prostaglandins (PGE1, PGF2) are synthesized within the cavernosal tissue and increase cyclic AMP levels, also leading to relaxation of cavernosal smooth-muscle cells.

Figure 48-1

 
 
 
Figure 48-1 Pathways that control erection and detumescence. A. Erection is mediated by cholinergic parasympathetic pathways and nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) pathways, which release nitric oxide (NO). Endothelial cells also release NO, which induces vascular smooth-muscle cell relaxation, allowing enhanced blood flow and leading to erection. Detumescence is mediated by sympathetic pathways that release norepinephrine and stimulate -adrenergic pathways, leading to contraction of vascular smooth-muscle cells. Endothelin, released from endothelial cells, also induces contraction. Rho kinase activation via endothelin activity (among others) also contributes to detumescence by alteration of calcium signaling. B. Biochemical pathways of NO synthesis and action. Sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil enhance erectile function by inhibiting phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5), thereby maintaining high levels of cyclic 3',5'-guanosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP). NOS, nitric oxide synthase; iCa2+, intracellular calcium.
 
 

Ejaculation is stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system; this results in contraction of the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and prostate, causing seminal fluid to enter the urethra. Seminal fluid emission is followed by rhythmic contractions of the bulbocavernosus and ischiocavernosus muscles, leading to ejaculation. Premature ejaculation usually is related to anxiety or a learned behavior and is amenable to behavioral therapy or treatment with medications such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Retrograde ejaculation results when the internal urethral sphincter does not close; it may occur in men with diabetes or after surgery involving the bladder neck.

Detumescence is mediated by norepinephrine from the sympathetic nerves, endothelin from the vascular surface, and smooth-muscle contraction induced by postsynaptic -adrenergic receptors and activation of Rho kinase. These events increase venous outflow and restore the flaccid state. Venous leak can cause premature detumescence and is caused by insufficient relaxation of the corporal smooth muscle rather than a specific anatomic defect. Priapism refers to a persistent and painful erection and may be associated with sickle cell anemia, hypercoagulable states, spinal cord injury, or injection of vasodilator agents into the penis.

Erectile Dysfunction

Epidemiology

Erectile dysfunction (ED) is not considered a normal part of the aging process. Nonetheless, it is associated with certain physiologic and psychological changes related to age. In the Massachusetts Male Aging Study (MMAS), a community-based survey of men age 40每70, 52% of responders reported some degree of ED. Complete ED occurred in 10% of respondents, moderate ED in 25%, and minimal ED in 17%. The incidence of moderate or severe ED more than doubled between the ages of 40 and 70. In the National Health and Social Life Survey (NHSLS), which included a sample of men and women age 18每59, 10% of men reported being unable to maintain an erection (corresponding to the proportion of men in the MMAS reporting severe ED). Incidence was highest among men in the age group 50每59 (21%) and men who were poor (14%), divorced (14%), and less educated (13%).

The incidence of ED is also higher among men with certain medical disorders, such as diabetes mellitus, obesity, lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), heart disease, hypertension, and decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels. Cardiovascular disease and ED share etiologies as well as pathophysiology (e.g., endothelial dysfunction), and the degree of ED appears to correlate with the severity of cardiovascular disease. Consequently, ED represents a "sentinel symptom" in patients with occult cardiovascular and peripheral vascular disease.

Smoking is also a significant risk factor in the development of ED. Medications used in treating diabetes or cardiovascular disease are additional risk factors (see below). There is a higher incidence of ED among men who have undergone radiation or surgery for prostate cancer and in those with a lower spinal cord injury. Psychological causes of ED include depression, anger, stress from unemployment, and other stress-related causes.

Pathophysiology

ED may result from three basic mechanisms: (1) failure to initiate (psychogenic, endocrinologic, or neurogenic), (2) failure to fill (arteriogenic), and (3) failure to store adequate blood volume within the lacunar network (venoocclusive dysfunction). These categories are not mutually exclusive, and multiple factors contribute to ED in many patients. For example, diminished filling pressure can lead secondarily to venous leak. Psychogenic factors frequently coexist with other etiologic factors and should be considered in all cases. Diabetic, atherosclerotic, and drug-related causes account for >80% of cases of ED in older men.

Vasculogenic

The most common organic cause of ED is a disturbance of blood flow to and from the penis. Atherosclerotic or traumatic arterial disease can decrease flow to the lacunar spaces, resulting in decreased rigidity and an increased time to full erection. Excessive outflow through the veins despite adequate inflow also may contribute to ED. Structural alterations to the fibroelastic components of the corpora may cause a loss of compliance and inability to compress the tunical veins. This condition may result from aging, increased cross-linking of collagen fibers induced by nonenzymatic glycosylation, hypoxemia, or altered synthesis of collagen associated with hypercholesterolemia.

Neurogenic

Disorders that affect the sacral spinal cord or the autonomic fibers to the penis preclude nervous system relaxation of penile smooth muscle, thus leading to ED. In patients with spinal cord injury, the degree of ED depends on the completeness and level of the lesion. Patients with incomplete lesions or injuries to the upper part of the spinal cord are more likely to retain erectile capabilities than are those with complete lesions or injuries to the lower part. Although 75% of patients with spinal cord injuries have some erectile capability, only 25% have erections sufficient for penetration. Other neurologic disorders commonly associated with ED include multiple sclerosis and peripheral neuropathy. The latter is often due to either diabetes or alcoholism. Pelvic surgery may cause ED through disruption of the autonomic nerve supply.

Endocrinologic

Androgens increase libido, but their exact role in erectile function is unclear. Individuals with castrate levels of testosterone can achieve erections from visual or sexual stimuli. Nonetheless, normal levels of testosterone appear to be important for erectile function, particularly in older males. Androgen replacement therapy can improve depressed erectile function when it is secondary to hypogonadism; however, it is not useful for ED when endogenous testosterone levels are normal. Increased prolactin may decrease libido by suppressing gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), and it also leads to decreased testosterone levels. Treatment of hyperprolactinemia with dopamine agonists can restore libido and testosterone.

Diabetic

ED occurs in 35每75% of men with diabetes mellitus. Pathologic mechanisms are related primarily to diabetes-associated vascular and neurologic complications. Diabetic macrovascular complications are related mainly to age, whereas microvascular complications correlate with the duration of diabetes and the degree of glycemic control (Chap. 344). Individuals with diabetes also have reduced amounts of nitric oxide synthase in both endothelial and neural tissues.

Psychogenic

Two mechanisms contribute to the inhibition of erections in psychogenic ED. First, psychogenic stimuli to the sacral cord may inhibit reflexogenic responses, thereby blocking activation of vasodilator outflow to the penis. Second, excess sympathetic stimulation in an anxious man may increase penile smooth-muscle tone. The most common causes of psychogenic ED are performance anxiety, depression, relationship conflict, loss of attraction, sexual inhibition, conflicts over sexual preference, sexual abuse in childhood, and fear of pregnancy or sexually transmitted disease. Almost all patients with ED, even when it has a clear-cut organic basis, develop a psychogenic component as a reaction to ED.

Medication-Related

Medication-induced ED (Table 48-1) is estimated to occur in 25% of men seen in general medical outpatient clinics. The adverse effects related to drug therapy are additive, especially in older men. In addition to the drug itself, the disease being treated is likely to contribute to sexual dysfunction. Among the antihypertensive agents, the thiazide diuretics and beta blockers have been implicated most frequently. Calcium channel blockers and angiotensin converting-enzyme inhibitors are cited less frequently. These drugs may act directly at the corporal level (e.g., calcium channel blockers) or indirectly by reducing pelvic blood pressure, which is important in the development of penile rigidity. -Adrenergic blockers are less likely to cause ED. Estrogens, GnRH agonists, H2 antagonists, and spironolactone cause ED by suppressing gonadotropin production or by blocking androgen action. Antidepressant and antipsychotic agents〞particularly neuroleptics, tricyclics, and SSRIs〞are associated with erectile, ejaculatory, orgasmic, and sexual desire difficulties.

Table 48-1 Drugs Associated with Erectile Dysfunction

 
 
Classification Drugs 
Diuretics Thiazides 

Spironolactone
 
Antihypertensives Calcium channel blockers

Methyldopa

Clonidine

Reserpine

Beta blockers 

Guanethidine
 
Cardiac/antihyperlipidemics Digoxin

Gemfibrozil

Clofibrate
 
Antidepressants Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 

Tricyclic antidepressants

Lithium

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
 
Tranquilizers Butyrophenones 

Phenothiazines
 
H2 antagonists
  Ranitidine

Cimetidine
 
Hormones Progesterone

Estrogens 

Corticosteroids 

GnRH agonists 

5-Reductase inhibitors 

Cyproterone acetate
 
Cytotoxic agents Cyclophosphamide

Methotrexate

Roferon-A
 
Anticholinergics Disopyramide

Anticonvulsants
 
Recreational Ethanol

Cocaine

Marijuana
 
 


Abbreviation: GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
 

If there is a strong association between the institution of a drug and the onset of ED, alternative medications should be considered. Otherwise, it is often practical to treat the ED without attempting multiple changes in medications, as it may be difficult to establish a causal role for a drug.

Figure 48-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for the evaluation and management of patients with ED. PDE, phosphodiesterase.
 
 

Approach to the Patient: Erectile Dysfunction

A good physician-patient relationship helps unravel the possible causes of ED, many of which require discussion of personal and sometimes embarrassing topics. For this reason, a primary care provider is often ideally suited to initiate the evaluation. However, a significant percentage of men experience ED and remain undiagnosed unless specifically questioned about this issue. By far the most common reason for underreporting of ED is patient embarrassment. Once the topic is initiated by the physician, patients are more willing to discuss their potency issues. A complete medical and sexual history should be taken in an effort to assess whether the cause of ED is organic, psychogenic, or multifactorial (Fig. 48-2).

Figure 48-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for the evaluation and differential diagnosis of hirsutism. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, sulfated form of dehydroepiandrosterone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.
 
 

Both the patient and his sexual partner should be interviewed regarding sexual history. ED should be distinguished from other sexual problems, such as premature ejaculation. Lifestyle factors such as sexual orientation, the patient's distress from ED, performance anxiety, and details of sexual techniques should be addressed. Standardized questionnaires are available to assess ED, including the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) and the more easily administered Sexual Health Inventory for Men (SHIM), a validated abridged version of the IIEF.

The initial evaluation of ED begins with a review of the patient's medical, surgical, sexual, and psychosocial histories. The history should note whether the patient has experienced pelvic trauma, surgery, or radiation. In light of the increasing recognition of the relationship between lower urinary tract symptoms and ED, it is advisable to evaluate for the presence of symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction. Questions should focus on the onset of symptoms, the presence and duration of partial erections, and the progression of ED. A history of nocturnal or early morning erections is useful for distinguishing physiologic ED from psychogenic ED. Nocturnal erections occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and require intact neurologic and circulatory systems. Organic causes of ED generally are characterized by a gradual and persistent change in rigidity or the inability to sustain nocturnal, coital, or self-stimulated erections. The patient should be questioned about the presence of penile curvature or pain with coitus. It is also important to address libido, as decreased sexual drive and ED are sometimes the earliest signs of endocrine abnormalities (e.g., increased prolactin, decreased testosterone levels). It is useful to ask whether the problem is confined to coitus with one partner or also involves other partners; ED not uncommonly arises in association with new or extramarital sexual relationships. Situational ED, as opposed to consistent ED, suggests psychogenic causes. Ejaculation is much less commonly affected than erection, but questions should be asked about whether ejaculation is normal, premature, delayed, or absent. Relevant risk factors should be identified, such as diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease (CAD), and neurologic disorders. The patient's surgical history should be explored with an emphasis on bowel, bladder, prostate, and vascular procedures. A complete drug history is also important. Social changes that may precipitate ED are also crucial to the evaluation, including health worries, spousal death, divorce, relationship difficulties, and financial concerns.

Because ED commonly involves a host of endothelial cell risk factors, men with ED report higher rates of overt and silent myocardial infarction. Therefore, ED in an otherwise asymptomatic male warrants consideration of other vascular disorders, including CAD.

The physical examination is an essential element in the assessment of ED. Signs of hypertension as well as evidence of thyroid, hepatic, hematologic, cardiovascular, or renal diseases should be sought. An assessment should be made of the endocrine and vascular systems, the external genitalia, and the prostate gland. The penis should be palpated carefully along the corpora to detect fibrotic plaques. Reduced testicular size and loss of secondary sexual characteristics are suggestive of hypogonadism. Neurologic examination should include assessment of anal sphincter tone, investigation of the bulbocavernosus reflex, and testing for peripheral neuropathy.

Although hyperprolactinemia is uncommon, a serum prolactin level should be measured, as decreased libido and/or ED may be the presenting symptoms of a prolactinoma or another mass lesion of the sella (Chap. 339). The serum testosterone level should be measured, and if it is low, gonadotropins should be measured to determine whether hypogonadism is primary (testicular) or secondary (hypothalamic-pituitary) in origin (Chap. 346). If not performed recently, serum chemistries, complete blood count (CBC), and lipid profiles may be of value, as they can yield evidence of anemia, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or other systemic diseases associated with ED. Determination of serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) should be conducted according to recommended clinical guidelines (Chap. 95).

Additional diagnostic testing is rarely necessary in the evaluation of ED. However, in selected patients, specialized testing may provide insight into pathologic mechanisms of ED and aid in the selection of treatment options. Optional specialized testing includes (1) studies of nocturnal penile tumescence and rigidity, (2) vascular testing (in-office injection of vasoactive substances, penile Doppler ultrasound, penile angiography, dynamic infusion cavernosography/cavernosometry), (3) neurologic testing (biothesiometry-graded vibratory perception, somatosensory evoked potentials), and (4) psychological diagnostic tests. The information potentially gained from these procedures must be balanced against their invasiveness and cost.

Treatment: Male Sexual Dysfunction

Patient Education

Patient and partner education is essential in the treatment of ED. In goal-directed therapy, education facilitates understanding of the disease, the results of the tests, and the selection of treatment. Discussion of treatment options helps clarify how treatment is best offered and stratify first- and second-line therapies. Patients with high-risk lifestyle issues such as obesity, smoking, alcohol abuse, and recreational drug use should be counseled on the role those factors play in the development of ED.

Therapies currently employed for the treatment of ED include oral phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor therapy (most commonly used), injection therapies, testosterone therapy, penile devices, and psychological therapy. In addition, limited data suggest that treatments for underlying risk factors and comorbidities〞for example, weight loss, exercise, stress reduction, and smoking cessation〞may improve erectile function. Decisions regarding therapy should take into account the preferences and expectations of patients and their partners.

Oral Agents

Sildenafil, tadalafil, and vardenafil are the only approved and effective oral agents for the treatment of ED. These three medications have markedly improved the management of ED because they are effective for the treatment of a broad range of causes, including psychogenic, diabetic, vasculogenic, post-radical prostatectomy (nerve-sparing procedures), and spinal cord injury. They belong to a class of medications that are selective and potent inhibitors of PDE-5, the predominant phosphodiesterase isoform found in the penis. They are administered in graduated doses and enhance erections after sexual stimulation. The onset of action is approximately 60每120 min, depending on the medication used and other factors, such as recent food intake. Reduced initial doses should be considered for patients who are elderly, are taking concomitant alpha blockers, have renal insufficiency, or are taking medications that inhibit the CYP3A4 metabolic pathway in the liver (e.g., erythromycin, cimetidine, ketoconazole, and possibly itraconazole and mibefradil), as they may increase the serum concentration of the PDE-5 inhibitors (PDE-5i) or promote hypotension.

Several randomized trials have demonstrated the efficacy of this class of medications. There are no compelling data to support the superiority of one PDE-5i over another.

Patients may fail to respond to a PDE-5i for several reasons (Table 48-2). Some patients may not tolerate PDE-5i secondary to adverse events from vasodilation in nonpenile tissues expressing PDE-5 or from the inhibition of homologous nonpenile isozymes (i.e., PDE-6 found in the retina). Abnormal vision attributed to the effects of PDE-5i on retinal PDE-6 is of short duration, reported only with sildenafil and not thought to be clinically significant. A more serious concern is the possibility that PDE-5i may cause nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy; although data to support that association are limited, it is prudent to avoid the use of these agents in men with a prior history of nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy.

Table 48-2 Issues to Consider If Patients Report Failure of PDE-5i to Improve Erectile Dysfunction

 
 
 A trial of medication on at least six different days at the maximal dose should be made before declaring patient nonresponsive to PDE-5i use

 Taking medication after a high-fat meal

 Failure to include physical and psychic stimulation at the time of foreplay to induce endogenous NO

 Unrecognized hypogonadism
 
 


Abbreviations: NO, nitric oxide; PDE-5i, phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor.
 

Testosterone supplementation combined with a PDE-5i may be beneficial in improving erectile function in hypogonadal men with ED who are unresponsive to PDE-5i alone. These drugs do not affect ejaculation, orgasm, or sexual drive. Side effects associated with PDE-5i include headaches (19%), facial flushing (9%), dyspepsia (6%), and nasal congestion (4%). Approximately 7% of men using sildenafil may experience transient altered color vision (blue halo effect), and 6% of men taking tadalafil may experience loin pain. PDE-5i is contraindicated in men receiving nitrate therapy for cardiovascular disease, including agents delivered by the oral, sublingual, transnasal, and topical routes. These agents can potentiate its hypotensive effect and may result in profound shock. Likewise, amyl/butyl nitrate "poppers" may have a fatal synergistic effect on blood pressure. PDE-5i also should be avoided in patients with congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy because of the risk of vascular collapse. Because sexual activity leads to an increase in physiologic expenditure [5每6 metabolic equivalents (METS)], physicians have been advised to exercise caution in prescribing any drug for sexual activity to those with active coronary disease, heart failure, borderline hypotension, or hypovolemia and to those on complex antihypertensive regimens.

Although the various forms of PDE-5i have a common mechanism of action, there are a few differences among the three agents. Tadalafil is unique in its longer half-life. All three drugs are effective for patients with ED of all ages, severities, and etiologies. Although there are pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic differences among these agents, clinically relevant differences are not clear.

Androgen Therapy

Testosterone replacement is used to treat both primary and secondary causes of hypogonadism (Chap. 346). Androgen supplementation in the setting of normal testosterone is rarely efficacious in the treatment of ED and is discouraged. Methods of androgen replacement include transdermal patches and gels, parenteral administration of long-acting testosterone esters (enanthate and cypionate), and oral preparations (17 -alkylated derivatives) (Chap. 346). Oral androgen preparations have the potential for hepatotoxicity and should be avoided.

Men who receive testosterone should be reevaluated after 1每3 months and at least annually thereafter for testosterone levels, erectile function, and adverse effects, which may include gynecomastia, sleep apnea, development or exacerbation of lower urinary tract symptoms or benign prostatic hyperplasia, prostate cancer, lowering of HDL, erythrocytosis, elevations of liver function tests, and reduced fertility. Periodic reevaluation should include measurement of CBC and PSA and digital rectal exam. Therapy should be discontinued in patients who do not respond within 3 months.

Vacuum Constriction Devices

Vacuum constriction devices (VCDs) are a well-established noninvasive therapy. They are a reasonable treatment alternative for select patients who cannot take sildenafil or do not desire other interventions. VCDs draw venous blood into the penis and use a constriction ring to restrict venous return and maintain tumescence. Adverse events with VCD include pain, numbness, bruising, and altered ejaculation. Additionally, many patients complain that the devices are cumbersome and that the induced erections have a nonphysiologic appearance and feel.

Intraurethral Alprostadil

If a patient fails to respond to oral agents, a reasonable next choice is intraurethral or self-injection of vasoactive substances. Intraurethral prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil), in the form of a semisolid pellet (doses of 125每1000 g), is delivered with an applicator. Approximately 65% of men receiving intraurethral alprostadil respond with an erection when tested in the office, but only 50% achieve successful coitus at home. Intraurethral insertion is associated with a markedly reduced incidence of priapism in comparison to intracavernosal injection.

Intracavernosal Self-Injection

Injection of synthetic formulations of alprostadil is effective in 70每80% of patients with ED, but discontinuation rates are high because of the invasive nature of administration. Doses range between 1 and 40 g. Injection therapy is contraindicated in men with a history of hypersensitivity to the drug and men at risk for priapism (hypercoagulable states, sickle cell disease). Side effects include local adverse events, prolonged erections, pain, and fibrosis with chronic use. Various combinations of alprostadil, phentolamine, and/or papaverine sometimes are used.

Surgery

A less frequently used form of therapy for ED involves the surgical implantation of a semirigid or inflatable penile prosthesis. The choice of prosthesis is dependent on patient preference and should take into account body habitus and manual dexterity, which may affect the ability of the patient to manipulate the device. Because of the permanence of prosthetic devices, patients should be advised to first consider less invasive options for treatment. These surgical treatments are invasive, are associated with potential complications, and generally are reserved for treatment of refractory ED. Despite their high cost and invasiveness, penile prostheses are associated with high rates of patient and partner satisfaction.

Sex Therapy

A course of sex therapy may be useful for addressing specific interpersonal factors that may affect sexual functioning. Sex therapy generally consists of in-session discussion and at-home exercises specific to the person and the relationship. Psychosexual therapy involves techniques such as sensate focus (nongenital massage), sensory awareness exercises, correction of misconceptions about sexuality, and interpersonal difficulties therapy (e.g., open communication about sexual issues, physical intimacy scheduling, and behavioral interventions). These approaches may be useful in patients who have psychogenic or social components to their ED, although data from randomized trials are scanty and inconsistent. It is preferable if therapy includes both partners if the patient is involved in an ongoing relationship.
 
Female Sexual Dysfunction

Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) has traditionally included disorders of desire, arousal, pain, and muted orgasm. The associated risk factors for FSD are similar to those in males: cardiovascular disease, endocrine disorders, hypertension, neurologic disorders, and smoking (Table 48-3).

Table 48-3 Risk Factors for Female Sexual Dysfunction

 
 
Neurologic disease: stroke, spinal cord injury, parkinsonism

Trauma, genital surgery, radiation

Endocrinopathies: diabetes, hyperprolactinemia

Liver and/or renal failure

Cardiovascular disease

Psychological factors and interpersonal relationship disorders: sexual abuse, life stressors

Medications

   Antiandrogens: cimetidine, spironolactone

   Antidepressants, alcohol, hypnotics, sedatives

   Antiestrogens or GnRH antagonists

   Antihistamines, sympathomimetic amines

   Antihypertensives: diuretics, calcium channel blockers

   Alkylating agents

   Anticholinergics
 
 


Abbreviation: GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
 

Epidemiology

Epidemiologic data are limited, but the available estimates suggest that as many as 43% of women complain of at least one sexual problem. Despite the recent interest in organic causes of FSD, desire and arousal phase disorders (including lubrication complaints) remain the most common presenting problems when surveyed in a community-based population.

Physiology of the Female Sexual Response

The female sexual response requires the presence of estrogens. A role for androgens is also likely but less well established. In the CNS, estrogens and androgens work synergistically to enhance sexual arousal and response. A number of studies report enhanced libido in women during preovulatory phases of the menstrual cycle, suggesting that hormones involved in the ovulatory surge (e.g., estrogens) increase desire.

Sexual motivation is heavily influenced by context, including the environment and partner factors. Once sufficient sexual desire is reached, sexual arousal is mediated by the central and autonomic nervous systems. Cerebral sympathetic outflow is thought to increase desire, and peripheral parasympathetic activity results in clitoral vasocongestion and vaginal secretion (lubrication).

The neurotransmitters for clitoral corporal engorgement are similar to those in the male, with a prominent role for neural, smooth-muscle, and endothelial released nitric oxide (NO). A fine network of vaginal nerves and arterioles promotes a vaginal transudate. The major transmitters of this complex vaginal response are not certain, but roles for NO and vasointestinal polypeptide (VIP) are suspected. Investigators studying the normal female sexual response have challenged the long-held construct of a linear and unmitigated relationship between initial desire, arousal, vasocongestion, lubrication, and eventual orgasm. Caregivers should consider a paradigm of a positive emotional and physical outcome with one, many, or no orgasmic peak and release.

Although there are anatomic differences as well as variation in the density of vascular and neural beds in males and females, the primary effectors of sexual response are strikingly similar. Intact sensation is important for arousal. Thus, reduced levels of sexual functioning are more common in women with peripheral neuropathies (e.g., diabetes). Vaginal lubrication is a transudate of serum that results from the increased pelvic blood flow associated with arousal. Vascular insufficiency from a variety of causes may compromise adequate lubrication and result in dyspareunia. Cavernosal and arteriole smooth-muscle relaxation occurs via increased nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity and produces engorgement in the clitoris and the surrounding vestibule. Orgasm requires an intact sympathetic outflow tract; hence, orgasmic disorders are common in female patients with spinal cord injuries.

Approach to the Patient: Female Sexual Dysfunction

Many women do not volunteer information about their sexual response. Open-ended questions in a supportive atmosphere are helpful in initiating a discussion of sexual fitness in women who are reluctant to discuss such issues. Once a complaint has been voiced, a comprehensive evaluation should be performed, including a medical history, a psychosocial history, a physical examination, and limited laboratory testing.

The history should include the usual medical, surgical, obstetric, psychological, gynecologic, sexual, and social information. Past experiences, intimacy, knowledge, and partner availability should also be ascertained. Medical disorders that may affect sexual health should be delineated. They include diabetes, cardiovascular disease, gynecologic conditions, obstetric history, depression, anxiety disorders, and neurologic disease. Medications should be reviewed as they may affect arousal, libido, and orgasm. The need for counseling and recognizing life stresses should be identified. The physical examination should assess the genitalia, including the clitoris. Pelvic floor examination may identify prolapse or other disorders. Laboratory studies are needed, especially if menopausal status is uncertain. Estradiol, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH) are usually obtained, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) should be considered as it reflects adrenal androgen secretion. A CBC, liver function assessment, and lipid studies may be useful, if not otherwise obtained. Complicated diagnostic evaluation such as clitoral Doppler ultrasonography and biothesiometry require expensive equipment and are of uncertain utility. It is important for the patient to identify which symptoms are most distressing.

The evaluation of FSD previously occurred mainly in a psychosocial context. However, inconsistencies between diagnostic categories based only on psychosocial considerations and the emerging recognition of organic etiologies have led to a new classification of FSD. This diagnostic scheme is based on four components that are not mutually exclusive: (1) Hypoactive sexual desire〞the persistent or recurrent lack of sexual thoughts and/or receptivity to sexual activity, which causes personal distress. Hypoactive sexual desire may result from endocrine failure or may be associated with psychological or emotional disorders, (2) Sexual arousal disorder〞the persistent or recurrent inability to attain or maintain sexual excitement, which causes personal distress, (3) Orgasmic disorder〞the persistent or recurrent loss of orgasmic potential after sufficient sexual stimulation and arousal, which causes personal distress, and (4) Sexual pain disorder〞persistent or recurrent genital pain associated with noncoital sexual stimulation, which causes personal distress. This newer classification emphasizes "personal distress" as a requirement for dysfunction and provides clinicians with an organized framework for evaluation before or in conjunction with more traditional counseling methods.

Treatment: Female Sexual Dysfunction

General

An open discussion with the patient is important as couples may need to be educated about normal anatomy and physiologic responses, including the role of orgasm, in sexual encounters. Physiologic changes associated with aging and/or disease should be explained. Couples may need to be reminded that clitoral stimulation rather than coital intromission may be more beneficial.

Behavioral modification and nonpharmacologic therapies should be a first step. Patient and partner counseling may improve communication and relationship strains. Lifestyle changes involving known risk factors can be an important part of the treatment process. Emphasis on maximizing physical health and avoiding lifestyles (e.g., smoking, alcohol abuse) and medications likely to produce FSD is important (Table 48-3). The use of topical lubricants may address complaints of dyspareunia and dryness. Contributing medications such as antidepressants may need to be altered, including the use of medications with less impact on sexual function, dose reduction, medication switching, or drug holidays.

Hormonal Therapy

In postmenopausal women, estrogen replacement therapy may be helpful in treating vaginal atrophy, decreasing coital pain, and improving clitoral sensitivity (Chap. 348). Estrogen replacement in the form of local cream is the preferred method, as it avoids systemic side effects. Androgen levels in women decline substantially before menopause. However, low levels of testosterone or DHEA are not effective predictors of a positive therapeutic outcome with androgen therapy. The widespread use of exogenous androgens is not supported by the literature except in select circumstances (premature ovarian failure or menopausal states) and in secondary arousal disorders.

Oral Agents

The efficacy of PDE-5i in FDS has been a marked disappointment in light of the proposed role of nitric oxide每dependent physiology in the normal female sexual response. The use of PDE-5i for FSD should be discouraged pending proof that it is effective.

Clitoral Vacuum Device

In patients with arousal and orgasmic difficulties, the option of using a clitoral vacuum device may be explored. This handheld battery-operated device has a small soft plastic cup that applies a vacuum over the stimulated clitoris. This causes increased cavernosal blood flow, engorgement, and vaginal lubrication.
 
Further Readings

Araujo AB et al: Changes in sexual function in middle-aged and older men: Longitudinal data from the Massachusetts male aging study. J Am Geriatr Soc 52:1502, 2004[PMID: 15341552] 

 
Bhasin S et al: Sexual dysfunction in men and women with endocrine disorders. Lancet 369:597, 2007[PMID: 17307107] 

 
Burnett AL: Erectile dysfunction. J Urol 175:S25, 2006 

 
Cappelleri JC et al: A 5-year review of research and clinical experience. Int J Impot Res 17:307, 2005[PMID: 15875061] 

 
Davis SR et al: Endocrine aspects of female sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med 1:82, 2004[PMID: 16422987] 

 
Doggrell SA: Comparison of clinical trials with sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil in erectile dysfunction. Expert Opin Pharmacother 6:75, 2005[PMID: 15709885] 

 
Esposito K et al: Effect of lifestyle changes on erectile dysfunction in obese men: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 291:2978, 2004[PMID: 15213209] 

 
Inman BA et al. A population-based, longitudinal study of erectile dysfunction and future coronary artery disease. Mayo Clin Proc 84:108, 2009[PMID: 19181643] 

 
Pauls RN et al: Female sexual dysfunction: Principles of diagnosis and therapy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 60:196, 2005[PMID: 16570398] 

 
Rees PM et al: Sexual function in men and women with neurological disorders. Lancet 369(9560):512, 2007[PMID: 17292771] 

 
Thompson IM et al: Erectile dysfunction and subsequent cardiovascular disease. JAMA 294:2996, 2005[PMID: 16414947] 
 
 

^^
Hirsutism and Virilization: Introduction

Hirsutism, which is defined as androgen-dependent excessive male-pattern hair growth, affects approximately 10% of women. Hirsutism is most often idiopathic or the consequence of androgen excess associated with the polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Less frequently, it may result from adrenal androgen overproduction as occurs in nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) (Table 49-1). Rarely, it is a harbinger of a serious underlying condition. Cutaneous manifestations commonly associated with hirsutism include acne and male-pattern balding (androgenic alopecia). Virilization refers to a condition in which androgen levels are sufficiently high to cause additional signs and symptoms, such as deepening of the voice, breast atrophy, increased muscle bulk, clitoromegaly, and increased libido; virilization is an ominous sign that suggests the possibility of an ovarian or adrenal neoplasm.

Table 49-1 Causes of Hirsutism

 
 
Gonadal hyperandrogenism

   Ovarian hyperandrogenism

   Polycystic ovary syndrome/functional ovarian hyperandrogenism

   Ovarian steroidogenic blocks

   Syndromes of extreme insulin resistance

   Ovarian neoplasms

Adrenal hyperandrogenism

   Premature adrenarche

   Functional adrenal hyperandrogenism

   Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (nonclassic and classic)

   Abnormal cortisol action/metabolism

   Adrenal neoplasms

Other endocrine disorders

   Cushing's syndrome

   Hyperprolactinemia

   Acromegaly

Peripheral androgen overproduction

   Obesity

   Idiopathic

Pregnancy-related hyperandrogenism

   Hyperreactio luteinalis

   Thecoma of pregnancy

Drugs

   Androgens

   Oral contraceptives containing androgenic progestins

   Minoxidil

   Phenytoin

   Diazoxide

   Cyclosporine

True hermaphroditism
 
 

 

Hair Follicle Growth and Differentiation

Hair can be categorized as either vellus (fine, soft, and not pigmented) or terminal (long, coarse, and pigmented). The number of hair follicles does not change over an individual's lifetime, but the follicle size and type of hair can change in response to numerous factors, particularly androgens. Androgens are necessary for terminal hair and sebaceous gland development and mediate differentiation of pilosebaceous units (PSUs) into either a terminal hair follicle or a sebaceous gland. In the former case, androgens transform the vellus hair into a terminal hair; in the latter case, the sebaceous component proliferates and the hair remains vellus.

There are three phases in the cycle of hair growth: (1) anagen (growth phase), (2) catagen (involution phase), and (3) telogen (rest phase). Depending on the body site, hormonal regulation may play an important role in the hair growth cycle. For example, the eyebrows, eyelashes, and vellus hairs are androgen-insensitive, whereas the axillary and pubic areas are sensitive to low levels of androgens. Hair growth on the face, chest, upper abdomen, and back requires higher levels of androgens and is therefore more characteristic of the pattern typically seen in men. Androgen excess in women leads to increased hair growth in most androgen-sensitive sites except in the scalp region, where hair loss occurs because androgens cause scalp hairs to spend less time in the anagen phase.

Although androgen excess underlies most cases of hirsutism, there is only a modest correlation between androgen levels and the quantity of hair growth. This is due to the fact that hair growth from the follicle also depends on local growth factors, and there is variability in end organ (PSU) sensitivity. Genetic factors and ethnic background also influence hair growth. In general, dark-haired individuals tend to be more hirsute than blond or fair individuals. Asians and Native Americans have relatively sparse hair in regions sensitive to high androgen levels, whereas people of Mediterranean descent are more hirsute.

Clinical Assessment

Historic elements relevant to the assessment of hirsutism include the age at onset and rate of progression of hair growth and associated symptoms or signs (e.g., acne). Depending on the cause, excess hair growth typically is first noted during the second and third decades of life. The growth is usually slow but progressive. Sudden development and rapid progression of hirsutism suggest the possibility of an androgen-secreting neoplasm, in which case virilization also may be present.

The age at onset of menstrual cycles (menarche) and the pattern of the menstrual cycle should be ascertained; irregular cycles from the time of menarche onward are more likely to result from ovarian rather than adrenal androgen excess. Associated symptoms such as galactorrhea should prompt evaluation for hyperprolactinemia (Chap. 339) and possibly hypothyroidism (Chap. 341). Hypertension, striae, easy bruising, centripetal weight gain, and weakness suggest hypercortisolism (Cushing's syndrome; Chap. 342). Rarely, patients with growth hormone excess (i.e., acromegaly) present with hirsutism. Use of medications such as phenytoin, minoxidil, and cyclosporine may be associated with androgen-independent excess hair growth (i.e., hypertrichosis). A family history of infertility and/or hirsutism may indicate disorders such as nonclassic CAH (Chap. 342).

Physical examination should include measurement of height and weight and calculation of body mass index (BMI). A BMI >25 kg/m2 is indicative of excess weight for height, and values >30 kg/m2 are often seen in association with hirsutism, probably the result of increased conversion of androgen precursors to testosterone. Notation should be made of blood pressure, as adrenal causes may be associated with hypertension. Cutaneous signs sometimes associated with androgen excess and insulin resistance include acanthosis nigricans and skin tags.

An objective clinical assessment of hair distribution and quantity is central to the evaluation in any woman presenting with hirsutism. This assessment permits the distinction between hirsutism and hypertrichosis and provides a baseline reference point to gauge the response to treatment. A simple and commonly used method to grade hair growth is the modified scale of Ferriman and Gallwey (Fig. 49-1), in which each of nine androgen-sensitive sites is graded from 0 to 4. Approximately 95% of white women have a score below 8 on this scale; thus, it is normal for most women to have some hair growth in androgen-sensitive sites. Scores above 8 suggest excess androgen-mediated hair growth, a finding that should be assessed further by means of hormonal evaluation (see below). In racial/ethnic groups that are less likely to manifest hirsutism (e.g., Asian women), additional cutaneous evidence of androgen excess should be sought, including pustular acne and thinning scalp hair.

Figure 49-1

 
 
 
Hirsutism scoring scale of Ferriman and Gallwey. The nine body areas that have androgen-sensitive areas are graded from 0 (no terminal hair) to 4 (frankly virile) to obtain a total score. A normal hirsutism score is <8. [Modified from DA Ehrmann et al: Hyperandrogenism, hirsutism, and polycystic ovary syndrome, in LJ DeGroot and JL Jameson (eds), Endocrinology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2006; with permission.]
 
 

Hormonal Evaluation

Androgens are secreted by the ovaries and adrenal glands in response to their respective tropic hormones: luteinizing hormone (LH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The principal circulating steroids involved in the etiology of hirsutism are testosterone, androstenedione, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfated form (DHEAS). The ovaries and adrenal glands normally contribute about equally to testosterone production. Approximately half of the total testosterone originates from direct glandular secretion, and the remainder is derived from the peripheral conversion of androstenedione and DHEA (Chap. 346).

Although it is the most important circulating androgen, testosterone is in effect the penultimate androgen in mediating hirsutism; it is converted to the more potent dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by the enzyme 5-reductase, which is located in the PSU. DHT has a higher affinity for, and slower dissociation from, the androgen receptor. The local production of DHT allows it to serve as the primary mediator of androgen action at the level of the pilosebaceous unit. There are two isoenzymes of 5-reductase: Type 2 is found in the prostate gland and in hair follicles, and type 1 is found primarily in sebaceous glands.

One approach to testing for hyperandrogenemia is depicted in Fig. 49-2. In addition to measuring blood levels of testosterone and DHEAS, it is important to measure the level of free (or unbound) testosterone. The fraction of testosterone that is not bound to its carrier protein, sex hormone每binding globulin (SHBG), is biologically available for conversion to DHT and binding to androgen receptors. Hyperinsulinemia and/or androgen excess decrease hepatic production of SHBG, resulting in levels of total testosterone within the high-normal range, whereas the unbound hormone is elevated more substantially. Although there is a decline in ovarian testosterone production after menopause, ovarian estrogen production decreases to an even greater extent, and the concentration of SHBG is reduced. Consequently, there is an increase in the relative proportion of unbound testosterone, and it may exacerbate hirsutism after menopause.

Figure 49-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for the evaluation and differential diagnosis of hirsutism. ACTH, adrenocorticoctropic hormone; CAH, congential adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, sulfated form of dehydroepiandrosterone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.
 
 

A baseline plasma total testosterone level >12 nmol/L (>3.5 ng/mL) usually indicates a virilizing tumor, whereas a level >7 nmol/L (>2 ng/mL) is suggestive. A basal DHEAS level >18.5 mol/L (>7000 g/L) suggests an adrenal tumor. Although DHEAS has been proposed as a "marker" of predominant adrenal androgen excess, it is not unusual to find modest elevations in DHEAS among women with PCOS. Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be used to localize an adrenal mass, and ultrasound usually suffices to identify an ovarian mass if clinical evaluation and hormonal levels suggest these possibilities.

PCOS is the most common cause of ovarian androgen excess (Chap. 347). An increased ratio of LH to follicle-stimulating hormone is characteristic in carefully studied patients with PCOS. However, because of the pulsatile nature of gonadotropin secretion, this finding may be absent in up to half of women with PCOS. Transvaginal ultrasound classically shows enlarged ovaries and increased stroma in women with PCOS. However, cystic ovaries also may be found in women without clinical or laboratory features of PCOS. Although usually limited to a research setting, a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist test can be used to make a specific diagnosis of ovarian hyperandrogenism. A peak 17-hydroxyprogesterone level 7.8 nmol/L (2.6 g/L) after the administration of 100 g nafarelin (or 10 g/kg leuprolide) subcutaneously is virtually diagnostic of ovarian hyperandrogenism.

Because adrenal androgens are readily suppressed by low doses of glucocorticoids, the dexamethasone androgen-suppression test may broadly distinguish ovarian from adrenal androgen overproduction. A blood sample is obtained before and after the administration of dexa-methasone (0.5 mg orally every 6 h for 4 days). An adrenal source is suggested by suppression of unbound testosterone into the normal range; incomplete suppression suggests ovarian androgen excess. An overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test, with measurement of 8:00 a.m. serum cortisol, is useful when there is clinical suspicion of Cushing's syndrome (Chap. 342).

Nonclassic CAH is most commonly due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency but also can be caused by autosomal recessive defects in other steroidogenic enzymes necessary for adrenal corticosteroid synthesis (Chap. 342). Because of the enzyme defect, the adrenal gland cannot secrete glucocorticoids (especially cortisol) efficiently. This results in diminished negative feedback inhibition of ACTH, leading to compensatory adrenal hyperplasia and the accumulation of steroid precursors that subsequently are converted to androgen. Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase can be reliably excluded by determining a morning 17-hydroxyprogesterone level <6 nmol/L (<2 g/L) (drawn in the follicular phase). Alternatively, 21-hydroxylase deficiency can be diagnosed by measurement of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 1 h after the administration of 250 g of synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin) intravenously.

Treatment: Hirsutism

Treatment of hirsutism may be accomplished pharmacologically or by mechanical means of hair removal. Nonpharmacologic treatments should be considered in all patients either as the only treatment or as an adjunct to drug therapy.

Nonpharmacologic treatments include (1) bleaching, (2) depilatory (removal from the skin surface) such as shaving and chemical treatments, and (3) epilatory (removal of the hair including the root) such as plucking, waxing, electrolysis, and laser therapy. Despite perceptions to the contrary, shaving does not increase the rate or density of hair growth. Chemical depilatory treatments may be useful for mild hirsutism that affects only limited skin areas, though they can cause skin irritation. Wax treatment removes hair temporarily but is uncomfortable. Electrolysis is effective for more permanent hair removal, particularly in the hands of a skilled electrologist. Laser phototherapy appears to be efficacious for hair removal. It delays hair regrowth and causes permanent hair removal in most patients. The long-term effects and complications associated with laser treatment are being evaluated.

Pharmacologic therapy is directed at interrupting one or more of the steps in the pathway of androgen synthesis and action: (1) suppression of adrenal and/or ovarian androgen production, (2) enhancement of androgen-binding to plasma-binding proteins, particularly SHBG, (3) impairment of the peripheral conversion of androgen precursors to active androgen, and (4) inhibition of androgen action at the target tissue level. Attenuation of hair growth is typically not evident until 4每6 months after initiation of medical treatment and in most cases leads to only a modest reduction in hair growth.

Combination estrogen-progestin therapy in the form of an oral contraceptive is usually the first-line endocrine treatment for hirsutism and acne, after cosmetic and dermatologic management. The estrogenic component of most oral contraceptives currently in use is either ethinyl estradiol or mestranol. The suppression of LH leads to reduced production of ovarian androgens. The reduced androgen levels also result in a dose-related increase in SHBG, thus lowering the fraction of unbound plasma testosterone. Combination therapy also has been demonstrated to decrease DHEAS, perhaps by reducing ACTH levels. Estrogens also have a direct, dose-dependent suppressive effect on sebaceous cell function.

The choice of a specific oral contraceptive should be predicated on the progestational component, as progestins vary in their suppressive effect on SHBG levels and in their androgenic potential. Ethynodiol diacetate has relatively low androgenic potential, whereas progestins such as norgestrel and levonor-gestrel are particularly androgenic, as judged from their attenuation of the estrogen-induced increase in SHBG. Norgestimate exemplifies the newer generation of progestins that are virtually nonandrogenic. Drospirenone, an analogue of spironolactone that has both antimineralocorticoid and antiandrogenic activities, has been approved for use as a progestational agent in combination with ethinyl estradiol.

Oral contraceptives are contraindicated in women with a history of thromboembolic disease and women with increased risk of breast or other estrogen-dependent cancers (Chap. 348). There is a relative contraindication to the use of oral contraceptives in smokers and those with hypertension or a history of migraine headaches. In most trials, estrogen-progestin therapy alone improves the extent of acne by a maximum of 50每70%. The effect on hair growth may not be evident for 6 months, and the maximum effect may require 9每12 months owing to the length of the hair growth cycle. Improvements in hirsutism are typically in the range of 20%, but there may be an arrest of further progression of hair growth.

Adrenal androgens are more sensitive than cortisol to the suppressive effects of glucocorticoids. Therefore, glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment in patients with CAH. Although glucocorticoids have been reported to restore ovulatory function in some women with PCOS, this effect is highly variable. Because of side effects from excessive glucocorticoids, low doses should be used. Dexamethasone (0.2每0.5 mg) or prednisone (5每10 mg) should be taken at bedtime to achieve maximal suppression by inhibiting the nocturnal surge of ACTH.

Cyproterone acetate is the prototypic antiandrogen. It acts mainly by competitive inhibition of the binding of testosterone and DHT to the androgen receptor. In addition, it may enhance the metabolic clearance of testosterone by inducing hepatic enzymes. Although not available for use in the United States, cyproterone acetate is widely used in Canada, Mexico, and Europe. Cyproterone (50每100 mg) is given on days 1每15 and ethinyl estradiol (50 g) is given on days 5每26 of the menstrual cycle. Side effects include irregular uterine bleeding, nausea, headache, fatigue, weight gain, and decreased libido.

Spironolactone, which usually is used as a mineralocorticoid antagonist, is also a weak antiandrogen. It is almost as effective as cyproterone acetate when used at high enough doses (100每200 mg daily). Patients should be monitored intermittently for hyperkalemia or hypotension, though these side effects are uncommon. Pregnancy should be avoided because of the risk of feminization of a male fetus. Spironolactone can also cause menstrual irregularity. It often is used in combination with an oral contraceptive, which suppresses ovarian androgen production and helps prevent pregnancy.

Flutamide is a potent nonsteroidal antiandrogen that is effective in treating hirsutism, but concerns about the induction of hepatocellular dysfunction have limited its use. Finasteride is a competitive inhibitor of 5-reductase type 2. Beneficial effects on hirsutism have been reported, but the predominance of 5-reductase type 1 in the PSU appears to account for its limited efficacy. Finasteride would also be expected to impair sexual differentiation in a male fetus, and it should not be used in women who may become pregnant.

Eflornithine cream (Vaniqa) has been approved as a novel treatment for unwanted facial hair in women, but long-term efficacy remains to be established. It can cause skin irritation under exaggerated conditions of use. Ultimately, the choice of any specific agent(s) must be tailored to the unique needs of the patient being treated. As noted previously, pharmacologic treatments for hirsutism should be used in conjunction with nonpharmacologic approaches. It is also helpful to review the pattern of female hair distribution in the normal population to dispel unrealistic expectations.
 
Further Readings

Ehrmann DA: Polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 352:1223, 2005[PMID: 15788499] 

 
Martin KA et al: Evaluation and treatment of hirsutism in premenopausal women: An Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:1105, 2008[PMID: 18252793] 

 
Pall M et al: The phenotype of hirsute women: A comparison of polycystic ovary syndrome and 21-hydroxylase每deficient nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. Fertil Steril 94:684, 2010[PMID: 19726039] 

 
Rathnayake D, Sinclair: Innovative use of spironolactone as an antiandrogen in the treatment of female pattern hair loss. Dermatol Clin 28:611, 2010[PMID: 20510769] 

 
Swiglo BA et al: Antiandrogens for the treatment of hirsutism: A systematic review and metaanalyses of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:1153, 2008[PMID: 18252786] 

 
 

^^
Menstrual Disorders and Pelvic Pain: Introduction

Menstrual dysfunction can signal an underlying abnormality that may have long-term health consequences. Although frequent or prolonged bleeding usually prompts a woman to seek medical attention, infrequent or absent bleeding may seem less troubling and the patient may not bring it to the attention of the physician. Thus, a focused menstrual history is a critical part of every encounter with a female patient. Pelvic pain is a common complaint that may relate to an abnormality of the reproductive organs but also may be of gastrointestinal, urinary tract, or musculoskeletal origin. Depending on its cause, pelvic pain may require urgent surgical attention.
 
Menstrual Disorders

Definition and Prevalence

Amenorrhea refers to the absence of menstrual periods. Amenorrhea is classified as primary if menstrual bleeding has never occurred in the absence of hormonal treatment or secondary if menstrual periods are absent for 3每6 months. Primary amenorrhea is a rare disorder that occurs in <1% of the female population. However, between 3 and 5% of women experience at least 3 months of secondary amenorrhea in any specific year. There is no evidence that race or ethnicity influences the prevalence of amenorrhea. However, because of the importance of adequate nutrition for normal reproductive function, both the age at menarche and the prevalence of secondary amenorrhea vary significantly in different parts of the world.

Oligoamenorrhea is defined as a cycle length >35 days or <10 menses per year. Both the frequency and the amount of vaginal bleeding are irregular in oligoamenorrhea. It is often associated with anovulation, which also can occur with intermenstrual intervals <24 days or vaginal bleeding for >7 days. Frequent or heavy irregular bleeding is termed dysfunctional uterine bleeding if anatomic uterine lesions or a bleeding diathesis has been excluded.

Primary Amenorrhea

The absence of menses by age 16 has been used traditionally to define primary amenorrhea. However, other factors, such as growth, secondary sexual characteristics, the presence of cyclic pelvic pain, and the secular trend toward an earlier age of menarche, particularly in African-American girls, also influence the age at which primary amenorrhea should be investigated. Thus, an evaluation for amenorrhea should be initiated by age 15 or 16 in the presence of normal growth and secondary sexual characteristics; age 13 in the absence of secondary sexual characteristics or if height is less than the third percentile; age 12 or 13 in the presence of breast development and cyclic pelvic pain; or within 2 years of breast development if menarche, defined by the first menstrual period, has not occurred.

Secondary Amenorrhea or Oligoamenorrhea

Anovulation and irregular cycles are relatively common for up to 2 years after menarche and for 1每2 years before the final menstrual period. In the intervening years, menstrual cycle length is 28 days, with an intermenstrual interval normally ranging between 25 and 35 days. Cycle-to-cycle variability in an individual woman who is ovulating consistently is generally +/每 2 days. Pregnancy is the most common cause of amenorrhea and should be excluded early in any evaluation of menstrual irregularity. However, many women occasionally miss a single period. Three or more months of secondary amenorrhea should prompt an evaluation, as should a history of intermenstrual intervals >35 or <21 days or bleeding that persists for >7 days.

Diagnosis

Evaluation of menstrual dysfunction depends on understanding the interrelationships between the four critical components of the reproductive tract: (1) the hypothalamus, (2) the pituitary, (3) the ovaries, and (4) the uterus and outflow tract (Fig. 50-1; Chap. 347). This system is maintained by complex negative and positive feedback loops involving the ovarian steroids (estradiol and progesterone) and peptides (inhibin B and inhibin A) and the hypothalamic [gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)] and pituitary [follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)] components of this system (Fig. 50-1).

Figure 50-1

 
 
 
Role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in the etiology of amenorrhea. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion from the hypothalamus stimulates follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion from the pituitary to induce ovarian folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis. Ovarian secretion of estradiol and progesterone controls the shedding of the endometrium, resulting in menses, and, in combination with the inhibins, provides feedback regulation of the hypothalamus and pituitary to control secretion of FSH and LH. The prevalence of amenorrhea resulting from abnormalities at each level of the reproductive system (hypothalamus, pituitary, ovary, uterus and outflow tract) varies depending on whether amenorrhea is primary or secondary. PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.
 
 

Disorders of menstrual function can be thought of in two main categories: disorders of the uterus and outflow tract and disorders of ovulation. Many of the conditions that cause primary amenorrhea are congenital but go unrecognized until the time of normal puberty (e.g., genetic, chromosomal, and anatomic abnormalities). All causes of secondary amenorrhea also can cause primary amenorrhea.

Disorders of the Uterus or Outflow Tract

Abnormalities of the uterus and outflow tract typically present as primary amenorrhea. In patients with normal pubertal development and a blind vagina, the differential diagnosis includes obstruction by a transverse vaginal septum or imperforate hymen; m邦llerian agenesis (Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome), which has been associated with mutations in the WNT4 gene; and androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), which is an X-linked recessive disorder that accounts for 10% of all cases of primary amenorrhea (Chap. 346). Patients with AIS have a 46,XY karyotype, but because of the lack of androgen receptor responsiveness, they have severe underandrogenization and female external genitalia. The absence of pubic and axillary hair distinguishes them clinically from patients with m邦llerian agenesis. Asherman syndrome presents as secondary amenorrhea or hypomenorrhea and results from partial or complete obliteration of the uterine cavity by adhesions that prevent normal growth and shedding of the endometrium. Curettage performed for pregnancy complications accounts for >90% of cases; genital tuberculosis is an important cause in regions where it is endemic.

Treatment: Disorders of the Uterus or Outflow Tract

Obstruction of the outflow tract requires surgical correction. The risk of endometriosis is increased with this condition, perhaps because of retrograde menstrual flow. M邦llerian agenesis also may require surgical intervention, although vaginal dilatation is adequate in some patients. Because ovarian function is normal, assisted reproductive techniques can be used with a surrogate carrier. Androgen resistance syndrome requires gonadectomy because there is risk of gonadoblastoma in the dysgenetic gonads. Whether this should be performed in early childhood or after completion of breast development is controversial. Estrogen replacement is indicated after gonadectomy, and vaginal dilatation may be required to allow sexual intercourse.

Disorders of Ovulation

Once uterus and outflow tract abnormalities have been excluded, other causes of amenorrhea involve disorders of ovulation. The differential diagnosis is based on the results of initial tests, including a pregnancy test, gonadotropins (to determine whether the cause is likely to be ovarian or central), and assessment of hyperandrogenism (Fig. 50-2).

Figure 50-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for evaluation of amenorrhea. -hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; PRL, prolactin; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
 
 

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism

Low estrogen levels in combination with normal or low levels of LH and FSH are seen with anatomic, genetic, or functional abnormalities that interfere with hypothalamic GnRH secretion or normal pituitary responsiveness to GnRH. Although relatively uncommon, tumors and infiltrative diseases should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (Chap. 339). These disorders may present with primary or secondary amenorrhea. They may occur in association with other features suggestive of hypothalamic or pituitary dysfunction, such as short stature, diabetes insipidus, galactorrhea, and headache. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism also may be seen after cranial irradiation. In the postpartum period, it may be caused by pituitary necrosis (Sheehan's syndrome) or lymphocytic hypophysitis. Because reproductive dysfunction is commonly associated with hyperprolactinemia from neuroanatomic lesions or medications, prolactin should be measured in all patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (Chap. 339).

Isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) occurs in women, although it is more common in men. IHH generally presents with primary amenorrhea and is associated with anosmia in about 50% of women (termed Kallmann syndrome). Genetic causes of IHH have been identified in approximately 35% of patients (Chaps. 346 and 347).

Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (HA) is caused by a mismatch between energy expenditure and energy intake. Recent studies suggest that variants in genes associated with IHH may increase susceptibility to these environmental inputs, accounting in part for the clinical variability in this disorder. Leptin secretion may play a key role in transducing the signals from the periphery to the hypothalamus in HA. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis also may play a role. The diagnosis of HA generally can be made on the basis of a careful history, a physical examination, and the demonstration of low levels of gonadotropins and normal prolactin levels. Eating disorders and chronic disease must be specifically excluded (Chap. 79). An atypical history, headache, signs of other hypothalamic dysfunction, or hyperprolactinemia, even if mild, necessitates cranial imaging with CT or MRI to exclude a neuroanatomic cause.

Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism

Ovarian failure is considered premature when it occurs in women <40 years old and accounts for 10% of secondary amenorrhea. Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) has generally replaced the terms premature menopause and premature ovarian failure in recognition that this disorder represents a continuum of impaired ovarian function. Ovarian insufficiency is associated with the loss of negative-feedback restraint on the hypothalamus and pituitary, resulting in increased FSH and LH levels. FSH is a better marker of ovarian failure as its levels are less variable than those of LH. As with natural menopause, POI may wax and wane, and serial measurements may be necessary to establish the diagnosis.

Once the diagnosis of POI has been established, further evaluation is indicated because of other health problems that may be associated with POI. For example, POI occurs in association with a variety of chromosomal abnormalities, including Turner syndrome, autoimmune polyglandular failure syndromes, radio- and chemotherapy, and galactosemia. The recognition that early ovarian failure occurs in premutation carriers of the fragile X syndrome is important because of the increased risk of severe mental retardation in male children with FMR1 mutations. In the majority of cases, however, a cause for POI is not determined.

Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism occurs rarely in other disorders, such as mutations in the FSH or LH receptors. Aromatase deficiency and 17-hydroxylase deficiency are associated with elevated gonadotropins with hyperandrogenism and hypertension, respectively. Gonadotropin-secreting tumors in women of reproductive age generally present with high, rather than low, estrogen levels and cause ovarian hyperstimulation or dysfunctional bleeding.

Treatment: Hypo- and Hypergonadotropic Causes of Amenorrhea

Amenorrhea almost always is associated with chronically low levels of estrogen, whether it is caused by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism or ovarian insufficiency. Development of secondary sexual characteristics requires gradual titration of estradiol replacement with eventual addition of progestin. Symptoms of hypoestrogenism can be treated with hormone replacement therapy or oral contraceptive pills. Patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism who are interested in fertility require treatment with pulsatile GnRH or exogenous FSH and LH, whereas patients with ovarian failure can consider oocyte donation, which has a high chance of success in this population.

Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS)

PCOS is diagnosed on the basis of a combination of clinical or biochemical evidence of hyperandrogenism, amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, and the ultrasound appearance of polycystic ovaries. Approximately half of patients with PCOS are obese, and abnormalities in insulin dynamics are common, as is metabolic syndrome. Symptoms generally begin shortly after menarche and are slowly progressive. Lean patients with PCOS generally have high LH levels in the presence of normal to low levels of FSH and estradiol. The LH/FSH ratio is less pronounced in obese patients in whom insulin resistance is a more prominent feature.

Treatment: Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome

A major abnormality in patients with PCOS is the failure of regular, predictable ovulation. Thus, these patients are at risk for the development of dysfunctional bleeding and endometrial hyperplasia associated with unopposed estrogen exposure. Endometrial protection can be achieved with the use of oral contraceptives or progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate, 5每10 mg, or prometrium, 200 mg daily for 10每14 days of each month). Oral contraceptives are also useful for management of hyperandrogenic symptoms, as is spironolactone, which functions as a weak androgen receptor antagonist. Management of the associated metabolic syndrome may be appropriate for some patients (Chap. 242). For patients interested in fertility, weight control is a critical first step. Clomiphene citrate is highly effective as a first-line treatment, with or without the addition of metformin. Exogenous gonadotropins can be used by experienced practitioners.
 
Pelvic Pain

The mechanisms that cause pelvic pain are similar to those which cause abdominal pain (Chap. 13) and include inflammation of the parietal peritoneum, obstruction of hollow viscera, vascular disturbances, and pain originating in the abdominal wall. Pelvic pain may reflect pelvic disease per se but also may reflect extrapelvic disorders that refer pain to the pelvis. In up to 60% of cases, pelvic pain can be attributed to gastrointestinal problems, including appendicitis, cholecystitis, infections, intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Urinary tract and musculoskeletal disorders are also common causes of pelvic pain.

Approach to the Patient: Pelvic Pain

A thorough history that includes the type, location, radiation, and status with respect to increasing or decreasing severity can help identify the cause of acute pelvic pain. Specific associations with vaginal bleeding, sexual activity, defecation, urination, movement, or eating should be specifically sought. A careful menstrual history is essential to assess the possibility of pregnancy. Determination of whether the pain is acute versus chronic and cyclic versus noncyclic will direct further investigation (Table 50-1). However, disorders that cause cyclic pain occasionally may cause noncyclic pain, and the converse is also true.

Table 50-1 Causes of Pelvic Pain

 
 
  Acute Chronic 
Cyclic pelvic pain
   Premenstrual symptoms
 
    Mittelschmerz
 
    Dysmenorrhea
 
    Endometriosis
 
Noncyclic pelvic pain
 Pelvic inflammatory disease
 Pelvic congestion syndrome
 
  Ruptured or hemorrhagic ovarian cyst or ovarian torsion
 Adhesions and retroversion of the uterus
 
  Ectopic pregnancy
 Pelvic malignancy
 
  Endometritis
 Vulvodynia
 
  Acute growth or degeneration of uterine myoma
 History of sexual abuse
 
 

 

Acute Pelvic Pain

Pelvic inflammatory disease most commonly presents with bilateral lower abdominal pain. It is generally of recent onset and is exacerbated by intercourse or jarring movements. Fever is present in about half of these patients; abnormal uterine bleeding occurs in about one-third. New vaginal discharge, urethritis, and chills may be present but are less specific signs. Adnexal pathology can present acutely and may be due to rupture, bleeding or torsion of cysts, or, much less commonly, neoplasms of the ovary, fallopian tubes, or paraovarian areas. Fever may be present with ovarian torsion. Ectopic pregnancy is associated with right- or left-sided lower abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding, with clinical signs generally appearing 6每8 weeks after the last normal menstrual period. Orthostatic signs and fever may be present. Risk factors include the presence of known tubal disease, previous ectopic pregnancies, a history of infertility, diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure of the mother in utero, or a history of pelvic infections. Uterine pathology includes endometritis and, less frequently, degenerating leiomyomas (fibroids). Endometritis often is associated with vaginal bleeding and systemic signs of infection. It occurs in the setting of sexually transmitted infections, uterine instrumentation, or postpartum infection.

A sensitive pregnancy test, complete blood count with differential, urinalysis, tests for chlamydial and gonococcal infections, and abdominal ultrasound aid in making the diagnosis and directing further management.

Treatment: Acute Pelvic Pain

Treatment of acute pelvic pain depends on the suspected etiology but may require surgical or gynecologic intervention. Conservative management is an important consideration for ovarian cysts, if torsion is not suspected, to avoid unnecessary pelvic surgery and the subsequent risk of infertility due to adhesions. The majority of unruptured ectopic pregnancies are now treated with methotrexate, which is effective in 84每96% of cases. However, surgical treatment may be required.

Chronic Pelvic Pain

Some women experience discomfort at the time of ovulation (mittelschmerz). The pain can be quite intense but is generally of short duration. The mechanism is thought to involve rapid expansion of the dominant follicle, although it also may be caused by peritoneal irritation by follicular fluid released at the time of ovulation. Many women experience premenstrual symptoms such as breast discomfort, food cravings, and abdominal bloating or discomfort. These moliminal symptoms are a good predictor of ovulation, although their absence is less helpful.

Dysmenorrhea

Dysmenorrhea refers to the crampy lower abdominal discomfort that begins with the onset of menstrual bleeding and gradually decreases over the next 12每72 h. It may be associated with nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, and headache and occurs in 60每93% of adolescents, beginning with the establishment of regular ovulatory cycles. Its prevalence decreases after pregnancy and with the use of oral contraceptives.

Primary dysmenorrhea results from increased stores of prostaglandin precursors, which are generated by sequential stimulation of the uterus by estrogen and progesterone. During menstruation these precursors are converted to prostaglandins, which cause intense uterine contractions, decreased blood flow, and increased peripheral nerve hypersensitivity, resulting in pain.

Secondary dysmenorrhea is caused by underlying pelvic pathology. Endometriosis results from the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. These deposits of ectopic endometrium respond to hormonal stimulation and cause dysmenorrhea, which generally precedes menstruation by several days. Endometriosis also may be associated with painful intercourse, painful bowel movements, and tender nodules in the uterosacral ligament. Fibrosis and adhesions can produce lateral displacement of the cervix. The CA125 level may be increased, but it has low negative predictive value. Definitive diagnosis requires laparoscopy. Symptomatology does not always predict the extent of endometriosis. Other secondary causes of dysmenorrhea include adenomyosis, a condition caused by the presence of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma within the myometrium. Cervical stenosis may result from trauma, infection, or surgery.

Treatment: Dysmenorrhea

Local application of heat; use of vitamins B1, B6, and E and magnesium; acupuncture; yoga; and exercise are of some benefit for the treatment of dysmenorrhea. However, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the most effective treatment and provide >80% sustained response rates. Ibuprofen, naproxen, ketoprofen, mefanamic acid, and nimesulide are all superior to placebo. Treatment should be started a day before expected menses and generally is continued for 2每3 days. Oral contraceptives also reduce symptoms of dysmenorrhea. Failure of response to NSAIDs and oral contraceptives is suggestive of a pelvic disorder such as endometriosis, and diagnostic laparoscopy should be considered to guide further treatment.
 
Further Readings

Gordon CM: Clinical practice: Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. N Engl J Med 33:365, 2010 

 
Hall JE: Neuroendocrine control of the menstrual cycle, in Yen and Jaffe's Reproductive Endocrinology, 6th ed, JF Strauss III, RL Barbieri (eds). Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2009, pp 139每154 

 
Howard FM: Endometriosis and mechanisms of pelvic pain. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 16:540, 2009[PMID: 19835795] 

 
Nelson LM: Clinical practice: Primary ovarian insufficiency. N Engl J Med 360:606, 2009[PMID: 19196677] 

 
Pallais JC et al: Kallmann syndrome, in GeneReviews, RA Pagon et al (eds). Seattle, University of Washington, 1993每2007 [updated April 8, 2010]. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bookshelf/br.fcgi?book=gene 

 
Sultan C et al: Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome: Recent clinical and genetic findings. Gynecol Endocrinol 25:88, 2009 

 
Wittenberger MD et al: The FMR1 premutation and reproduction. Fertil Steril 87:456, 2007[PMID: 17074338] 

 
Zahradnik HP et al: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and hormonal contraceptives for pain relief from dysmenorrhea: A review. Contraception 81:185, 2010[PMID: 20159173] 

 
^^
Approach to the Patient with a Skin Disorder: Introduction

The challenge of examining the skin lies in distinguishing normal from abnormal, significant findings from trivial ones, and in integrating pertinent signs and symptoms into an appropriate differential diagnosis. The fact that the largest organ in the body is visible is both an advantage and a disadvantage to those who examine it. It is advantageous because no special instrumentation is necessary and because the skin can be biopsied with little morbidity. However, the casual observer can be misled by a variety of stimuli and overlook important, subtle signs of skin or systemic disease. For instance, the sometimes minor differences in color and shape that distinguish a melanoma (Fig. 51-1) from a benign nevomelanocytic nevus (Fig. 51-2) can be difficult to recognize. To aid in the interpretation of skin lesions, a variety of descriptive terms have been developed to characterize cutaneous lesions (Tables 51-1, 51-2, and 51-3 as well as Fig. 51-3) and to formulate a differential diagnosis (Table 51-4). For instance, the finding of scaling papules (present in patients with psoriasis or atopic dermatitis) places the patient in a different diagnostic category than would hemorrhagic papules, which may indicate vasculitis or sepsis (Figs. 51-4 and 51-5, respectively). It is also important to differentiate primary from secondary skin lesions. If the examiner focuses on linear erosions overlying an area of erythema and scaling, he or she may incorrectly assume that the erosion is the primary lesion and the redness and scale are secondary, while the correct interpretation would be that the patient has a pruritic eczematous dermatitis with erosions caused by scratching.

Figure 51-1

 
 
 
Superficial spreading melanoma. This is the most common type of melanoma. Such lesions usually demonstrate asymmetry, border irregularity, color variegation (black, blue, brown, pink, and white), a diameter >6 mm, and a history of change (e.g., an increase in size or development of associated symptoms such as pruritus or pain).
 
 

Figure 51-2

 
 
 
Nevomelanocytic nevus. Nevi are benign proliferations of nevomelanocytes characterized by regularly shaped hyperpigmented macules or papules of a uniform color.
 
 

Figure 51-3

 
 
 
A schematic representation of several common primary skin lesions (see Table 51-1).
 
 

Figure 51-4

 
 
 
Necrotizing vasculitis. Palpable purpuric papules on the lower legs are seen in this patient with cutaneous small vessel vasculitis. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure 51-5

 
 
 
Meningococcemia. An example of fulminant meningococcemia with extensive angular purpuric patches. (Courtesy of Stephen E. Gellis, MD; with permission.)
 
 
Table 51-1 Description of Primary Skin Lesions

 
 
Macule: A flat, colored lesion, <2 cm in diameter, not raised above the surface of the surrounding skin. A "freckle," or ephelid, is a prototype pigmented macule. 
Patch: A large (>2 cm) flat lesion with a color different from the surrounding skin. This differs from a macule only in size.  
Papule: A small, solid lesion, <0.5 cm in diameter, raised above the surface of the surrounding skin and, hence, palpable (e.g., a closed comedone, or whitehead, in acne). 
Nodule: A larger (0.5每5.0 cm), firm lesion raised above the surface of the surrounding skin. This differs from a papule only in size (e.g., a dermal nevomelanocytic nevus). 
Tumor: A solid, raised growth >5 cm in diameter.   
Plaque: A large (>1 cm), flat-topped, raised lesion; edges may either be distinct (e.g., in psoriasis) or gradually blend with surrounding skin (e.g., in eczematous dermatitis).  
Vesicle: A small, fluid-filled lesion, <0.5 cm in diameter, raised above the plane of surrounding skin. Fluid is often visible, and the lesions are translucent [e.g., vesicles in allergic contact dermatitis caused by Toxicodendron (poison ivy)]. 
Pustule: A vesicle filled with leukocytes. Note: The presence of pustules does not necessarily signify the existence of an infection.  
Bulla: A fluid-filled, raised, often translucent lesion >0.5 cm in diameter.  
Wheal: A raised, erythematous, edematous papule or plaque, usually representing short-lived vasodilatation and vasopermeability.   
Telangiectasia: A dilated, superficial blood vessel.  
 

 
Table 51-2 Description of Secondary Skin Lesions

 
 
Lichenification: A distinctive thickening of the skin that is characterized by accentuated skin-fold markings.  
Scale: Excessive accumulation of stratum corneum.  
Crust: Dried exudate of body fluids that may be either yellow (i.e., serous crust) or red (i.e., hemorrhagic crust).  
Erosion: Loss of epidermis without an associated loss of dermis. 
Ulcer: Loss of epidermis and at least a portion of the underlying dermis.  
Excoriation: Linear, angular erosions that may be covered by crust and are caused by scratching.  
Atrophy: An acquired loss of substance. In the skin, this may appear as a depression with intact epidermis (i.e., loss of dermal or subcutaneous tissue) or as sites of shiny, delicate, wrinkled lesions (i.e., epidermal atrophy). 
Scar: A change in the skin secondary to trauma or inflammation. Sites may be erythematous, hypopigmented, or hyperpigmented depending on their age or character. Sites on hair-bearing areas may be characterized by destruction of hair follicles.  
 

 
Table 51-3 Common Dermatologic Terms

 
 
Alopecia: Hair loss; it may be partial or complete.  
Annular: Ring-shaped lesions.  
Cyst: A soft, raised, encapsulated lesion filled with semisolid or liquid contents.  
Herpetiform: Grouped lesions.  
Lichenoid: Violaceous to purple, polygonal lesions that resemble those seen in lichen planus.  
Milia: Small, firm, white papules filled with keratin. 
Morbilliform: Generalized, small erythematous macules and/or papules that resemble lesions seen in measles. 
Nummular: Coin-shaped lesions.  
Poikiloderma: Skin that displays variegated pigmentation, atrophy, and telangiectases. 
Polycyclic: A configuration of skin lesions formed from coalescing rings or incomplete rings.  
Pruritus: A sensation that elicits the desire to scratch. Pruritus is often the predominant symptom of inflammatory skin diseases (e.g., atopic dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis); it is also commonly associated with xerosis and aged skin. Systemic conditions that can be associated with pruritus include chronic renal disease, cholestasis, pregnancy, malignancy, thyroid disease, polycythemia vera, and delusions of parasitosis. 
 

 
Table 51-4 Selected Common Dermatologic Conditions

 
 
Diagnosis Common Distribution Usual Morphology Diagnosis Common Distribution Usual Morphology 
Acnevulgaris Face, upper back, chest Open and closed comedones, erythematous papules, pustules, cysts Seborrheic keratosis Trunk, face Brown plaques with adherent, greasy scale; "stuck on" appearance 
Rosacea Blush area of cheeks, nose, forehead, chin Erythema, telangiectases, papules, pustules Folliculitis

Impetigo
 Any hair-bearing area

Anywhere
 Follicular pustules

Papules, vesicles, pustules, often with honey-colored crusts
 
Seborrheic dermatitis Scalp, eyebrows, perinasal areas Erythema with greasy yellow-brown scale Herpes simplex Lips, genitalia Grouped vesicles progressing to crusted erosions 
Atopic dermatitis Antecubital and popliteal fossae; may be widespread Patches and plaques of erythema, scaling, and lichenification; pruritus Herpes zoster Dermatomal, usually trunk but may be anywhere Vesicles limited to a dermatome (often painful) 
Stasis dermatitis Ankles, lower legs over medial malleoli Patches of erythema and scaling on background of hyperpigmentation associated with signs of venous insufficiency Varicella Face, trunk, relative sparing of extremities Lesions arise in crops and quickly progress from erythematous macules, to papules, to vesicles, to pustules, to crusted sites 
Dyshidrotic eczema Palms, soles, sides of fingers and toes Deep vesicles Pityriasis rosea Trunk (Christmas tree pattern); herald patch followed by multiple smaller lesions Symmetric erythematous patches with a collarette of scale 
Allergic contact dermatitis Anywhere Localized erythema, vesicles, scale, and pruritus (e.g., fingers, earlobes〞nickel; dorsal aspect of foot〞shoe; exposed surfaces〞poison ivy) Tinea versicolor Chest, back, abdomen, proximal extremities Scaly hyper- or hypopigmented macules 
Psoriasis Elbows, knees, scalp, lower back, fingernails (may be generalized) Papules and plaques covered with silvery scale; nails have pits Candidiasis Groin, beneath breasts, vagina, oral cavity Erythematous macerated areas with satellite pustules; white, friable patches on mucous membranes 
Lichen planus Wrists, ankles, mouth (may be widespread) Violaceous flat-topped papules and plaques Dermatophytosis Feet, groin, beard, or scalp Varies with site, (e.g., tinea corporis〞scaly annular patch) 
Keratosis pilaris Extensor surfaces of arms and thighs, buttocks Keratotic follicular papules with surrounding erythema Scabies Groin, axillae, between fingers and toes, beneath breasts Excoriated papules, burrows, pruritus 
Melasma Forehead, cheeks, temples, upper lip Tan to brown patches Insect bites Anywhere Erythematous papules with central puncta 
Vitiligo Periorificial, trunk, extensor surfaces of extremities, flexor wrists, axillae Chalk-white macules Cherry angioma

Keloid

Dermatofibroma
 Trunk

Anywhere (site of previous injury)

Anywhere
 Red, blood-filled papules

Firm tumor, pink, purple, or brown

Firm red to brown nodule that shows dimpling of overlying skin with lateral compression
 
Actinic keratosis Sun-exposed areas Skin-colored or red-brown macule or papule with dry, rough, adherent scale Acrochordons (skin tags) Groin, axilla, neck Fleshy papules 
Basal cell carcinoma Face Papule with pearly, telangiectatic border on sun-damaged skin Urticaria Anywhere Wheals, sometimes with surrounding flare; pruritus 
Squamous cell carcinoma Face, especially lower lip, ears Indurated and possibly hyperkeratotic lesions often showing ulceration and/or crusting Transient acantholytic dermatosis Trunk, especially anterior chest Erythematous papules 
      Xerosis Extensor extremities, especially legs Dry, erythematous, scaling patches; pruritus 
 

 

Approach to the Patient: Skin Disorder

In examining the skin it is usually advisable to assess the patient before taking an extensive history. This way, the entire cutaneous surface is sure to be evaluated, and objective findings can be integrated with relevant historic data. Four basic features of a skin lesion must be noted and considered during a physical examination: the distribution of the eruption, the types of primary and secondary lesions, the shape of individual lesions, and the arrangement of the lesions. An ideal skin examination includes evaluation of the skin, hair, and nails as well as the mucous membranes of the mouth, eyes, nose, nasopharynx, and anogenital region. In the initial examination it is important that the patient be disrobed as completely as possible. This will minimize chances of missing important individual skin lesions and make it possible to assess the distribution of the eruption accurately. The patient should first be viewed from a distance of about 1.5每2 m (4每6 ft) so that the general character of the skin and the distribution of lesions can be evaluated. Indeed, the distribution of lesions often correlates highly with diagnosis (Fig. 51-6). For example, a hospitalized patient with a generalized erythematous exanthem is more likely to have a drug eruption than is a patient with a similar rash limited to the sun-exposed portions of the face. Once the distribution of the lesions has been established, the nature of the primary lesion must be determined. Thus, when lesions are distributed on elbows, knees, and scalp, the most likely possibility based solely on distribution is psoriasis or dermatitis herpetiformis (Figs. 51-7 and 51-8, respectively). The primary lesion in psoriasis is a scaly papule that soon forms erythematous plaques covered with a white scale, whereas that of dermatitis herpetiformis is an urticarial papule that quickly becomes a small vesicle. In this manner, identification of the primary lesion directs the examiner toward the proper diagnosis. Secondary changes in skin can also be quite helpful. For example, scale represents excessive epidermis, while crust is the result of a discontinuous epithelial cell layer. Palpation of skin lesions can also yield insight into the character of an eruption. Thus, red papules on the lower extremities that blanch with pressure can be a manifestation of many different diseases, but hemorrhagic red papules that do not blanch with pressure indicate palpable purpura characteristic of necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 51-4).

Figure 51-6

 
 
 
 
 
 
A每D. The distribution of some common dermatologic diseases and lesions.
 
 

Figure 51-7

 
 
 
Psoriasis. This papulosquamous skin disease is characterized by small and large erythematous papules and plaques with overlying adherent silvery scale.
 
 

Figure 51-8

 
 
 
Dermatitis herpetiformis. This disorder typically displays pruritic, grouped papulovesicles on elbows, knees, buttocks, and posterior scalp. Vesicles are often excoriated due to associated pruritus.
 
 


The shape of lesions is also an important feature. Flat, round, erythematous papules and plaques are common in many cutaneous diseases. However, target-shaped lesions that consist in part of erythematous plaques are specific for erythema multiforme (Fig. 51-9). In the same way, the arrangement of individual lesions is important. Erythematous papules and vesicles can occur in many conditions, but their arrangement in a specific linear array suggests an external etiology such as allergic contact (Fig. 51-10) or primary irritant dermatitis. In contrast, lesions with a generalized arrangement are common and suggest a systemic etiology.

Figure 51-9

 
 
 
Erythema multiforme. This eruption is characterized by multiple erythematous plaques with a target or iris morphology. It usually represents a hypersensitivity reaction to drugs (e.g., sulfonylamides) or infections (e.g., HSV). (Courtesy of the Yale Resident's Slide Collection; with permission.)
 
 

Figure 51-10

 
 
 
 
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD). A. An example of ACD in its acute phase, with sharply demarcated, weeping, eczematous plaques in a perioral distribution. B. ACD in its chronic phase demonstrating an erythematous, lichenified, weeping plaque on skin chronically exposed to nickel in a metal snap. (B, Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

As in other branches of medicine, a complete history should be obtained to emphasize the following features:

Evolution of lesions 

Site of onset

Manner in which the eruption progressed or spread

Duration

Periods of resolution or improvement in chronic eruptions

Symptoms associated with the eruption

Itching, burning, pain, numbness

What, if anything, has relieved symptoms

Time of day when symptoms are most severe

Current or recent medications (prescribed as well as over-the-counter)

Associated systemic symptoms (e.g., malaise, fever, arthralgias)

Ongoing or previous illnesses

History of allergies

Presence of photosensitivity

Review of systems

Family history (particularly relevant for patients with melanoma, atopy, psoriasis, or acne)

Social, sexual, or travel history as relevant to the patient

Diagnostic Techniques

Many skin diseases can be diagnosed on gross clinical appearance, but sometimes relatively simple diagnostic procedures can yield valuable information. In most instances, they can be performed at the bedside with a minimum of equipment.

Skin Biopsy

A skin biopsy is a straightforward minor surgical procedure; however, it is important to biopsy a lesion that is most likely to yield diagnostic findings. This decision may require expertise in skin diseases and knowledge of superficial anatomic structures in selected areas of the body. In this procedure, a small area of skin is anesthetized with 1% lidocaine with or without epinephrine. The skin lesion in question can be excised or saucerized with a scalpel or removed by punch biopsy. In the latter technique, a punch is pressed against the surface of the skin and rotated with downward pressure until it penetrates to the subcutaneous tissue. The circular biopsy is then lifted with forceps, and the bottom is cut with iris scissors. Biopsy sites may or may not need suture closure, depending on size and location.

Koh Preparation

A potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation is performed on scaling skin lesions where a fungal infection is suspected. The edge of such a lesion is scraped gently with a no. 15 scalpel blade, and the removed scale is collected on a glass microscope slide then treated with 1 to 2 drops of a solution of 10每20% KOH. KOH dissolves keratin and allows easier visualization of fungal elements. Brief heating of the slide accelerates dissolution of keratin. When the preparation is viewed under the microscope, the refractile hyphae will be seen more easily when the light intensity is reduced and the condenser is lowered. This technique can be used to identify hyphae in dermatophyte infections, pseudohyphae and budding yeast in Candida infections (see Fig. 203-1), and "spaghetti and meatballs" yeast forms in tinea versicolor. The same sampling technique can be used to obtain scale for culture of selected pathogenic organisms.

Tzanck Smear

A Tzanck smear is a cytologic technique most often used in the diagnosis of herpesvirus infections [herpes simplex virus (HSV) or varicella zoster virus (VZV)] (see Figs. 180-1 and 180-3). An early vesicle, not a pustule or crusted lesion, is unroofed, and the base of the lesion is scraped gently with a scalpel blade. The material is placed on a glass slide, air-dried, and stained with Giemsa or Wright's stain. Multinucleated epithelial giant cells suggest the presence of HSV or VZV; culture or immunofluorescence, or genetic testing must be performed to identify the specific virus.

Diascopy

Diascopy is designed to assess whether a skin lesion will blanch with pressure as, for example, in determining whether a red lesion is hemorrhagic or simply blood-filled. Urticaria (Fig. 51-11) will blanch with pressure, whereas a purpuric lesion caused by necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 51-4) will not. Diascopy is performed by pressing a microscope slide or magnifying lens against a lesion and noting the amount of blanching that occurs. Granulomas often have an opaque to transparent, brown-pink "apple jelly" appearance on diascopy.

Figure 51-11

 
 
 
Urticaria. Discrete and confluent, edematous, erythematous papules and plaques are characteristic of this whealing eruption.
 
 

Wood's Light

A Wood's lamp generates 360-nm ultraviolet (or "black") light that can be used to aid the evaluation of certain skin disorders. For example, a Wood's lamp will cause erythrasma (a superficial, intertriginous infection caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum) to show a characteristic coral pink color, and wounds colonized by Pseudomonas to appear pale blue. Tinea capitis caused by certain dermatophytes such as Microsporum canis or M. audouini exhibits a yellow fluorescence. Pigmented lesions of the epidermis such as freckles are accentuated, while dermal pigment such as postinflammatory hyperpigmentation fades under a Wood's light. Vitiligo (Fig. 51-12) appears totally white under a Wood's lamp, and previously unsuspected areas of involvement often become apparent. A Wood's lamp may also aid in the demonstration of tinea versicolor and in recognition of ash leaf spots in patients with tuberous sclerosis.

Figure 51-12

 
 
 
Vitiligo. Characteristic lesions display an acral distribution and striking depigmentation as a result of loss of melanocytes.
 
 

Patch Tests

Patch testing is designed to document sensitivity to a specific antigen. In this procedure, a battery of suspected allergens is applied to the patient's back under occlusive dressings and allowed to remain in contact with the skin for 48 h. The dressings are removed, and the area is examined for evidence of delayed hypersensitivity reactions (e.g., erythema, edema, or papulovesicles). This test is best performed by physicians with special expertise in patch testing and is often helpful in the evaluation of patients with chronic dermatitis.
 
Further Readings

Habif TP: Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2004 

 
James WD et al: Andrews Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2006 

 
Wolff K et al (eds): Fitzpatricks Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008 

 
 


^^
Eczema and Dermatitis

Eczema is a type of dermatitis and these terms are often used synonymously (atopic eczema or atopic dermatitis). Eczema is a reaction pattern that presents with variable clinical findings and the common histologic finding of spongiosis (intercellular edema of the epidermis). Eczema is the final common expression for a number of disorders, including those discussed in the following sections. Primary lesions may include erythematous macules, papules, and vesicles, which can coalesce to form patches and plaques. In severe eczema, secondary lesions from infection or excoriation, marked by weeping and crusting, may predominate. In chronic eczematous conditions, lichenification (cutaneous hypertrophy and accentuation of normal skin markings) may alter the characteristic appearance of eczema.

Atopic Dermatitis

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the cutaneous expression of the atopic state, characterized by a family history of asthma, allergic rhinitis, or eczema. The prevalence of AD is increasing worldwide. Some of its features are shown in Table 52-1.

Table 52-1 Clinical Features of Atopic Dermatitis

 
 
1. Pruritus and scratching 
2. Course marked by exacerbations and remissions 
3. Lesions typical of eczematous dermatitis 
4. Personal or family history of atopy (asthma, allergic rhinitis, food allergies, or eczema) 
5. Clinical course lasting longer than 6 weeks 
6. Lichenification of skin 
 

 

The etiology of AD is only partially defined, but there is a clear genetic predisposition. When both parents are affected by AD, >80% of their children manifest the disease. When only one parent is affected, the prevalence drops to slightly over 50%. Patients with AD may display a variety of immunoregulatory abnormalities including increased IgE synthesis; increased serum IgE; and impaired, delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions.

The clinical presentation often varies with age. Half of patients with AD present within the first year of life, and 80% present by 5 years of age. About 80% ultimately coexpress allergic rhinitis or asthma. The infantile pattern is characterized by weeping inflammatory patches and crusted plaques on the face, neck, and extensor surfaces. The childhood and adolescent pattern is marked by dermatitis of flexural skin, particularly in the antecubital and popliteal fossae (Fig. 52-1). AD may resolve spontaneously, but approximately 40% of all individuals affected as children will have dermatitis in adult life. The distribution of lesions may be similar to those seen in childhood; however, adults frequently have localized disease, manifesting as lichen simplex chronicus or hand eczema (see below). In patients with localized disease, AD may be suspected because of a typical personal history, family history, or the presence of cutaneous stigmata of AD such as perioral pallor, an extra fold of skin beneath the lower eyelid (Dennie-Morgan folds), increased palmar skin markings, and an increased incidence of cutaneous infections, particularly with Staphylococcus aureus. Regardless of other manifestations, pruritus is a prominent characteristic of AD in all age groups and is exacerbated by dry skin. Many of the cutaneous findings in affected patients, such as lichenification, are secondary to rubbing and scratching.

Figure 52-1

 
 
 
Atopic dermatitis. Hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and scaling in the antecubital fossae are seen in this patient with atopic dermatitis. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Treatment: Atopic Dermatitis

Therapy of AD should include avoidance of cutaneous irritants, adequate moisturizing through the application of emollients, judicious use of topical anti-inflammatory agents, and prompt treatment of secondary infection. Patients should be instructed to bathe no more often than daily, using warm or cool water, and to use only mild bath soap. Immediately after bathing, while the skin is still moist, a topical anti-inflammatory agent in a cream or ointment base should be applied to areas of dermatitis, and all other skin areas should be lubricated with a moisturizer. Approximately 30 g of a topical agent is required to cover the entire body surface of an average adult.

Low- to midpotency topical glucocorticoids are employed in most treatment regimens for AD. Skin atrophy and the potential for systemic absorption are constant concerns, especially with more potent agents. Low-potency topical glucocorticoids or nonglucocorticoid anti-inflammatory agents should be selected for use on the face and intertriginous areas to minimize the risk of skin atrophy. Two nonglucocorticoid anti-inflammatory agents are available: tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus cream. These agents are macrolide immunosuppressants that are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for topical use in AD. Reports of broader effectiveness appear in the literature. These agents do not cause skin atrophy, nor do they suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Recently, however, concerns have emerged regarding the potential for lymphomas in patients treated with these agents. Thus, caution should be exercised when considering these agents. Currently, they are also more costly than topical glucocorticoids. Barrier-repair products are also nonglucocorticoid agents and are gaining popularity in treating AD.

Secondary infection of eczematous skin may lead to exacerbation of AD. Crusted and weeping skin lesions may be infected with S. aureus. When secondary infection is suspected, eczematous lesions should be cultured and patients treated with systemic antibiotics active against S. aureus. The initial use of penicillinase-resistant penicillins or cephalosporins is preferable. Dicloxacillin or cephalexin (250 mg qid for 7每10 days) is generally adequate for adults; however, antibiotic selection must be directed by culture results and clinical response. More than 50% of S. aureus (SA) isolates are now methacillin resistant (MR) in some communities〞community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA). Current recommendations for the treatment of CA-MRSA infection in adults include trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (1 double strength bid), minocycline (100 mg bid), doxycycline (100 mg bid), or clindamycin (300每450 mg qid). Duration of therapy should be 7每10 days. Inducible resistance may limit clindamycin's usefulness. The latter can be detected by the double-disk diffusion test, which should be ordered if the isolate is erythromycin-resistant and clindamycin-sensitive. As an adjunct, the use of antibacterial washes or dilute sodium hypochlorite baths (0.005% bleach) and intermittent nasal mupirocin may be useful.

Control of pruritus is essential for treatment, because AD often represents "an itch that rashes." Antihistamines are most often used to control pruritus, and mild sedation may be responsible for their antipruritic action. Sedation may also limit their usefulness; however, when used at bedtime, sedating antihistamines may improve the patient's sleep. Unlike their effects in urticaria, nonsedating antihistamines and selective H2 blockers are of little use in controlling the pruritus of AD.

Treatment with systemic glucocorticoids should be limited to severe exacerbations unresponsive to topical therapy. In the patient with chronic AD, therapy with systemic glucocorticoids will generally clear the skin only briefly, and cessation of the systemic therapy will invariably be accompanied by return, if not worsening, of the dermatitis. Patients who do not respond to conventional therapies should be considered for patch testing to rule out allergic contact dermatitis (ACD). The role of dietary allergens in atopic dermatitis is controversial, and there is little evidence they play any role outside of infancy where a small percentage of patients with AD may be affected by food allergens.

Lichen Simplex Chronicus

Lichen simplex chronicus may represent the end stage of a variety of pruritic and eczematous disorders, including atopic dermatitis. It consists of a circumscribed plaque or plaques of lichenified skin due to chronic scratching or rubbing. Common areas involved include the posterior nuchal region, dorsum of the feet, and ankles. Treatment of lichen simplex chronicus centers on breaking the cycle of chronic itching and scratching. High-potency topical glucocorticoids are helpful in most cases, but in recalcitrant cases, application of topical glucocorticoids under occlusion, or intralesional injection of glucocorticoids may be required. Oral antihistamines such as hydroxyzine (10每25 mg every 6 h) or tricyclic antidepressants with antihistaminic activity, such as doxepin (10每25 mg at bedtime), are useful primarily due to their sedating action. Higher doses of these agents may be required, but sedation can become bothersome. Patients need to be counseled regarding driving or operating heavy equipment after taking these medications.

Contact Dermatitis

Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory process in skin caused by an exogenous agent or agents that directly or indirectly injure the skin. This injury may be caused by an inherent characteristic of a compound〞irritant contact dermatitis (ICD). An example of ICD would be dermatitis induced by a concentrated acid or base. Agents that cause ACD induce an antigen-specific immune response (poison ivy dermatitis). The clinical lesions of contact dermatitis may be acute (wet and edematous) or chronic (dry, thickened, and scaly), depending on the persistence of the insult (see Fig. 51-10).

Irritant Contact Dermatitis

ICD is generally well demarcated and often localized to areas of thin skin (eyelids, intertriginous areas) or to areas where the irritant was occluded. Lesions may range from minimal skin erythema to areas of marked edema, vesicles, and ulcers. Chronic low-grade irritant dermatitis is the most common type of ICD, and the most common area of involvement is the hands (see below). The most common irritants encountered are chronic wet work, soaps, and detergents. Treatment should be directed to avoidance of irritants and use of protective gloves or clothing.

Allergic Contact Dermatitis

ACD is a manifestation of delayed-type hypersensitivity mediated by memory T lymphocytes in the skin. The most common cause of ACD is exposure to plants, especially to members of the family Anacardiaceae, including the genus Toxicodendron. Poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac are members of this genus and cause an allergic reaction marked by erythema, vesiculation, and severe pruritus. The eruption is often linear or angular, corresponding to areas where plants have touched the skin. The sensitizing antigen common to these plants is urushiol, an oleoresin containing the active ingredient pentadecylcatechol. The oleoresin may adhere to skin, clothing, tools, and pets, and contaminated articles may cause dermatitis even after prolonged storage. Blister fluid does not contain urushiol and is not capable of inducing skin eruption in exposed subjects.

Treatment: Contact Dermatitis

If contact dermatitis is suspected and an offending agent is identified and removed, the eruption will resolve. Usually, treatment with high-potency topical glucocorticoids is enough to relieve symptoms while the dermatitis runs its course. For those patients who require systemic therapy, daily oral prednisone beginning at 1 mg/kg, but usually 60 mg/d, is sufficient. It should be tapered over 2 to 3 weeks, and each daily dose given in the morning with food.

Identification of a contact allergen can be a difficult and time-consuming task. Patients with dermatitis unresponsive to conventional therapy or with an unusual and patterned distribution should be suspected of having ACD. They should be questioned carefully regarding occupational exposures and topical medications. Common sensitizers include preservatives in topical preparations, nickel sulfate, potassium dichromate, thimerosal, neomycin sulfate, fragrances, formaldehyde, and rubber-curing agents. Patch testing is helpful in identifying these agents but should not be attempted on patients with widespread active dermatitis or on those taking systemic glucocorticoids.

Hand Eczema

Hand eczema is a very common, chronic skin disorder in which both exogenous and endogenous factors play important roles. It may be associated with other cutaneous disorders such as atopic dermatitis, and contact with various agents may be involved. It represents a large proportion of occupation-associated skin disease. Chronic, excessive exposure to water and detergents, harsh chemicals, or allergens may initiate or aggravate this disorder. It may present with dryness and cracking of the skin of the hands as well as with variable amounts of erythema and edema. Often, the dermatitis will begin under rings where water and irritants are trapped. Dyshidrotic eczema, a variant of hand eczema, presents with multiple, intensely pruritic, small papules and vesicles occurring on the thenar and hypothenar eminences and the sides of the fingers (Fig. 52-2). Lesions tend to occur in crops that slowly form crusts and then heal.

Figure 52-2

 
 
 
Dyshidrotic eczema. This example is characterized by deep-seated vesicles and scaling on palms and lateral fingers, and the disease is often associated with an atopic diathesis.
 
 

The evaluation of a patient with hand eczema should include an assessment of potential occupation-associated exposures. The history should be directed to identifying possible irritant or allergen exposures.

Treatment: Hand Eczema

Therapy of hand eczema is directed toward avoidance of irritants, identification of possible contact allergens, treatment of coexistent infection, and application of topical glucocorticoids. Whenever possible, the hands should be protected by gloves, preferably vinyl. The use of rubber gloves (latex) to protect dermatitic skin is sometimes associated with the development of hypersensitivity reactions to components of the gloves. Patients can be treated with cool moist compresses, followed by application of a mid- to high-potency topical glucocorticoid in a cream or ointment base. As with atopic dermatitis, treatment of secondary infection is essential for good control. In addition, patients with hand eczema should be examined for dermatophyte infection by KOH preparation and culture (see below).

Nummular Eczema

Nummular eczema is characterized by circular or oval "coinlike" lesions, beginning as small edematous papules that become crusted and scaly. The etiology of nummular eczema is unknown, but dry skin is a contributing factor. Common locations are the trunk or the extensor surfaces of the extremities, particularly on the pretibial areas or dorsum of the hands. It occurs more frequently in men and is most commonly seen in middle age. The treatment of nummular eczema is similar to that for atopic dermatitis.

Asteatotic Eczema

Asteatotic eczema, also known as xerotic eczema or "winter itch," is a mildly inflammatory dermatitis that develops in areas of extremely dry skin, especially during the dry winter months. Clinically, there may be considerable overlap with nummular eczema. This form of eczema accounts for a large number of physician visits because of the associated pruritus. Fine cracks and scale, with or without erythema, characteristically develop in areas of dry skin, especially on the anterior surfaces of the lower extremities in elderly patients. Asteatotic eczema responds well to topical moisturizers and the avoidance of cutaneous irritants. Overbathing and the use of harsh soaps exacerbate asteatotic eczema.

Stasis Dermatitis and Stasis Ulceration

Stasis dermatitis develops on the lower extremities secondary to venous incompetence and chronic edema. Patients may give a history of deep venous thrombosis, have evidence of vein removal, or varicose veins. Early findings in stasis dermatitis consist of mild erythema and scaling associated with pruritus. The typical initial site of involvement is the medial aspect of the ankle, often over a distended vein (Fig. 52-3).

Figure 52-3

 
 
 
Stasis dermatitis. An example of stasis dermatitis showing erythematous, scaly, and oozing patches over the lower leg. Several stasis ulcers are also seen in this patient.
 
 

Stasis dermatitis may become acutely inflamed, with crusting and exudate. In this state, it is easily confused with cellulitis. Chronic stasis dermatitis is often associated with dermal fibrosis that is recognized clinically as brawny edema of the skin. As the disorder progresses, the dermatitis becomes progressively pigmented, due to chronic erythrocyte extravasation leading to cutaneoushemosiderin deposition. Stasis dermatitis may be complicated by secondary infection and contact dermatitis. Severe stasis dermatitis may precede the development of stasis ulcers.

Treatment: Stasis Dermatitis and Stasis Ulceration

Patients with stasis dermatitis and stasis ulceration benefit greatly from leg elevation and the routine use of compression stockings with a gradient of at least 30每40 mmHg. Stockings providing less compression, such as antiembolism hose, are poor substitutes. Use of emollients and/or midpotency topical glucocorticoids and avoidance of irritants are also helpful in treating stasis dermatitis. Protecting the legs from injury, including scratching, and control of chronic edema are essential to prevent ulcers. Diuretics may be required to adequately control chronic edema.

Stasis ulcers are difficult to treat, and resolution is slow. It is extremely important to elevate the affected limb as much as possible. The ulcer should be kept clear of necrotic material by gentle debridement and covered with a semipermeable dressing and a compression dressing or compression stocking. Glucocorticoids should not be applied to ulcers, because they may retard healing; however, they may be applied to the surrounding skin to control itching, scratching, and additional trauma. Secondarily infected lesions should be treated with appropriate oral antibiotics, but it should be noted that all ulcers will become colonized with bacteria, and the purpose of antibiotic therapy should not be to clear all bacterial growth. Care must be taken to exclude treatable causes of leg ulcers (hypercoagulation, vasculitis) before beginning the chronic management outlined above.

Seborrheic Dermatitis

Seborrheic dermatitis is a common, chronic disorder, characterized by greasy scales overlying erythematous patches or plaques. Induration and scale are generally less prominent than in psoriasis, but clinical overlap exists between these diseases〞"sebopsoriasis." The most common location is in the scalp, where it may be recognized as severe dandruff. On the face, seborrheic dermatitis affects the eyebrows, eyelids, glabella, and nasolabial folds (Fig. 52-4). Scaling of the external auditory canal is common in seborrheic dermatitis. In addition, the postauricular areas often become macerated and tender. Seborrheic dermatitis may also develop in the central chest, axilla, groin, submammary folds, and gluteal cleft. Rarely, it may cause a widespread generalized dermatitis. Pruritus is variable.

Figure 52-4

 
 
 
Seborrheic dermatitis. Central facial erythema with overlying greasy, yellowish scale is seen in this patient. (Courtesy of Jean Bolognia, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Seborrheic dermatitis may be evident within the first few weeks of life, and within this context it typically occurs in the scalp ("cradle cap"), face, or groin. It is rarely seen in children beyond infancy but becomes evident again during adult life. Although it is frequently seen in patients with Parkinson's disease, in those who have had cerebrovascular accidents, and in those with HIV infection, the overwhelming majority of individuals with seborrheic dermatitis have no underlying disorder.

Treatment: Seborrheic Dermatitis

Treatment with low-potency topical glucocorticoids in conjunction with a topical antifungal agent, such as ketoconazole cream or ciclopirox cream, is often effective. The scalp and beard areas may benefit from antidandruff shampoos, which should be left in place 3每5 min before rinsing. High-potency topical glucocorticoid solutions (betamethasone or clobetasol) are effective for control of severe scalp involvement. High-potency glucocorticoids should not be used on the face because this is often associated with steroid-induced rosacea or atrophy.
 
Papulosquamous Disorders

See Table 52-2.

Table 52-2 Papulosquamous Disorders

 
 
  Clinical Features Other Notable Features Histologic Features 
Psoriasis Sharply demarcated, erythematous plaques with mica-like scale; predominantly elbows, knees, and scalp; atypical forms may localize to intertriginous areas; eruptive forms may be associated with infection May be aggravated by certain drugs, infection; severe forms seen associated with HIV Acanthosis, vascular proliferation 
Lichen planus Purple polygonal papules marked by severe pruritus; lacy white markings, especially associated with mucous membrane lesions Certain drugs may induce: thiazides, antimalarial drugs Interface dermatitis 
Pityriasis rosea Rash often preceded by herald patch; oval to round plaques with trailing scale; most often affects the trunk, and eruption lines up in skinfolds giving a "fir treelike" appearance; generally spares palms and soles Variable pruritus; self-limited resolving in 2每8 weeks; may be imitated by secondary syphilis Pathologic features often nonspecific 
Dermatophytosis Polymorphous appearance depending on dermatophyte, body site, and host response; sharply defined to ill-demarcated scaly plaques with or without inflammation; may be associated with hair loss KOH preparation may show branching hyphae; culture helpful Hyphae and neutrophils in stratum corneum 
 

 

Psoriasis

Psoriasis is one of the most common dermatologic diseases, affecting up to 1% of the world's population. It is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder clinically characterized by erythematous, sharply demarcated papules and rounded plaques, covered by silvery micaceous scale. The skin lesions of psoriasis are variably pruritic. Traumatized areas often develop lesions of psoriasis (Koebner's or isomorphic phenomenon). In addition, other external factors may exacerbate psoriasis including infections, stress, and medications (lithium, beta blockers, and antimalarials).

The most common variety of psoriasis is called plaque-type. Patients with plaque-type psoriasis will have stable, slowly enlarging plaques, which remain basically unchanged for long periods of time. The most commonly involved areas are the elbows, knees, gluteal cleft, and the scalp. Involvement tends to be symmetric. Plaque psoriasis generally develops slowly and runs an indolent course. It rarely remits spontaneously. Inverse psoriasis affects the intertriginous regions including the axilla, groin, submammary region, and navel; it also tends to affect the scalp, palms, and soles. The individual lesions are sharply demarcated plaques (see Fig. 51-7), but they may be moist and without scale due to their locations.

Guttate psoriasis (eruptive psoriasis) is most common in children and young adults. It develops acutely in individuals without psoriasis or in those with chronic plaque psoriasis. Patients present with many small erythematous, scaling papules, frequently after upper respiratory tract infection with -hemolytic streptococci. The differential diagnosis should include pityriasis rosea and secondary syphilis.

Pustular psoriasis is another variant. Patients may have disease localized to the palms and soles, or the disease may be generalized. Regardless of the extent of disease, the skin is erythematous with pustules and variable scale. Localized to the palms and soles, it is easily confused with eczema. When generalized, episodes are characterized by fever [39∼每40∼C (102.2∼每104.0∼F)] lasting several days, an accompanying generalized eruption of sterile pustules, and a background of intense erythema; patients may become erythrodermic. Episodes of fever and pustules are recurrent. Local irritants, pregnancy, medications, infections, and systemic glucocorticoid withdrawal can precipitate this form of psoriasis. Oral retinoids are the treatment of choice in nonpregnant patients.

Fingernail involvement, appearing as punctate pitting, onycholysis, nail thickening, or subungual hyperkeratosis may be a clue to the diagnosis of psoriasis when the clinical presentation is not classic.

According to the National Psoriasis Foundation, up to 30% of patients with psoriasis have psoriatic arthritis (PsA). There are five subtypes of PsA: symmetric, asymmetric, distal interphalangeal predominant (DIP), spondylitis, and arthritis mutilans. Symmetric arthritis resembles rheumatoid arthritis, but is usually milder. Asymmetric arthritis can involve any joint and may present as "sausage digits." DIP is the classic form, but occurs in only about 5% of patients with PsA. It may involve fingers and toes. Spondylitis also occurs in about 5% of patients with PsA. Arthritis mutilans is severe and deforming. It affects primarily the small joints of the hands and feet. It accounts for less than 5% of PsA.

The etiology of psoriasis is still poorly understood, but there is clearly a genetic component to the disease. Over 50% of patients with psoriasis report a positive family history. Psoriatic lesions demonstrate infiltrates of activated T cells that are thought to elaborate cytokines responsible for keratinocyte hyperproliferation, which results in the characteristic clinical findings. Agents inhibiting T cell activation, clonal expansion, or release of proinflammatory cytokines are often effective for the treatment of severe psoriasis (see below).

Treatment: Psoriasis

Treatment of psoriasis depends on the type, location, and extent of disease. All patients should be instructed to avoid excess drying or irritation of their skin and to maintain adequate cutaneous hydration. Most patients with localized, plaque-type psoriasis can be managed with midpotency topical glucocorticoids, although their long-term use is often accompanied by loss of effectiveness (tachyphylaxis) and atrophy of the skin. A topical vitamin D analogue (calcipotriene) and a retinoid (tazarotene) are also efficacious in the treatment of limited psoriasis and have largely replaced other topical agents such as coal tar, salicylic acid, and anthralin.

Ultraviolet light, natural or artificial, is an effective therapy for many patients with widespread psoriasis. Ultraviolet B (UV-B) light, narrowband UV-B, and ultraviolet A (UV-A) spectrum with either oral or topical psoralens (PUVA) are also extremely effective. The long-term use of UV light may be associated with an increased incidence of nonmelanoma and melanoma skin cancer. UV-light therapy is contraindicated in patients receiving cyclosporine and should be used with great care in all immunocompromised patients due to an increased risk of developing skin cancers.

Various systemic agents can be used for severe, widespread psoriatic disease (Table 52-3). Oral glucocorticoids should not be used for the treatment of psoriasis due to the potential for developing life-threatening pustular psoriasis when therapy is discontinued. Methotrexate is an effective agent, especially in patients with psoriatic arthritis. The synthetic retinoid acitretin is useful, especially when immunosuppression must be avoided; however, teratogenicity limits its use.

Table 52-3 FDA-Approved Systemic Therapy for Psoriasis

 
 
  Medication Administration   
Agent Class Route Frequency Adverse Events (Selected) 
Methotrexate Antimetabolite Oral Weekly Hepatotoxicity, pulmonary toxicity, pancytopenia, potential for increased malignancies, ulcerative stomatitis, nausea, diarrhea, teratogenicity 
Acitretin Retinoid Oral Daily Teratogenicity, osteophyte formation, hyperlipidemia, flare of inflammatory bowel disease, hepatoxicity, depression 
Cyclosporine Calcineurin inhibitor Oral Twice daily Renal dysfunction, hypertension, hyperkalemia, hyperuricemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperlipidemia, increased risk of malignancies 
 

 

The evidence implicating psoriasis as a T cell每mediated disorder has directed therapeutic efforts to immunoregulation. Cyclosporine and other immunosuppressive agents can be very effective in the treatment of psoriasis, and much attention is currently directed toward the development of biologic agents with more selective immunosuppressive properties and better safety profiles (Table 52-4). Experience with these agents is limited, and information regarding combination therapy and adverse events continues to emerge. Use of tumor necrosis factor (TNF-) inhibitors may worsen congestive heart failure (CHF), and they should be used with caution in those at risk for or known to have CHF. Further, none of the immunosuppressive agents used in the treatment of psoriasis should be initiated if the patient has a severe infection; patients on such therapy should be routinely screened for tuberculosis. There have been reports of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in association with treatment with the TNF- inhibitors. Malignancies, including a risk or history of certain malignancies, may limit the use of these systemic agents.

Table 52-4 Biologics Approved for Psoriasis or Psoriatic Arthritis

 
 
  Mechanism   Administration   
Agent of Action Indication Route Frequency Warnings 
Alefacept Anti-CD-2 Ps IM Once weekly x 12 weeks; may repeat Lymphopenia, potential for increased malignancies, serious infections 
Etanercept Anti TNF- Ps, PsA SC Once or twice weekly Serious infections, neurologic events, hematologic events, potential for increased malignancies 
Adalimumab Anti TNF- PsA SC Every other week Serious infections, neurologic events, potential for increased malignancies, hypersensitivity reactions, hematologic events 
Infliximab Anti TNF- PsA IV Initial infusion followed by infusions at week 2, 6, then every 8 weeks Serious infections, hepatotoxicity, hematologic events, hypersensitivity reactions, neurologic events, potential for increased malignancies 
 


Abbreviations: IM, intramuscular; Ps, psoriasis; PsA, psoriatic arthritis; SC, subcutaneous; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 

Lichen Planus

Lichen planus (LP) is a papulosquamous disorder that may affect the skin, scalp, nails, and mucous membranes. The primary cutaneous lesions are pruritic, polygonal, flat-topped, violaceous papules. Close examination of the surface of these papules often reveals a network of gray lines (Wickham's striae). The skin lesions may occur anywhere but have a predilection for the wrists, shins, lower back, and genitalia (Fig. 52-5). Involvement of the scalp, lichen planopilaris, may lead to scarring alopecia, and nail involvement may lead to permanent deformity or loss of fingernails and toenails. LP commonly involves mucous membranes, particularly the buccal mucosa, where it can present a spectrum of disease from a mild, white, reticulate eruption of the mucosa to a severe, erosive stomatitis. Erosive stomatitis may persist for years and may be linked to an increased risk of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Cutaneous eruptions clinically resembling LP have been observed after administration of numerous drugs, including thiazide diuretics, gold, antimalarials, penicillamine, and phenothiazines, and in patients with skin lesions of chronic graft-versus-host disease. In addition, LP may be associated with hepatitis C infection. The course of LP is variable, but most patients have spontaneous remissions 6 months to 2 years after the onset of disease. Topical glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy.

Figure 52-5

 
 
 
Lichen planus. An example of lichen planus showing multiple flat-topped, violaceous papules and plaques. Nail dystrophy as seen in this patient's thumbnail may also be a feature. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Pityriasis Rosea

Pityriasis rosea (PR) is a papulosquamous eruption of unknown etiology occurring more commonly in the spring and fall. Its first manifestation is the development of a 2- to 6-cm annular lesion (the herald patch). This is followed in a few days to a few weeks by the appearance of many smaller annular or papular lesions with a predilection to occur on the trunk (Fig. 52-6). The lesions are generally oval, with their long axis parallel to the skinfold lines. Individual lesions may range in color from red to brown and have a trailing scale. PR shares many clinical features with the eruption of secondary syphilis, but palm and sole lesions are extremely rare in PR and common in secondary syphilis. The eruption tends to be moderately pruritic and lasts 3 to 8 weeks. Treatment is directed at alleviating pruritus and consists of oral antihistamines; midpotency topical glucocorticoids; and, in some cases, the use of UV-B phototherapy.

Figure 52-6

 
 
 
Pityriasis rosea. In this patient with pityriasis rosea, multiple round to oval erythematous patches with fine central scale are distributed along the skin tension lines on the trunk.
 
 
 
Cutaneous Infections (Table 52-5)

See Table 52-5.

Table 52-5 Common Skin Infections

 
 
  Clinical Features Etiologic Agent Treatment 
Impetigo Honey-colored crusted papules, plaques, or bullae Group A streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus  Systemic or topical antistaphylococcal antibiotics 
Dermatophytosis Inflammatory or noninflammatory annular scaly plaques; may have hair loss; groin involvement spares scrotum; hyphae on KOH preparation Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, or Microsporum sp.  Topical azoles, systemic griseofulvin, terbinafine, or azoles 
Candidiasis Inflammatory papules and plaques with satellite pustules, frequently in intertriginous areas; may involve scrotum; pseudohyphae on KOH preparation Candida albicans and other Candida sp.  Topical nystatin or azoles; systemic azoles for resistant disease 
Tinea versicolor Hyper- or hypopigmented scaly patches on the trunk; characteristic mixture of hyphae and spores ("spaghetti and meatballs") on KOH preparation Malassezia furfur  Topical selenium sulfide lotion or azoles 
 

 

Impetigo, Ecthyma, and Furunculosis

Impetigo is a common superficial bacterial infection of skin caused most often by S. aureus (Chap. 135), and in some cases by group A -hemolytic streptococci (Chap. 136). The primary lesion is a superficial pustule that ruptures and forms a characteristic yellow-brown honey-colored crust (Chap. 136). Lesions may occur on normal skin〞primary infection〞or in areas already affected by another skin disease〞secondary infection. Lesions caused by staphylococci may be tense, clear bullae, and this less common form of the disease is called bullous impetigo. Blisters are caused by the production of exfoliative toxin by S. aureus phage type II. This is the same toxin responsible for staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome (SSSS), often resulting in dramatic loss of the superficial epidermis due to blistering. SSSS is much more common in children than in adults; however, it should be considered along with toxic epidermal necrolysis and severe drug eruptions in patients with widespread blistering of the skin. Ecthyma is a variant of impetigo that causes punched-out ulcerative lesions. It may result from neglected or inadequately treated impetigo. Treatment of both ecthyma and impetigo involves gentle debridement of adherent crusts, which is facilitated by the use of soaks and topical antibiotics, in conjunction with appropriate oral antibiotics. Furunculosis is also caused by S. aureus, and this disorder has gained prominence in the last decade because of CA-MRSA. A furuncle, or boil, is a painful, erythematous, nodule that can occur on any cutaneous surface. The lesions may be solitary but are most often multiple. Patients frequently believe they have been bitten by spiders or insects. Family members or close contacts may also be affected. Furuncles can rupture and drain spontaneously or may need incision and drainage, which may be adequate therapy for small solitary furuncles without cellulitis or systemic symptoms. Whenever possible, lesional material should be sent for culture. Current recommendations for methicillin-sensitive infections are -lactam antibiotics. Therapy for CA-MRSA was discussed previously (see "Atopic Dermatitis"). Warm compresses and nasal mupirocin are helpful therapeutic additions. Severe infections may require IV antibiotics.

Erysipelas and Cellulitis

See Chap. 125.

Dermatophytosis

Dermatophytes are fungi that infect skin, hair, and nails and include members of the genera Trichophyton, Microsporum, and Epidermophyton. Tinea corporis, or infection of the relatively hairless skin of the body (glabrous skin), may have a variable appearance depending on the extent of the associated inflammatory reaction. Typical infections have an annular appearance that patients refer to as "ringworm." Deep inflammatory nodules or granulomas occur in some infections〞especially in those infections inappropriately treated with mid- to high-potency topical glucocorticoids. Involvement of the groin (tinea cruris) is more common in males than females. It presents as a scaling, erythematous eruption sparing the scrotum. Infection of the foot (tinea pedis) is the most common dermatophyte infection and is often chronic; it is characterized by variable erythema, edema, scaling, pruritus, and, occasionally, vesiculation. Involvement may be widespread or localized but generally involves the web space between the fourth and fifth toes. Infection of the nails (tinea unguium or onychomycosis) occurs in many patients with tinea pedis and is characterized by opacified, thickened nails and subungual debris. The distal-lateral variant is most common. Proximal subungual onychomycosis may be a marker for HIV infection or other immunocompromised states. Dermatophyte infection of the scalp (tinea capitis) continues to be common, particularly affecting inner-city children, but it also affects adults. The predominant organism is T. tonsurans, which can produce a relatively noninflammatory infection with mild scale and hair loss that is diffuse or localized. T. tonsurans can also cause a markedly inflammatory dermatosis with edema and nodules. This latter presentation is a kerion.

The diagnosis of tinea can be made from skin scrapings, nail scrapings, or hair by culture or direct microscopic examination with potassium hydroxide (KOH). Nail clippings may be sent for histologic examination with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain.

Treatment: Dermatophytosis

Both topical and systemic therapies may be used to treat dermatophyte infections. Treatment depends on the site involved and the type of infection. Topical therapy is generally effective for uncomplicated tinea corporis, tinea cruris, and limited tinea pedis. It is not effective as a monotherapy for tinea capitis or onychomycosis. Topical imidazoles, triazoles, and allylamines may be effective therapies for dermatophyte infections, but nystatin is not active against dermatophytes. Topicals are generally applied twice daily, and treatment should continue 1 week beyond clinical resolution of the infection. Tinea pedis often requires longer treatment courses and it frequently relapses. Oral antifungal agents may be required for recalcitrant tinea pedis or tinea corporis.

Oral antifungal agents are required for dermatophyte infections involving the hair and nails and for other infections unresponsive to topical therapy. A fungal etiology should be confirmed by direct microscopic examination or by culture prior to prescribing oral antifungal agents. All of the oral agents may cause hepatotoxicity and should not be used in women who are pregnant or breast-feeding.

Griseofulvin is the only oral agent approved in the United States for dermatophyte infections involving the skin, hair, or nails. When griseofulvin is used, a daily dose of 500 mg microsized or 375 mg ultramicrosized griseofulvin administered with a fatty meal is an adequate dose for most dermatophyte infections. Higher doses are required for some cases of tinea pedis and tinea capitis. Markedly inflammatory tinea capitis may result in scarring and hair loss, and systemic or topical glucocorticoids may be helpful in preventing these sequelae. The duration of anti-fungal therapy may be 2 weeks for uncomplicated tinea corporis, 8每12 weeks for tinea capitis, or as long as 6每18 months for nail infections. Due to high relapse rates, griseofulvin is seldom used for nail infections. Common side effects of griseofulvin include gastrointestinal distress, headache, and urticaria.

Oral itraconazole and terbinafine are approved for onychomycosis. Itraconazole is given as either continuous daily therapy (200 mg/d) or pulses (200 mg bid for 1 week per month) administered with food. Fingernails require 2 months of continuous therapy or two pulses. Toenails require 3 months of continuous therapy or three pulses. Itraconazole has the potential for serious interactions with other drugs requiring the P450 enzyme system for metabolism. Terbinafine (250 mg/d) is also effective for onychomycosis. Therapy with terbinafine is continued for 6 weeks for fingernail infections and 12 weeks for toenail infections. Terbinafine has fewer drug-drug interactions, but caution should be used with patients who are on multiple medications.

Tinea Versicolor

Tinea versicolor is caused by a nondermatophyte, dimorphic fungus, Malassezia furfur, a normal inhabitant of the skin. The expression of infection is promoted by heat and humidity. The typical lesions consist of oval scaly macules, papules, and patches concentrated on the chest, shoulders, and back, but only rarely on the face or distal extremities. On dark skin, they often appear as hypopigmented areas, while on light skin, they are slightly erythematous or hyperpigmented. A KOH preparation from scaling lesions will demonstrate a confluence of short hyphae and round spores ("spaghetti and meatballs"). Lotions or shampoos containing sulfur, salicylic acid, or selenium sulfide will clear the infection if used daily for 1 to 2 weeks and then weekly thereafter. These preparations are irritating if left on the skin for more than 10 minutes; thus, they should be washed off completely. Treatment with some oral antifungal agents is also effective, but they do not provide lasting results and they are not FDA-approved for this indication. Ketoconazole has been used as have itraconazole and fluconazole. Griseofulvin is not effective, and terbinafine is not reliably effective for tinea versicolor.

Candidiasis

Candidiasis is a fungal infection caused by a related group of yeasts, whose manifestations may be localized to the skin, or, rarely, may be systemic and life-threatening. The causative organism is usually Candida albicans, but may also be C. tropicalis, C. parapsilosis, or C. krusei. These organisms are normal saprophytic inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tract but may overgrow (usually due to broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy) and cause disease at a number of cutaneous sites. Other predisposing factors include diabetes mellitus, chronic intertrigo, oral contraceptive use, and cellular immune deficiency. Candidiasis is a very common infection in HIV-infected individuals (Chap. 189). The oral cavity is commonly involved. Lesions may occur on the tongue or buccal mucosa (thrush) and appear as white plaques. Microscopic examination of scrapings demonstrates both pseudohyphae and yeast forms. Fissured, macerated lesions at the corners of the mouth (perl谷che) are often seen in individuals with poorly fitting dentures and may also be associated with candidal infection. In addition, candidal infections have an affinity for sites that are chronically wet and macerated, including the skin around nails (onycholysis and paronychia) and in intertriginous areas. Intertriginous lesions are characteristically edematous, erythematous, and scaly, with scattered "satellite pustules." In males, there is often involvement of the penis and scrotum as well as the inner aspect of the thighs. In contrast to dermatophyte infections, candidal infections are frequently painful and accompanied by a marked inflammatory response. Diagnosis of candidal infection is based upon the clinical pattern and demonstration of yeast on KOH preparation or culture.

Treatment: Candidiasis

Treatment involves removing any predisposing factors such as antibiotic therapy or chronic wetness and the use of appropriate topical or systemic antifungal agents. Effective topicals include nystatin or azoles (miconazole, clotrimazole, econazole, or ketoconazole). The associated inflammatory response accompanying candidal infection on glabrous skin can be treated with a mild glucocorticoid lotion or cream (2.5% hydrocortisone). Systemic therapy is usually reserved for immunosuppressed patients or individuals with chronic or recurrent disease who fail to respond to appropriate topical therapy. Oral agents approved for the treatment of candidiasis include itraconazole and fluconazole. Oral nystatin is only effective for candidiasis of the gastrointestinal tract. Griseofulvin and terbinafine are not effective.

Warts

Warts are cutaneousneoplasms caused by papilloma viruses. More than 100 different human papilloma viruses (HPV) have been described. A typical wart, verruca vulgaris, is sessile, dome-shaped, and usually about a centimeter in diameter. Its surface is hyperkeratotic consisting of many small filamentous projections. The HPV that cause typical verruca vulgaris also cause typical plantar warts, flat warts (or verruca plana), and filiform warts. Plantar warts are endophytic and are covered by thick keratin. Paring of the wart will generally demonstrate a central core of keratinized debris and punctate bleeding points. Filiform warts are most commonly seen on the face, neck, and skinfolds and present as papillomatous lesions on a narrow base. Flat warts are only slightly elevated and have a velvety, nonverrucous surface. They have a propensity for the face, arms, and legs and are often spread by shaving.

Genital warts begin as small papillomas that may grow to form large, fungating lesions. In women, they may involve either the labia, perineum, or perianal skin. In addition, the mucosa of the vagina, urethra, and anus can be involved as well as the cervical epithelium. In men, the lesions often occur initially in the coronal sulcus but may be seen on the shaft of the penis, the scrotum, perianal skin, or in the urethra.

Appreciable evidence has accumulated that suggests HPV plays a role in the development of neoplasia of the uterine cervix and anogenital skin (Chap. 97). HPV types 16 and 18 have been most intensely studied and are the major risk factors for intraepithelial neoplasia and squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, anus, vulva, and penis. The risk is higher in patients immunosuppressed after solid organ transplantation and in those infected with HIV. Recent evidence also implicates other types. Histologic examination of biopsies from affected sites may reveal changes associated with typical warts and/or features typical of intraepidermal carcinoma (Bowen's disease). Squamous cell carcinomas associated with HPV infections have also been observed in extragenital skin (Chap. 87). This is most commonly seen in patients immunosuppressed after organ transplantation. Patients on long-term immunosuppression should be monitored for the development of squamous cell carcinoma and other cutaneous malignancies.

Treatment: Warts

Treatment of warts, other than anogenital warts, should be tempered by the observation that a majority of warts in normal individuals resolve spontaneously within 1 to 2 years. There are many modalities available to treat warts, but no single therapy is universally effective. Factors that influence the choice of therapy include the location of the wart, the extent of disease, the age and immunologic status of the patient, and the patient's desire for therapy. Perhaps the most useful and convenient method for treating warts in almost any location is cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen. Equally effective for nongenital warts, but requiring much more patient compliance, is the use of keratolytic agents such as salicylic acid plasters or solutions. For genital warts, in-office application of a podophyllin solution is moderately effective but may be associated with marked local reactions. Prescription preparations of dilute, purified podophyllin are available for home use. Topical imiquimod, a potent inducer of local cytokine release, has also been approved for use in genital warts. Conventional and laser surgical procedures may be required for recalcitrant warts. Recurrence of warts appears to be common to all these modalities. A highly effective vaccine for selected types of HPV has been recently approved by the FDA, and its use will likely reduce the incidence of anogenital and cervical carcinoma.

Herpes Simplex

See Chap. 179.

Herpes Zoster

See Chap. 180.
 
Acne

Acne Vulgaris

Acnevulgaris is a self-limited disorder primarily of teenagers and young adults, although perhaps 10每20% of adults may continue to experience some form of the disorder. The permissive factor for the expression of the disease in adolescence is the increase in sebum production by sebaceous glands after puberty. Small cysts, called comedones, form in hair follicles due to blockage of the follicular orifice by retention of keratinous material and sebum. The activity of bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes) within the comedones releases free fatty acids from sebum, causes inflammation within the cyst, and results in rupture of the cyst wall. An inflammatory foreign-body reaction develops as result of extrusion of oily and keratinous debris from the cyst.

The clinical hallmark of acnevulgaris is the comedone, which may be closed (whitehead) or open (blackhead). Closed comedones appear as 1- to 2-mm pebbly white papules, which are accentuated when the skin is stretched. They are the precursors of inflammatory lesions of acne vulgaris. The contents of closed comedones are not easily expressed. Open comedones, which rarely result in inflammatory acne lesions, have a large dilated follicular orifice and are filled with easily expressible oxidized, darkened, oily debris. Comedones are usually accompanied by inflammatory lesions: papules, pustules, or nodules.

The earliest lesions seen in adolescence are generally mildly inflamed or noninflammatory comedones on the forehead. Subsequently, more typical inflammatory lesions develop on the cheeks, nose, and chin (Fig. 52-7). The most common location for acne is the face, but involvement of the chest and back is common. Most disease remains mild and does not lead to scarring. A small number of patients develop large inflammatory cysts and nodules, which may drain and result in significant scarring. Regardless of the severity, acne may affect a patient's quality of life. If adequately treated, this may be a transient effect. In the case of severe, scarring acne, the effects can be permanent and profound. Early therapeutic intervention in severe acne is essential.

Figure 52-7

 
 
 
Acnevulgaris. An example of acne vulgaris with inflammatory papules, pustules, and comedones. (Courtesy of Kalman Watsky, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Exogenous and endogenous factors can alter the expression of acnevulgaris. Friction and trauma (from headbands or chin straps of athletic helmets), application of comedogenic topical agents (cosmetics or hair preparations), or chronic topical exposure to certain industrial compounds may elicit or aggravate acne. Glucocorticoids, topical or systemic, may also elicit acne. Other systemic medications such as oral contraceptive pills, lithium, isoniazid, androgenic steroids, halogens, phenytoin, and phenobarbital may produce acneiform eruptions or aggravate preexisting acne. Genetic factors and polycystic ovary disease may also play a role.

Treatment: Acne Vulgaris

Treatment of acnevulgaris is directed toward elimination of comedones by normalization of follicular keratinization, decreasing sebaceous gland activity, decreasing the population of P. acnes, and decreasing inflammation. Minimal to moderate pauci-inflammatory disease may respond adequately to local therapy alone. Although areas affected with acne should be kept clean, overly vigorous scrubbing may aggravate acne due to mechanical rupture of comedones. Topical agents such as retinoic acid, benzoyl peroxide, or salicylic acid may alter the pattern of epidermal desquamation, preventing the formation of comedones and aiding in the resolution of preexisting cysts. Topical antibacterial agents such as azelaic acid, topical erythromycin, or clindamycin are also useful adjuncts to therapy.

Patients with moderate to severe acne with a prominent inflammatory component will benefit from the addition of systemic therapy, such as tetracycline in doses of 250每500 mg bid or doxycycline, 100 mg bid. Minocycline is also useful. Such antibiotics appear to have anti-inflammatory effects independent of their antibacterial effects. Female patients who do not respond to oral antibiotics may benefit from hormonal therapy. Several oral contraceptives are now approved by the FDA for use in the treatment of acne vulgaris.

Patients with severe nodulocystic acne unresponsive to the therapies discussed above may benefit from treatment with the synthetic retinoid isotretinoin. Its dose is based on the patient's weight, and it is given once daily for 5 months. Results are excellent in appropriately selected patients. Its use is highly regulated due to its potential for severe adverse events, primarily teratogenicity. In addition, patients receiving this medication develop extremely dry skin, cheilitis, and must be followed for development of hypertriglyceridemia.

Recently, there have also been concerns that isotretinoin is associated with severe depression in some patients. At present, prescribers must enroll in a program designed to prevent pregnancy and adverse events while patients are taking isotretinoin. These measures are imposed to ensure that all prescribers are familiar with the risks of isotretinoin; that all female patients have two negative pregnancy tests prior to initiating therapy and a negative pregnancy test prior to each refill; and that all patients have been warned about the risks associated with isotretinoin.

Acne Rosacea

Acne rosacea, commonly referred to as rosacea, is an inflammatory disorder predominantly affecting the central face. Those most often affected are Caucasians of northern European background, but it is seen in patients with dark skin also. It is seen almost exclusively in adults, only rarely affecting patients <30 years. Rosacea is more common in women, but those most severely affected are men. It is characterized by the presence of erythema, telangiectases, and superficial pustules (Fig. 52-8), but is not associated with the presence of comedones. Rosacea rarely involves the chest or back.

Figure 52-8

 
 
 
Acne rosacea. Prominent facial erythema, telangiectasia, scattered papules, and small pustules are seen in this patient with acne rosacea. (Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 

There is a relationship between the tendency for facial flushing and the subsequent development of acne rosacea. Often, individuals with rosacea initially demonstrate a pronounced flushing reaction. This may be in response to heat, emotional stimuli, alcohol, hot drinks, or spicy foods. As the disease progresses, the flush persists longer and longer and may eventually become permanent. Papules, pustules, and telangiectases can become superimposed on the persistent flush. Rosacea of very long standing may lead to connective tissue overgrowth, particularly of the nose (rhinophyma). Rosacea may also be complicated by various inflammatory disorders of the eye, including keratitis, blepharitis, iritis, and recurrent chalazion. These ocular problems are potentially sight-threatening and warrant ophthalmologic evaluation.

Treatment: Acne Rosacea

Acne rosacea can be treated topically or systemically. Mild disease often responds to topical metronidazole or sodium sulfacetamide. More severe disease requires oral tetracyclines: tetracycline 250每500 mg bid, doxycycline 100 mg bid, or minocycline 50每100 mg bid. Residual telangiectasia may respond to laser therapy. Topical glucocorticoids, especially potent agents, should be avoided because chronic use of these preparations may elicit rosacea. Topical therapy of the skin is not effective treatment for ocular disease.
 
Skin Diseases and Smallpox Vaccination

Because of a higher incidence of adverse events associated with smallpox vaccination in patients with a history of certain skin diseases, including atopic dermatitis, eczema, and psoriasis, such vaccination is contraindicated in patients with these conditions in the absence of a bioterrorism attack and a real or potential exposure to smallpox. In the case of such exposure, the risk of smallpox infection outweighs the risk of adverse events from the vaccine (Chap. 221).
 
Further Readings

Bolognia JL, Jorizzo JL, Rapini RP (eds): Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009 

 
James WD et al: Andrews Diseases of the Skin Clinical Dermatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders-Elsevier, 2006 

 
Wolff K, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI, et al (eds): Fitzpatricks Dermatology in General Medicine, 7th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2008 

 
Wolff K, Johnson RA: Fitzpatricks Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2009 

 
Wolverton SE (ed): Comprehensive Dermatologic Drug Therapy 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2007 
 
 

^^
Skin Manifestations of Internal Disease: Introduction

It is a generally accepted concept in medicine that the skin can develop signs of internal disease. Therefore, in textbooks of medicine, one finds a chapter describing in detail the major systemic disorders that can be identified by cutaneous signs. The underlying assumption of such a chapter is that the clinician has been able to identify the specific disorder in the patient and needs only to read about it in the textbook. In reality, concise differential diagnoses and the identification of these disorders are actually difficult for the nondermatologist because he or she is not well-versed in the recognition of cutaneous lesions or their spectrum of presentations. Therefore, this chapter covers this particular topic of cutaneous medicine not by discussing individual disorders, but by describing and discussing the various presenting clinical signs and symptoms that indicate the presence of these disorders. Concise differential diagnoses will be generated in which the significant diseases will be briefly discussed and distinguished from the more common disorders that have minimal or no significance for internal diseases. The latter disorders are reviewed in table form and always need to be excluded when considering the former. For a detailed description of individual diseases, the reader should consult a dermatologic text.
 
Papulosquamous Skin Lesions

(Table 53-1) When an eruption is characterized by elevated lesions, papules (<1 cm), or plaques (>1 cm), in association with scale, it is referred to as a papulosquamous lesion. The most common papulosquamous diseases〞psoriasis, tinea, pityriasis rosea, and lichen planus〞are primary cutaneous disorders (Chap. 52). When psoriatic lesions are accompanied by arthritis, the possibility of psoriatic arthritis or reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome) should be considered. A history of oral ulcers, conjunctivitis, uveitis, and/or urethritis points to the latter diagnosis. Lithium, beta blockers, HIV or streptococcal infections, and a rapid taper of systemic glucocorticoids are known to exacerbate psoriasis. Emerging comorbidities in psoriasis include cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome.

Table 53-1 Selected Causes of Papulosquamous Skin Lesions

 
 
1. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  a. Psoriasisa  
  b. Tineaa
  
  c. Pityriasis roseaa
  
  d. Lichen planusa
  
  e. Parapsoriasis 
  f. Bowen's disease (squamous cell carcinoma in situ)b
  
2. Drugs 
3. Systemic diseases 
  a. Lupus erythematosusc
  
  b. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma; in particular, mycosis fungoidesd
  
  c. Secondary syphilis 
  d. Reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome) 
  e. Sarcoidosise
  
 


a Discussed in detail in Chap. 52; cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome are emerging comorbidities in psoriasis; primarily in Europe, hepatitis C virus is associated with oral lichen planus.

b Associated with chronic sun exposure and exposure to arsenic.

c See also Red Lesions in "Papulonodular Skin Lesions."

d Also cutaneous lesions of HTLV-1-associated adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma.

e See also Red-Brown Lesions in "Papulonodular Skin Lesions."
 

Whenever the diagnosis of pityriasis rosea or lichen planus is made, it is important to review the patient's medications because the eruption can be treated by simply discontinuing the offending agent. Pityriasis rosea每like drug eruptions are seen most commonly with beta blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and metronidazole, while the drugs that can produce a lichenoid eruption include thiazides, antimalarials, quinidine, beta blockers, and ACE inhibitors. In some populations, there is a higher prevalence of hepatitis C viral infection in patients with lichen planus. Lichen planus每like lesions are also observed in chronic graft-versus-host disease.

In its early stages, the mycosis fungoides (MF) form of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) may be confused with eczema or psoriasis, but it often fails to respond to the appropriate therapy for those inflammatory diseases. MF can develop within lesions of large-plaque parapsoriasis and is suggested by an increase in the thickness of the lesions. The diagnosis of MF is established by skin biopsy in which collections of atypical T lymphocytes are found in the epidermis and dermis. As the disease progresses, cutaneous tumors and lymph node involvement may appear.

In secondary syphilis, there are scattered red-brown papules with thin scale. The eruption often involves the palms and soles and can resemble pityriasis rosea. Associated findings are helpful in making the diagnosis and include annular plaques on the face, nonscarring alopecia, condyloma lata (broad-based and moist), and mucous patches as well as lymphadenopathy, malaise, fever, headache, and myalgias. The interval between the primary chancre and the secondary stage is usually 4每8 weeks, and spontaneous resolution without appropriate therapy is seen.
 
Erythroderma

(Table 53-2)Erythroderma is the term used when the majority of the skin surface is erythematous (red in color). There may be associated scale, erosions, or pustules as well as shedding of the hair and nails. Potential systemic manifestations include fever, chills, hypothermia, reactive lymphadenopathy, peripheral edema, hypoalbuminemia, and high-output cardiac failure. The major etiologies of erythroderma are (1) cutaneous diseases such as psoriasis and dermatitis (Table 53-3); (2) drugs; (3) systemic diseases, most commonly CTCL; and (4) idiopathic. In the first three groups, the location and description of the initial lesions, prior to the development of the erythroderma, aid in the diagnosis. For example, a history of red scaly plaques on the elbows and knees would point to psoriasis. It is also important to examine the skin carefully for a migration of the erythema and associated secondary changes such as pustules or erosions. Migratory waves of erythema studded with superficial pustules are seen in pustular psoriasis.

Table 53-2 Causes of Erythroderma

 
 
1. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  a. Psoriasisa
  
  b. Dermatitis [atopic, contact >> stasis (with autosensitization) or seborrheic]a
  
  c. Pityriasis rubra pilaris 
2. Drugs 
3. Systemic diseases 
  a. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma 
  b. Lymphoma 
4. Idiopathic 
aDiscussed in detail in Chap. 52.
  
 

 
Table 53-3 Erythroderma (Primary Cutaneous Disorders)

 
 
  Initial Lesions Location of Initial Lesions Other Findings Diagnostic Aids Treatment 
Psoriasisa
  Pink-red, silvery scale, sharply demarcated Elbows, knees, scalp, presacral area Nail dystrophy, arthritis, pustules; SAPHO syndrome, especially with palmoplantar pustulosis Skin biopsy Topical glucocorticoids, vitamin D; UV-B (narrowband); oral retinoid and/or PUVA; MTX, cyclosporine, anti-TNF agents, anti-IL-12/23 Ab 
Dermatitisa
  
Atopic Acute:

Erythema, fine scale, crust, indistinct borders

Chronic:

Lichenification (increased skin markings)
 Antecubital and popliteal fossae, neck, hands, eyelids Pruritus

Personal and/or family history of atopy, including asthma, allergic rhinitis or conjunctivitis, and atopic dermatitis

Exclude secondary infection with S. aureus or HSV

Exclude superimposed irritant or allergic contact dermatitis
 Skin biopsy Topical glucocorticoids, tacrolimus, pimecrolimus, tar, and antipruritics; oral antihistamines; open wet dressings; UV-B ㊣ UV-A; PUVA; oral/IM glucocorticoids; MTX; mycophenolate mofetil; cyclosporine

Topical or oral antibiotics
 
Contact Local: Erythema, crusting, vesicles, and bullae Depends on offending agent Irritant〞onset often within hours

Allergic〞delayed-type hypersensitivity; lag time of 48 h
 Patch testing; open use test Remove irritant or allergen; topical glucocorticoids; oral antihistamines; oral/IM glucocorticoids 
  Systemic: Erythema, fine scale, crust Generalized vs major intertriginous zones (especially groin) Patient has history of allergic contact dermatitis to topical agent and then receives systemic medication that is structurally related, e.g., ethylenediamine (topical), aminophylline (IV) Patch testing Same as local 
Seborrheic (rare) in adults Pink-red, greasy scale Scalp, nasolabial folds, eyebrows, intertriginous zones Flares with stress, HIV infection

Associated with Parkinson's disease
 Skin biopsy Topical glucocorticoids and imidazoles 
Stasis (with autosensitization) Erythema, crusting, excoriations Lower extremities Pruritus, lower extremity edema, varicosities, hemosiderin deposits

History of venous ulcers, thrombophlebitis, and/or cellulitis

Exclude cellulitis

Exclude superimposed contact dermatitis, e.g., topical neomycin
 Skin biopsy Topical glucocorticoids; open wet dressings; leg elevation; pressure stockings 
Pityriasis rubra pilaris Orange-red, perifollicular papules Generalized, but characteristic "skip" areas of normal skin Wax-like palmoplantar keratoderma

Exclude cutaneous T cell lymphoma
 Skin biopsy Isotretinoin or acitretin; MTX 
 


aDiscussed in detail in Chap. 52. 

Note: Ab, antibody; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IL, interleukin; IM, intramuscular; MTX, methotrexate; PUVA, p soralens + ultraviolet A irradiation; SAPHO, synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis and osteitis (also referred to as chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis); TNF, tumor necrosis factor; UV-A, ultraviolet A irradiation; UV-B, ultraviolet B irradiation.
 

Drug-induced erythroderma (exfoliative dermatitis) may begin as an exanthematous (morbilliform) eruption (Chap. 55) or may arise as diffuse erythema. A number of drugs can produce an erythroderma, including penicillins, sulfonamides, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and allopurinol. Fever and peripheral eosinophilia often accompany the eruption, and there may also be facial swelling, hepatitis, myocarditis, and allergic interstitial nephritis; this constellation is frequently referred to as drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS). In addition, these reactions, especially to anticonvulsants, can lead to a pseudolymphoma syndrome (with adenopathy and circulating atypical lymphocytes), while reactions to allopurinol may be accompanied by gastrointestinal bleeding.

The most common malignancy that is associated with erythroderma is CTCL; in some series, up to 25% of the cases of erythroderma were due to CTCL. The patient may progress from isolated plaques and tumors, but, more commonly, the erythroderma is present throughout the course of the disease (S谷zary syndrome). In the S谷zary syndrome, there are circulating atypical T lymphocytes, pruritus, and lymphadenopathy. In cases of erythroderma where there is no apparent cause (idiopathic), longitudinal evaluation is mandatory to monitor for the possible development of CTCL. There have been isolated case reports of erythroderma secondary to some solid tumors〞lung, liver, prostate, thyroid, and colon〞but it is primarily during a late stage of the disease.
 
Alopecia

(Table 53-4) The two major forms of alopecia are scarring and nonscarring. In scarring alopecia, there are associated fibrosis, inflammation, and loss of hair follicles. A smooth scalp with a decreased number of follicular openings is usually observed clinically, but in some cases, the changes are seen only in biopsy specimens from affected areas. In nonscarring alopecia, the hair shafts are gone, but the hair follicles are preserved, explaining the reversible nature of nonscarring alopecia.

Table 53-4 Causes of Alopecia

 
 
I. Nonscarring alopecia 
  A. Primary cutaneous disorders 
    1. Telogen effluvium 
    2. Androgenetic alopecia 
    3. Alopecia areata 
    4. Tinea capitis 
    5. Traumatic alopeciaa
  
  B. Drugs 
  C. Systemic diseases 
    1. Systemic lupus erythematosus 
    2. Secondary syphilis 
    3. Hypothyroidism 
    4. Hyperthyroidism 
    5. Hypopituitarism 
    6. Deficiencies of protein, iron, biotin, and zinc 
II. Scarring alopecia 
  A. Primary cutaneous disorders 
    1. Cutaneous lupus (chronic discoid lesions)b
  
    2. Lichen planus 
    3. Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia 
    4. Folliculitis decalvans 
    5. Linear scleroderma (morphea) 
  B. Systemic diseases 
    1. Discoid lesions in the setting of systemic lupus erythematosusb
  
    2. Sarcoidosis 
    3. Cutaneous metastases 
 


a Most patients with trichotillomania, pressure-induced alopecia, early stages of traction alopecia.

b While the majority of patients with discoid lesions have only cutaneous disease, these lesions do represent one of the 11 American College of Rheumatology criteria (1982) for systemic lupus erythematosus.
 

The most common causes of nonscarring alopecia include telogen effluvium, androgenetic alopecia, alopecia areata, tinea capitis, and the early phase of traumatic alopecia(Table 53-5). In women with androgenetic alopecia, an elevation in circulating levels of androgens may be seen as a result of ovarian or adrenal gland dysfunction. When there are signs of virilization, such as a deepened voice and enlarged clitoris, the possibility of an ovarian or adrenal gland tumor should be considered.

Table 53-5 Nonscarring Alopecia (Primary Cutaneous Disorders)

 
 
  Clinical Characteristics Pathogenesis Treatment 
Telogen effluvium Diffuse shedding of normal hairs

Follows major stress (high fever, severe infection) or change in hormones (postpartum)

Reversible without treatment
 Stress causes more of the asynchronous growth cycles of individual hairs to become synchronous; therefore, larger numbers of growing (anagen) hairs simultaneously enter the dying (telogen) phase Observation; discontinue any drugs that have alopecia as a side effect; must exclude underlying metabolic causes, e.g., hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism 
Androgenetic alopecia (male pattern; female pattern) Miniaturization of hairs along the midline of the scalp

Recession of the anterior scalp line in men and some women
 Increased sensitivity of affected hairs to the effects of androgens

Increased levels of circulating androgens (ovarian or adrenal source in women)
 If no evidence of hyperandrogen state, then topical minoxidil; finasteridea; spironolactone (women); hair transplant
  
Alopecia areata Well-circumscribed, circular areas of hair loss, 2每5 cm in diameter

In extensive cases, coalescence of lesions and/or involvement of other hair-bearing surfaces of the body

Pitting of the nails
 The germinative zones of the hair follicles are surrounded by T lymphocytes

Occasional associated diseases: hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, vitiligo, Down syndrome
 Topical anthralin or tazarotene; intralesional glucocorticoids; topical contact sensitizers 
Tinea capitis Varies from scaling with minimal hair loss to discrete patches with "black dots" (broken hairs) to boggy plaque with pustules (kerion)b
  Invasion of hairs by dermatophytes, most commonly Trichophyton tonsurans  Oral griseofulvin or terbinafine plus 2.5% selenium sulfide or ketoconazole shampoo; examine family members 
Traumatic alopeciac
  Broken hairs

Irregular outline
 Traction with curlers, rubber bands, braiding

Exposure to heat or chemicals (e.g., hair straighteners)

Mechanical pulling (trichotillomania)
 Discontinuation of offending hair style or chemical treatments; trichotillomania may require hair clipping and observation of shaved hairs or biopsy for diagnosis, possibly followed by psychotherapy 
 


a To date, FDA-approved for men.

b Scarring alopecia can occur at sites of kerions.

c May also be scarring, especially late-stage traction alopecia.
 

Exposure to various drugs can also cause diffuse hair loss, usually by inducing a telogen effluvium. An exception is the anagen effluvium observed with antimitotic agents such as daunorubicin. Alopecia is a side effect of the following drugs: warfarin, heparin, propylthiouracil, carbimazole, vitamin A, isotretinoin, acitretin, lithium, beta blockers, colchicine, and amphetamines. Fortunately, spontaneous regrowth usually follows discontinuation of the offending agent.

Less commonly, nonscarring alopecia is associated with lupus erythematosus and secondary syphilis. In systemic lupus there are two forms of alopecia〞one is scarring secondary to discoid lesions (see below), and the other is nonscarring. The latter form may be diffuse and involve the entire scalp or it may be localized to the frontal scalp, with the appearance of multiple short hairs ("lupus hairs") as a sign of initial regrowth. Scattered, poorly circumscribed patches of alopecia with a "moth-eaten" appearance are a manifestation of the secondary stage of syphilis. Diffuse thinning of the hair is also associated with hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism (Table 53-4).

Scarring alopecia is more frequently the result of a primary cutaneous disorder such as lichen planus, folliculitis decalvans, chroniccutaneous (discoid) lupus, or linear scleroderma (morphea) than it is a sign of systemic disease. Although the scarring lesions of discoid lupus can be seen in patients with systemic lupus, in the majority of cases, the disease process is limited to the skin. Less common causes of scarring alopecia include sarcoidosis (see "Papulonodular Skin Lesions," below) and cutaneous metastases.

In the early phases of discoid lupus, lichen planus, and folliculitis decalvans, there are circumscribed areas of alopecia. Fibrosis and subsequent loss of hair follicles are observed primarily in the center of the individual lesions; the inflammatory process is most prominent at the periphery. The areas of active inflammation in discoid lupus are erythematous with scale, whereas the areas of previous inflammation are often hypopigmented with a rim of hyperpigmentation. In lichen planus, the peripheral perifollicular macules are usually violet-colored. A complete examination of the skin and oral mucosa combined with a biopsy and direct immunofluorescence microscopy will aid in distinguishing these two entities. The peripheral active lesions in folliculitis decalvans are follicular pustules; these patients can develop a reactive arthritis.
 
Figurate Skin Lesions

(Table 53-6) In figurate eruptions, the lesions form rings and arcs that are usually erythematous but can be skin-colored to brown. Most commonly, they are due to primary cutaneous diseases such as tinea, urticaria, erythema annulare centrifugum, and granuloma annulare (Chaps. 52 and 54). An underlying systemic illness is found in a second, less common group of migratory annular erythemas. It includes erythema gyratum repens, erythema migrans, erythema marginatum, and necrolytic migratory erythema.

Table 53-6 Causes of Figurate Skin Lesions

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Tinea 
  B. Urticaria (primary in 90% of patients) 
  C. Erythema annulare centrifugum 
  D. Granuloma annulare 
  E. Psoriasis 
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Migratory 
    1. Erythema migrans 
    2. Urticaria (10% of patients) 
    3. Erythema gyratum repens 
    4. Erythema marginatum 
    5. Pustular psoriasis (generalized) 
    6. Necrolytic migratory erythema (glucagonoma syndrome)a
  
  B. Nonmigratory 
    1. Sarcoidosis 
    2. Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus 
    3. Secondary syphilis 
    4. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma (especially mycosis fungoides) 
 


a Migratory erythema with erosions; favors lower extremities and girdle area.
 

In erythema gyratum repens, one sees numerous mobile concentric arcs and wavefronts that resemble the grain in wood. A search for an underlying malignancy is mandatory in a patient with this eruption. Erythema migrans is the cutaneous manifestation of Lyme disease, which is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. In the initial stage (3每30 days after tick bite), a single annular lesion is usually seen, which can expand to 10 cm in diameter. Within several days, approximately half the patients develop multiple smaller erythematous lesions at sites distant from the bite. Associated symptoms include fever, headache, photophobia, myalgias, arthralgias, and malar rash. Erythema marginatum is seen in patients with rheumatic fever, primarily on the trunk. Lesions are pink-red in color, flat to mildly elevated, and transient.

There are additional cutaneous diseases that present as annular eruptions but lack an obvious migratory component. Examples include CTCL, subacute cutaneous lupus, secondary syphilis, and sarcoidosis (see "Papulonodular Skin Lesions," below).
 
Acne

(Table 53-7) In addition to acne vulgaris and acne rosacea, the two major forms of acne (Chap. 52), there are drugs and systemic diseases that can lead to acneiform eruptions.

Table 53-7 Causes of Acneiform Eruptions

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Acne vulgaris 
  B. Acne rosacea 
II. Drugs, e.g., anabolic steroids, glucocorticoids, lithium, EGFRa inhibitors, iodides
  
III. Systemic diseases 
  A. Increased androgen production 
    1. Adrenal origin, e.g., Cushing's disease, 21-hydroxylase deficiency 
    2. Ovarian origin, e.g., polycystic ovary syndrome 
  B. Cryptococcosis, disseminated 
  C. Dimorphic fungi 
  D. Beh?et's disease 
 


a EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor.
 

Patients with the carcinoid syndrome have episodes of flushing of the head, neck, and sometimes the trunk. Resultant skin changes of the face, in particular telangiectasias, may mimic the clinical appearance of acne rosacea.
 
Pustular Lesions

Acneiform eruptions (see "Acne," above) and folliculitis represent the most common pustular dermatoses. An important consideration in the evaluation of follicular pustules is a determination of the associated pathogen, e.g., normal flora, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ("hot tub" folliculitis), Malassezia, and dermatophytes (Majocchi's granuloma). Noninfectious forms of folliculitis include HIV-associated eosinophilic folliculitis and folliculitis secondary to drugs such as glucocorticoids, lithium, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. Administration of high-dose systemic glucocorticoids can result in a widespread eruption of follicular pustules on the trunk, characterized by lesions in the same stage of development. With regard to underlying systemic diseases, nonfollicular-based pustules are a characteristic component of pustular psoriasis (sterile) and can be seen in septic emboli of bacterial or fungal origin (see "Purpura," below). In patients with acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) due primarily to medications (e.g., cephalosporins), there are large areas of erythema studded with multiple sterile pustules in addition to neutrophilia.
 
Telangiectasias

(Table 53-8) To distinguish the various types of telangiectasias, it is important to examine the shape and configuration of the dilated blood vessels. Linear telangiectasias are seen on the face of patients with actinically damaged skin and acne rosacea, and they are found on the legs of patients with venous hypertension and essential telangiectasia. Patients with an unusual form of mastocytosis (telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans) and the carcinoid syndrome (see "Acne," above) also have linear telangiectasias. Lastly, linear telangiectasias are found in areas of cutaneous inflammation. For example, lesions of discoid lupus frequently have telangiectasias within them.

Table 53-8 Causes of Telangiectasias

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Linear 
1. Acne rosacea 
2. Actinically damaged skin 
3. Venous hypertension 
4. Essential telangiectasia 
5. Within basal cell carcinomas 
  B. Poikiloderma 
1. Ionizing radiationa
  
2. Poikiloderma vasculare atrophicans 
  C. Spider angioma 
1. Idiopathic 
2. Pregnancy 
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Linear 
    1. Carcinoid 
    2. Ataxia-telangiectasia 
    3. Mastocytosis 
  B. Poikiloderma 
    1. Dermatomyositis 
    2. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma 
    3. Xeroderma pigmentosum 
  C. Mat 
    1. Scleroderma 
  D. Periungual 
    1. Lupus erythematosus 
    2. Scleroderma 
    3. Dermatomyositis 
    4. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 
  E. Papular 
    1. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 
  F. Spider angioma 
    1. Cirrhosis 
 


aBecoming less common.
 

Poikiloderma is a term used to describe a patch of skin with: (1) reticulated hypo- and hyperpigmentation, (2) wrinkling secondary to epidermal atrophy, and (3) telangiectasias. Poikiloderma does not imply a single disease entity〞although it is becoming less common, it is seen in skin damaged by ionizing radiation as well as in patients with autoimmune connective tissue diseases, primarily dermatomyositis (DM), and rare genodermatoses (e.g., Kindler syndrome).

In systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) the dilated blood vessels have a unique configuration and are known as mat telangiectasias. The lesions are broad macules that usually measure 2每7 mm in diameter but occasionally are larger. Mats have a polygonal or oval shape and their erythematous color may appear uniform, but, upon closer inspection, the erythema is the result of delicate telangiectasias. The most common locations for mat telangiectasias are the face, oral mucosa, and hands〞peripheral sites that are prone to intermittent ischemia. The CREST (calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) variant of scleroderma (Chap. 323) is associated with a chronic course and anticentromere antibodies. Mat telangiectasias are an important clue to the diagnosis of the CREST syndrome as well as systemic scleroderma because they may be the only cutaneous finding.

Periungual telangiectasias are pathognomonic signs of the three major autoimmune connective tissue diseases: lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and DM. They are easily visualized by the naked eye and occur in at least two-thirds of these patients. In both DM and lupus, there is associated nailfold erythema, and in DM, the erythema is often accompanied by "ragged" cuticles and fingertip tenderness. Under 10x magnification, the blood vessels in the nailfolds of lupus patients are tortuous and resemble "glomeruli," whereas in scleroderma and DM, there is a loss of capillary loops and those that remain are markedly dilated.

In hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber disease), the lesions usually appear during adulthood and are most commonly seen on the mucous membranes, face, and distal extremities, including under the nails. They represent arteriovenous (AV) malformations of the dermal microvasculature, are dark red in color, and are usually slightly elevated. When the skin is stretched over an individual lesion, an eccentric punctum with radiating legs is seen. Although the degree of systemic involvement varies in this autosomal dominant disease (due primarily to mutations in either the endoglin or activin receptor每like kinase gene), the major symptoms are recurrent epistaxis and gastrointestinal bleeding. The fact that these mucosal telangiectasias are actually AV communications helps to explain their tendency to bleed.
 
Hypopigmentation

(Table 53-9) Disorders of hypopigmentation are often classified as either diffuse or localized. The classic example of diffuse hypopigmentation is oculocutaneous albinism (OCA). The most common forms are due to mutations in the tyrosinase gene (type I) or the P gene (type II); patients with type IA OCA have a total lack of enzyme activity. At birth, different forms of OCA can appear similar〞white hair, gray-blue eyes, and pink-white skin. However, the patients with no tyrosinase activity maintain this phenotype, whereas those with decreased activity will acquire some pigmentation of the eyes, hair, and skin as they age. The degree of pigment formation is also a function of racial background, and the pigmentary dilution is more readily apparent when patients are compared to their first-degree relatives. The ocular findings in OCA correlate with the degree of hypopigmentation and include decreased visual acuity, nystagmus, photophobia, and a lack of normal binocular vision.

Table 53-9 Causes of Hypopigmentation

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Diffuse 
    1. Generalized vitiligoa
  
  B. Localized 
    1. Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis 
    2. Postinflammatory 
    3. Tinea (pityriasis) versicolor 
    4. Vitiligoa
  
    5. Chemical- or drug-enduced leukoderma 
    6. Nevus depigmentosus 
    7. Piebaldism 
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Diffuse 
    1. Oculocutaneous albinismb
  
    2. Hermansky-Pudlak syndromeb,c
  
    3. Ch谷diak-Higashi syndromeb,d
  
    4. Phenylketonuria 
    5. Homocystinuria 
  B. Localized 
    1. Scleroderma 
    2. Melanoma-associated leukoderma 
    3. Sarcoidosis 
    4. Cutaneous T cell lymphoma (especially mycosis fungoides) 
    5. Tuberculoid and indeterminate leprosy 
    6. Onchocerciasis 
    7. Tuberous sclerosis 
    8. Hypomelanosis of Ito/mosaicism/linear nevoid hypopigmentation 
    9. Incontinentia pigmenti (stage IV) 
    10. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome 
    11. Waardenburg syndrome 
 


a Absence of melanocytes.

b Normal number of melanocytes.

c Platelet storage defect and restrictive lung disease secondary to deposits of ceroid-like material; due to mutations in  subunit of adaptor protein 3 as well as subunits of biogenesis of lysosome-related o rganelles c omplex (BLOC)-1, -2, and -3.

d Giant lysosomal granules and recurrent infections.
 

The differential diagnosis of localized hypomelanosis includes the following primary cutaneous disorders: idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis, postinflammatory hypopigmentation, tinea (pityriasis) versicolor, vitiligo, chemical- or drug-induced leukoderma, nevus depigmentosus (see below), and piebaldism (Table 53-9). In this group of diseases, the areas of involvement are macules or patches with a decrease or absence of pigmentation. Patients with vitiligo also have an increased incidence of several autoimmune disorders, including Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Graves' disease, pernicious anemia, Addison's disease, uveitis, alopecia areata, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, and the polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (types I and II). Diseases of the thyroid gland are the most frequently associated disorders, occurring in up to 30% of patients with vitiligo. Circulating autoantibodies are often found, and the most common ones are antithyroglobulin, antimicrosomal, and antithyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies.

There are four systemic diseases that should be considered in a patient with skin findings suggestive of vitiligo〞Vogt-Koyanagi- Harada syndrome, scleroderma, onchocerciasis, and melanoma-associated leukoderma. A history of aseptic meningitis, nontraumatic uveitis, tinnitus, hearing loss, and/or dysacousia points to the diagnosis of the Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. In these patients, the face and scalp are the most common locations of pigment loss. The vitiligo-like leukoderma seen in patients with scleroderma has a clinical resemblance to idiopathic vitiligo that has begun to repigment as a result of treatment; that is, perifollicular macules of normal pigmentation are seen within areas of depigmentation. The basis of this leukoderma is unknown; there is no evidence of inflammation in areas of involvement, but it can resolve if the underlying connective tissue disease becomes inactive. In contrast to idiopathic vitiligo, melanoma-associated leukoderma often begins on the trunk, and its appearance should prompt a search for metastatic disease. It is also seen in patients undergoing immunotherapy for melanoma, with cytotoxic T lymphocytes presumably recognizing cell surface antigens common to melanoma cells and melanocytes, and is associated with a greater likelihood of a clinical response.

There are two systemic disorders (neurocristopathies) that may have the cutaneous findings of piebaldism (Table 53-10). They are Shah-Waardenburg syndrome and Waardenburg syndrome. A possible explanation for both disorders is an abnormal embryonic migration or survival of two neural crest每derived elements, one of them being melanocytes and the other myenteric ganglion cells (leading to Hirschsprung disease in Shah-Waardenburg syndrome) or auditory nerve cells (Waardenburg syndrome). The latter syndrome is characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss, dystopia canthorum (lateral displacement of the inner canthi but normal interpupillary distance), heterochromic irises, and a broad nasal root, in addition to the piebaldism. Patients with Waardenburg syndrome have been shown to have mutations in three genes, including two (PAX-3 and MITF) that encode DNA-binding proteins, while patients with Hirschsprung disease plus white spotting have mutations in one of three genes〞endothelin 3, endothelin B receptor, and SOX-10.

Table 53-10 Hypopigmentation (Primary Cutaneous Disorders, Localized)

 
 
  Clinical Characteristics Wood's Lamp Examination (UV-A; Peak = 365 nm) Skin Biopsy Specimen Pathogenesis Treatment 
Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis Common; acquired; 1每4 mm in diameter

Shins and extensor forearms
 Less enhancement than vitiligo Abrupt decrease in epidermal melanin content Possible somatic mutations as a reflection of aging; UV exposure None 
Postinflammatory hypopigmentation Can develop within active lesions, as in subacute cutaneous lupus, or after the lesion fades, as in dermatitis Depends on particular disease

Usually less enhancement than in vitiligo
 Type of inflammatory infiltrate depends on specific disease Block in transfer of melanin from melanocytes to keratinocytes could be secondary to edema or decrease in contact time

Destruction of melanocytes if inflammatory cells attack basal layer of epidermis
 Treat underlying inflammatory disease 
Pityriasis (tinea) versicolor Common disorder

Upper trunk and neck (shawl-like distribution), groin

Young adults

Macules have fine white scale when scratched
 Golden fluorescence Hyphal forms and budding yeast in stratum corneum Invasion of stratum corneum by the yeast Malassezia

Yeast is lipophilic and produces C9 and C11 dicarboxylic acids, which in vitro inhibit tyrosinase
 Selenium sulfide 2.5%; topical imidazoles; oral imidazoles or triazoles 
Vitiligo Acquired; progressive

Symmetric areas of complete pigment loss

Periorificial〞around mouth, nose, eyes, nipples, umbilicus, anus

Other areas〞flexor wrists, extensor distal extremities

Segmental form is less common〞unilateral, dermatomal-like
 More apparent

Chalk-white
 Absence of melanocytes

Mild inflammation
 Autoimmune phenomenon that results in destruction of melanocytes〞primarily cellular (circulating skin-homing autoreactive T cells) Topical glucocorticoids; topical calcineurin inhibitors; NBUV-B; PUVA; transplants, if stable; depigmentation (topical MBEH), if widespread 
Chemical- or drug-induced leukoderma Similar appearance to vitiligo

Often begins on hands when associated with chemical exposure

Satellite lesions in areas not exposed to chemicals
 More apparent

Chalk-white
 Decreased number or absence of melanocytes Exposure to chemicals that selectively destroy melanocytes, in particular phenols and catechols (germicides; adhesives) or ingestion of drugs such as imatinib

Release of cellular antigens and activation of circulating lymphocytes may explain satellite phenomenon

Possible inhibition of KIT receptor
 Avoid exposure to offending agent, then treat as vitiligo

Drug-induced variant may undergo repigmentation when medication is discontinued
 
Piebaldism Autosomal dominant

Congenital, stable

White forelock

Areas of hypomelanosis contain normally pigmented and hyperpigmented macules of various sizes

Symmetric involvement of central forehead, ventral trunk, and mid regions of upper and lower extremities
 Enhancement of leukoderma and hyperpigmented macules Hypomelanotic areas〞few to no melanocytes Defect in migration of melanoblasts from neural crest to involved skin or failure of melanoblasts to survive or differentiate in these areas

Mutations within the c-kit protooncogene that encodes the tyrosine kinase receptor for stem cell growth factor (kit ligand)
 None; occasionally transplants 
 


Abbreviations: MBEH, monobenzylether of hydroquinone; NBUV-B, narrowb and ultraviolet B; PUVA, psoralens +ultraviolet A irradiation.
 

In tuberous sclerosis, the earliest cutaneous sign is an ash leaf spot. These lesions are often present at birth and are usually multiple; however, detection may require Wood's lamp examination, especially in fair-skinned individuals. The pigment within them is reduced, but not absent. The average size is 1每3 cm, and the common shapes are polygonal and lance-ovate. Examination of the patient for additional cutaneous signs such as multiple angiofibromas of the face (adenoma sebaceum), ungual and gingival fibromas, fibrous plaques of the forehead, and connective tissue nevi (shagreen patches) is recommended. It is important to remember that an ash leaf spot on the scalp will result in a circumscribed patch of lightly pigmented hair. Internal manifestations include seizures, mental retardation, central nervous system (CNS) and retinal hamartomas, pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (women), renal angiomyolipomas, and cardiac rhabdomyomas. The latter can be detected in up to 60% of children (<18 years) with tuberous sclerosis by echocardiography.

Nevus depigmentosus is a stable, well-circumscribed hypomelanosis that is present at birth. There is usually a single oval or rectangular lesion, but when there are multiple lesions, the possibility of tuberous sclerosis needs to be considered. In linear nevoid hypopigmentation or pigmentary mosaicism, terms that are replacing hypomelanosis of Ito and segmental or systematized nevus depigmentosus, streaks and swirls of hypopigmentation are observed. Up to a third of patients in a referral population had associated abnormalities involving the musculoskeletal system (asymmetry), the CNS (seizures and mental retardation), and the eyes (strabismus and hypertelorism). Chromosomal mosaicism has been detected in these patients, lending support to the hypothesis that the pattern is the result of the migration of two clones of primordial melanocytes, each with a different pigment potential.

Localized areas of decreased pigmentation are commonly seen as a result of cutaneous inflammation (Table 53-10) and have been observed in the skin overlying active lesions of sarcoidosis (see "Papulonodular Skin Lesions," below) as well as in CTCL. Cutaneous infections also present as disorders of hypopigmentation, and in tuberculoid leprosy, there are a few asymmetric patches of hypomelanosis that have associated anesthesia, anhidrosis, and alopecia. Biopsy specimens of the palpable border show dermal granulomas that contain rare, if any, Mycobacterium leprae organisms.
 
Hyperpigmentation

(Table 53-11) Disorders of hyperpigmentation are also divided into two groups〞localized and diffuse. The localized forms are due to an epidermal alteration, a proliferation of melanocytes, or an increase in pigment production. Both seborrheic keratoses and acanthosis nigricans belong to the first group. Seborrheic keratoses are common lesions, but in one rare clinical setting, they are a sign of systemic disease, and that setting is the sudden appearance of multiple lesions, often with an inflammatory base and in association with acrochordons (skin tags) and acanthosis nigricans. This is termed the sign of Leser-Tr谷lat and alerts the clinician to search for an internal malignancy. Acanthosis nigricans can also be a reflection of an internal malignancy, most commonly of the gastrointestinal tract, and it appears as velvety hyperpigmentation, primarily in flexural areas. However, in the majority of patients, acanthosis nigricans is associated with obesity and insulin resistance, but it may be a reflection of an endocrinopathy such as acromegaly, Cushing's syndrome, polycystic ovary syndrome, or insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus (type A, type B, and lipoatrophic forms).

Table 53-11 Causes of Hyperpigmentation

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Localized 
    1. Epidermal alteration 
       a. Seborrheic keratosis 
       b. Pigmented actinic keratosis 
    2. Proliferation of melanocytes 
       a. Lentigo 
       b. Melanocytic nevus (mole) 
       c. Melanoma 
    3. Increased pigment production 
       a. Ephelide (freckle) 
       b. Caf谷 au lait macule 
       c. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation 
  B. Localized and diffuse 
    1. Drugs 
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Localized 
    1. Epidermal alteration 
       a. Seborrheic keratoses (sign of Leser-Tr谷lat) 
       b. Acanthosis nigricans (insulin resistance, other endocrine disorders, paraneoplastic) 
    2. Proliferation of melanocytes 
       a. Lentigines (Peutz-Jeghers and LEOPARD syndromes; xeroderma pigmentosum) 
       b. Melanocytic nevi [Carney complex (LAMB and NAME syndromes)]a
  
    3. Increased pigment production 
       a. Caf谷 au lait macules (neurofibromatosis, McCune-Albright syndromeb)
  
       b. Urticaria pigmentosac
  
    4. Dermal pigmentation 
       a. Incontinentia pigmenti (stage III) 
       b. Dyskeratosis congenita 
  B. Diffuse 
    1. Endocrinopathies 
       a. Addison's disease 
       b. Nelson syndrome 
       c. Ectopic ACTH syndrome 
    2. Metabolic 
       a. Porphyria cutanea tarda 
       b. Hemochromatosis 
       c. Vitamin B12 , folate deficiency 
       d. Pellagra 
       e. Malabsorption, including Whipple's disease 
    3. Melanosis secondary to metastatic melanoma 
    4. Autoimmune 
       a. Biliary cirrhosis 
       b. Scleroderma 
       c. POEMS syndrome 
       d. Eosinophilia-myalgia syndromed
  
    5. Drugs and metals 
 


a Also lentigines.


b Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia.

c See also "Papulonodular Skin Lesions."d Late 1980s.

Abbreviations: LAMB, lentigines, atrial myxomas, mucocutaneous myxomas, and blue nevi; LEOPARD, lentigines, ECG abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis and subaortic valvular stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth, and deafness (sensorineural); NAME, nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, and ephelides (freckles); POEMS, polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathies, M-protein, and skin changes.
 

A proliferation of melanocytes results in the following pigmented lesions: lentigo, melanocytic nevus, and melanoma (Chap. 87). In an adult, the majority of lentigines are related to sun exposure, which explains their distribution. However, in the Peutz-Jeghers and LEOPARD [lentigines; ECG abnormalities, primarily conduction defects; ocular hypertelorism; pulmonary stenosis and subaortic valvular stenosis; abnormal genitalia (cryptorchidism, hypospadias); retardation of growth; and deafness (sensorineural)] syndromes, lentigines do serve as a clue to systemic disease. In LEOPARD syndrome, hundreds of lentigines develop during childhood and are scattered over the entire surface of the body. The lentigines in patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are located primarily around the nose and mouth, on the hands and feet, and within the oral cavity. While the pigmented macules on the face may fade with age, the oral lesions persist. However, similar intraoral lesions are also seen in Addison's disease, Laugier-Hunziker syndrome (no internal manifestations), and as a normal finding in darkly pigmented individuals. Patients with this autosomal dominant syndrome (due to mutations in a novel serine threonine kinase gene) have multiple benign polyps of the gastrointestinal tract, testicular or ovarian tumors, and an increased risk of developing gastrointestinal (primarily colon) and pancreatic cancers.

In the Carney complex, numerous lentigines are also seen but they are in association with cardiac myxomas. This autosomal dominant disorder is also known as the LAMB (lentigines, atrial myxomas, mucocutaneous myxomas, and blue nevi) syndrome or NAME [nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, and ephelides (freckles)] syndrome. These patients can also have evidence of endocrine overactivity in the form of Cushing's syndrome (pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease) and acromegaly.

The third type of localized hyperpigmentation is due to a local increase in pigment production, and it includes ephelides and caf谷 au lait macules (CALM). While a single CALM can be seen in up to 10% of the normal population, the presence of multiple or large-sized CALM raises the possibility of an associated genodermatosis, e.g., neurofibromatosis (NF) or McCune-Albright syndrome. CALM are flat, uniformly brown in color (usually two shades darker than uninvolved skin), and can- vary in size from 0.5每12 cm. Approximately 80每90% of adult patients with type I NF will have six or more CALM measuring 1.5 cm in diameter. Additional findings are discussed in the section on neurofibromas (see "Papulonodular Skin Lesions," below). In comparison with NF, the CALM in patients with McCune-Albright syndrome [polyostotic fibrous dysplasia with precocious puberty in females due to mosaicism for an activating mutation in a G protein (Gs) gene] are usually larger, more irregular in outline, and tend to respect the midline.

In incontinentia pigmenti, dyskeratosis congenita, and bleomycin pigmentation, the areas of localized hyperpigmentation form a pattern〞swirled in the first, reticulated in the second, and flagellate in the third. In dyskeratosis congenita, atrophic reticulated hyperpigmentation is seen on the neck, trunk, and thighs and is accompanied by nail dystrophy, pancytopenia, and leukoplakia of the oral and anal mucosae. The latter often develops into squamous cell carcinoma. In addition to the flagellate pigmentation (linear streaks) on the trunk, patients receiving bleomycin often have hyperpigmentation overlying the elbows, knees, and small joints of the hand.

Localized hyperpigmentation is seen as a side effect of several other systemic medications, including those that produce fixed drug reactions [nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), sulfonamides, barbiturates, and tetracyclines] and those that can complex with melanin (antimalarials) or iron (minocycline). Fixed drug eruptions recur in the exact same location as circular areas of erythema that can become bullous and then resolve as brown macules. The eruption usually appears within hours of administration of the offending agent, and common locations include the genitalia, extremities, and perioral region. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine produce gray-brown to blue-black discoloration of the shins, hard palate, and face, while blue macules (often misdiagnosed as bruises) can be seen on the lower extremities and in sites of inflammation with prolonged minocycline administration. Estrogen in oral contraceptives can induce melasma〞symmetric brown patches on the face, especially the cheeks, upper lip, and forehead. Similar changes are seen in pregnancy and in patients receiving phenytoin.

In the diffuse forms of hyperpigmentation, the darkening of the skin may be of equal intensity over the entire body or may be accentuated in sun-exposed areas. The causes of diffuse hyperpigmentation can be divided into four major groups〞endocrine, metabolic, autoimmune, and drugs. The endocrinopathies that frequently have associated hyperpigmentation include Addisons disease, Nelson syndrome, and ectopic ACTH syndrome. In these diseases, the increased pigmentation is diffuse but is accentuated in sun-exposed areas, the palmar creases, sites of friction, and scars. An overproduction of the pituitary hormones -MSH (melanocyte-stimulating hormone) and ACTH can lead to an increase in melanocyte activity. These peptides are products of the proopiomelanocortin gene and exhibit homology; e.g., -MSH and ACTH share 13 amino acids. A minority of the patients with Cushing's disease or hyperthyroidism have generalized hyperpigmentation.

The metabolic causes of hyperpigmentation include porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), hemochromatosis, vitamin B12 deficiency, folic acid deficiency, pellagra, and malabsorption, including Whipples disease. In patients with PCT (see "Vesicles/Bullae," below), the skin darkening is seen in sun-exposed areas and is a reflection of the photoreactive properties of porphyrins. The increased level of iron in the skin of patients with hemochromatosis stimulates melanin pigment production and leads to the classic bronze color. Patients with pellagra have a brown discoloration of the skin, especially in sun-exposed areas, as a result of nicotinic acid (niacin) deficiency. In the areas of increased pigmentation, there is a thin, varnish-like scale. These changes are also seen in patients who are vitamin B6 deficient, have functioning carcinoid tumors (increased consumption of niacin), or take isoniazid. Approximately 50% of the patients with Whipple's disease have an associated generalized hyperpigmentation in association with diarrhea, weight loss, arthritis, and lymphadenopathy. A diffuse, slate-blue color is seen in patients with melanosis secondary to metastatic melanoma. Although there is a debate as to whether the color is due to single-cell metastases in the dermis or to a widespread deposition of melanin resulting from the high concentration of circulating melanin precursors, there is more evidence to support the latter.

Of the autoimmune diseases associated with diffuse hyperpigmentation, biliary cirrhosis and scleroderma are the most common, and occasionally, both disorders are seen in the same patient. The skin is dark brown in color, especially in sun-exposed areas. In biliary cirrhosis, the hyperpigmentation is accompanied by pruritus, jaundice, and xanthomas, whereas in scleroderma, it is accompanied by sclerosis of the extremities, face, and, less commonly, the trunk. Additional clues to the diagnosis of scleroderma are mat and periungual telangiectasias, calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's phenomenon, and distal ulcerations (see "Telangiectasias," above). The differential diagnosis of cutaneous sclerosis with hyperpigmentation includes the POEMS [polyneuropathy; organomegaly (liver, spleen, lymph nodes); endocrinopathies (impotence, gynecomastia); M-protein; and skin changes] syndrome. The skin changes include hyperpigmentation, induration, hypertrichosis, and angiomas.

Diffuse hyperpigmentation that is due to drugs or metals can result from one of several mechanisms〞induction of melanin pigment formation, complexing of the drug or its metabolites to melanin, and deposits of the drug in the dermis. Busulfan, cyclophosphamide, 5-fluorouracil, and inorganic arsenic induce pigment production. Complexes containing melanin or iron plus the drug or its metabolites are seen in patients receiving minocycline, and a diffuse, blue-gray, muddy appearance within sun-exposed areas may develop, in addition to pigmentation of the mucous membranes, teeth, nails, bones, and thyroid. Administration of amiodarone can result in both a phototoxic eruption (exaggerated sunburn) and/or a slate-gray to violaceous discoloration of sun-exposed skin. Biopsy specimens of the latter show yellow-brown granules in dermal macrophages, which represent intralysosomal accumulations of lipids, amiodarone, and its metabolites. Actual deposits of a particular drug or metal in the skin are seen with silver (argyria), where the skin appears blue-gray in color; gold (chrysiasis), where the skin has a brown to blue-gray color; and clofazimine, where the skin appears reddish brown. The associated hyperpigmentation is accentuated in sun-exposed areas, and discoloration of the eye is seen with gold (sclerae) and clofazimine (conjunctivae).
 
Vesicles/Bullae

(Table 53-12) Depending on their size, cutaneous blisters are referred to as vesicles (<0.5 cm) or bullae (>0.5 cm). The primary autoimmune blistering disorders include pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, paraneoplastic pemphigus, bullous pemphigoid, gestational pemphigoid, cicatricial pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis (LABD), and dermatitis herpetiformis (Chap. 54).

Table 53-12 Causes of Vesicles/Bullae

 
 
I. Primary mucocutaneous diseases 
  A. Primary blistering diseases (autoimmune) 
    1. Pemphigusa  
    2. Bullous pemphigoidb  
    3. Gestational pemphigoidb  
    4. Cicatricial pemphigoidb  
    5. Dermatitis herpetiformisb,c  
    6. Linear IgA bullous dermatosisb  
    7. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisitab,d  
  B. Secondary blistering diseases 
    1. Contact dermatitisa  
    2. Erythema multiformee  
    3. Stevens-Johnson syndromee  
    4. Toxic epidermal necrolysise  
  C. Infections 
    1. Varicella/zoster virusa,f  
    2. Herpes simplex virusa,f  
    3. Enteroviruses, e.g., hand-foot-and-mouth disease 
    4. Staphylococcal scalded-skin syndromea,g  
    5. Bullous impetigoa  
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Autoimmune 
    1. Paraneoplastic pemphigusa  
  B. Infections 
    1. Cutaneous embolib  
  C. Metabolic 
    1. Diabetic bullaea,b  
    2. Porphyria cutanea tardab  
    3. Porphyria variegatab  
    4. Pseudoporphyriab  
    5. Bullous dermatosis of hemodialysisb  
  D. Ischemia 
    1. Coma bullae 
 


a Intraepidermal.

b Subepidermal.

c Associated with gluten enteropathy.

d Associated with inflammatory bowel disease.

e Degeneration of cells within the basal layer of the epidermis can give impression split is subepidermal.

f Also systemic.

g In adults, associated with renal failure and immunocompromised state.
 

Vesicles and bullae are also seen in contact dermatitis, both allergic and irritant forms (Chap. 52). When there is a linear arrangement of vesicular lesions, an exogenous cause should be suspected. Bullous disease secondary to the ingestion of drugs can take one of several forms, including phototoxic eruptions, isolated bullae, Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) (Chap. 55). Clinically, phototoxic eruptions resemble an exaggerated sunburn with diffuse erythema and bullae in sun-exposed areas. The most commonly associated drugs are doxycycline, quinolones, thiazides, NSAIDs, voriconazole, and psoralens. The development of a phototoxic eruption is dependent on the doses of both the drug and ultraviolet (UV)-A irradiation.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis is characterized by bullae that arise on widespread areas of erythema and then slough. This results in large areas of denuded skin. The associated morbidity, such as sepsis, and mortality rates are relatively high and are a function of the extent of epidermal necrosis. In addition, these patients may also have involvement of the mucous membranes and respiratory and intestinal tracts. Drugs are the primary cause of TEN, and the most common offenders are phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, sulfonamides, aminopenicillins, allopurinol, and NSAIDs. Severe acute graft-versus-host disease (grade 4), drug-induced LABD, and the acute syndrome of apoptotic pan-epidermolysis (ASAP) in patients with lupus can also resemble TEN.

In erythema multiforme (EM), the primary lesions are pink-red macules and edematous papules, the centers of which may become vesicular. In contrast to a morbilliform exanthem, the clue to the diagnosis of EM, and especially SJS, is the development of a "dusky" violet color in the center of the lesions. Target or iris lesions are also characteristic of EM and arise as a result of active centers and borders in combination with centrifugal spread. However, iris lesions need not be present to make the diagnosis of EM.

EM has been subdivided into two major groups: (1) EM minor due to herpes simplex virus (HSV) and (2) EM major due to HSV; Mycoplasma pneumoniae; or, occasionally, drugs. Involvement of the mucous membranes (oral, nasal, ocular, and genital) is seen more commonly in the latter form. Hemorrhagic crusts of the lips are characteristic of EM major and SJS as well as herpes simplex, pemphigus vulgaris, and paraneoplastic pemphigus. Fever, malaise, myalgias, sore throat, and cough may precede or accompany the eruption. The lesions of EM usually resolve over 2每4 weeks but may be recurrent, especially when due to HSV. In addition to HSV (in which lesions usually appear 7每12 days after the viral eruption), EM can also follow vaccinations, radiation therapy, and exposure to environmental toxins, including the oleoresin in poison ivy.

Induction of SJS is most often due to drugs, especially sulfonamides, phenytoin, barbiturates, aminopenicillins, non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, and carbamazepine. Widespread dusky macules and significant mucosal involvement are characteristic of SJS, and the cutaneous lesions may or may not develop epidermal detachment. If the latter occurs, by definition, it is limited to <10% of the body surface area (BSA). Greater involvement leads to the diagnosis of SJS/TEN overlap (10每30% BSA) or TEN (>30% BSA).

In addition to primary blistering disorders and hypersensitivity reactions, bacterial and viral infections can lead to vesicles and bullae. The most common infectious agents are HSV (Chap. 179), varicella-zoster virus (Chap. 180), and S. aureus (Chap. 135).

Staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome (SSSS) and bullous impetigo are two blistering disorders associated with staphylococcal (phage group II) infection. In SSSS, the initial findings are redness and tenderness of the central face, neck, trunk, and intertriginous zones. This is followed by short-lived flaccid bullae and a slough or exfoliation of the superficial epidermis. Crusted areas then develop, characteristically around the mouth. SSSS is distinguished from TEN by the following features: younger age group (primarily infants), more superficial site of blister formation, no oral lesions, shorter course, lower morbidity and mortality rates, and an association with staphylococcal exfoliative toxin ("exfoliatin"), not drugs. A rapid diagnosis of SSSS versus TEN can be made by a frozen section of the blister roof or exfoliative cytology of the blister contents. In SSSS the site of staphylococcal infection is usually extracutaneous (conjunctivitis, rhinorrhea, otitis media, pharyngitis, tonsillitis), and the cutaneous lesions are sterile, whereas in bullous impetigo, the skin lesions are the site of infection. Impetigo is more localized than SSSS and usually presents with honey-colored crusts. Occasionally, superficial purulent blisters also form. Cutaneous emboli from gram-negative infections may present as isolated bullae, but the base of the lesion is purpuric or necrotic, and it may develop into an ulcer (see "Purpura," below).

Several metabolic disorders are associated with blister formation, including diabetes mellitus, renal failure, and porphyria. Local hypoxemia secondary to decreased cutaneous blood flow can also produce blisters, which explains the presence of bullae over pressure points in comatose patients (coma bullae). In diabetes mellitus, tense bullae with clear viscous fluid arise on normal skin. The lesions can be as large as 6 cm in diameter and are located on the distal extremities. There are several types of porphyria, but the most common form with cutaneous findings is porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT). In sun-exposed areas (primarily the face and hands), the skin is very fragile, with trauma leading to erosions mixed with tense vesicles. These lesions then heal with scarring and formation of milia; the latter are firm, 1- to 2-mm white or yellow papules that represent epidermoid inclusion cysts. Associated findings can include hypertrichosis of the lateral malar region (men) or face (women) and, in sun-exposed areas, hyperpigmentation and firm sclerotic plaques. An elevated level of urinary uroporphyrins confirms the diagnosis and is due to a decrease in uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase activity. Precipitating agents include alcohol, iron, chlorinated hydrocarbons, hepatitis C infection, and hepatomas.

The differential diagnosis of PCT includes (1) porphyria variegata〞the skin signs of PCT plus the systemic findings of acute intermittent porphyria; it has a diagnostic plasma porphyrin fluorescence emission at 626 nm; (2) drug-induced pseudoporphyria〞the clinical and histologic findings are similar to PCT, but porphyrins are normal; etiologic agents include naproxen and other NSAIDs, furosemide, tetracycline, and retinoids; (3) bullous dermatosis of hemodialysis〞the same appearance as PCT, but porphyrins are usually normal or occasionally borderline elevated; patients have chronic renal failure and are on hemodialysis; (4) PCT associated with hepatomas and hemodialysis; and (5) epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (Chap. 54).
 
Exanthems

(Table 53-13) Exanthems are characterized by an acute generalized eruption. The most common presentation is erythematous macules and papules (morbilliform) and less often confluent blanching erythema (scarlatiniform). Morbilliform eruptions are usually due to either drugs or viral infections. For example, up to 5% of patients receiving penicillins, sulfonamides, phenytoin, or nevira- pine will develop a maculopapular eruption. Accompanying signs may include pruritus, fever, eosinophilia, and transient lymphadenopathy. Similar maculopapular eruptions are seen in the classic childhood viral exanthems, including (1) rubeola (measles)〞a prodrome of coryza, cough, and conjunctivitis followed by Koplik's spots on the buccal mucosa; the eruption begins behind the ears, at the hairline, and on the forehead and then spreads down the body, often becoming confluent; (2) rubella〞the eruption begins on the forehead and face and then spreads down the body; it resolves in the same order and is associated with retroauricular and suboccipital lymphadenopathy; and (3) erythema infectiosum (fifth disease)〞erythema of the cheeks is followed by a reticulated pattern on the extremities; it is secondary to a parvovirus B19 infection, and an associated arthritis is seen in adults.

Table 53-13 Causes of Exanthems

 
 
I. Morbilliform 
  A. Drugs 
  B. Viral 
    1. Rubeola (measles) 
    2. Rubella 
    3. Erythema infectiosum (reticulated on extremities) 
    4. Epstein-Barr virus, echovirus, coxsackievirus, CMV, and adenovirus infections 
    5. Early HIV infection (plus mucosal ulcerations) 
  C. Bacterial 
    1. Typhoid fever 
    2. Early secondary syphilis 
    3. Early Rickettsia infections  
    4. Early meningococcemia 
  D. Acute graft-versus-host disease 
  E. Kawasaki's disease  
II. Scarlatiniform 
  A. Scarlet fever 
  B. Toxic shock syndrome 
  C. Kawasaki's disease 
  D. Early staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome 
 


Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
 

Both measles and rubella can occur in unvaccinated adults, and an atypical form of measles is seen in adults immunized with either killed measles vaccine or killed vaccine followed in time by live vaccine. In contrast to classic measles, the eruption of atypical measles begins on the palms, soles, wrists, and knuckles, and the lesions may become purpuric. The patient with atypical measles can have pulmonary involvement and be quite ill. Rubelliform and roseoliform eruptions are also associated with Epstein-Barr virus (5每15% of patients), echovirus, coxsackievirus, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, dengue virus, and West Nile virus infections. Detection of specific IgM antibodies or fourfold elevations in IgG antibodies allows the proper diagnosis. Occasionally, a maculopapular drug eruption is a reflection of an underlying viral infection. For example, about 95% of the patients with infectious mononucleosis who are given ampicillin will develop a rash.

Of note, early in the course of infections with Rickettsia and meningococcus, prior to the development of purpura, the lesions may be erythematous macules and papules. This is also the case in chickenpox prior to the development of vesicles. Maculopapular eruptions are associated with early HIV infection, early secondary syphilis, typhoid fever, and acute graft-versus-host disease. In the last, lesions frequently begin on the dorsal hands and forearms; the macular rose spots of typhoid fever involve primarily the anterior trunk.

The prototypic scarlatiniform eruption is seen in scarlet fever and is due to an erythrotoxin produced by group A -hemolytic streptococcal infections, most commonly pharyngitis. This eruption is characterized by diffuse erythema, which begins on the neck and upper trunk, and red follicular puncta. Additional findings include a white strawberry tongue (white coating with red papillae) followed by a red strawberry tongue (red tongue with red papillae); petechiae of the palate; a facial flush with circumoral pallor; linear petechiae in the antecubital fossae; and desquamation of the involved skin, palms, and soles 5每20 days after onset of the eruption. A similar desquamation of the palms and soles is seen in toxic shock syndrome (TSS), Kawasaki's disease, and after severe febrile illnesses. Certain strains of staphylococci also produce an erythrotoxin that leads to the same clinical findings as in streptococcal scarlet fever, except that the anti-streptolysin O or -DNase B titers are not elevated.

In toxic shock syndrome, staphylococcal (phage group I) infections produce an exotoxin (TSST-1) that causes the fever and rash as well as enterotoxins. Initially, the majority of cases were reported in menstruating women who were using tampons. However, other sites of infection, including wounds and nasal packing, can lead to TSS. The diagnosis of TSS is based on clinical criteria (Chap. 135), and three of these involve mucocutaneous sites (diffuse erythema of the skin, desquamation of the palms and soles 1每2 weeks after onset of illness, and involvement of the mucous membranes). The latter is characterized as hyperemia of the vagina, oropharynx, or conjunctivae. Similar systemic findings have been described in streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (Chap. 136), and although an exanthem is seen less often than in TSS due to a staphylococcal infection, the underlying infection is often in the soft tissue.

The cutaneous eruption in Kawasakis disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome) (Chap. 326) is polymorphous, but the two most common forms are morbilliform and scarlatiniform. Additional mucocutaneous findings include bilateral conjunctival injection; erythema and edema of the hands and feet followed by desquamation; and diffuse erythema of the oropharynx, red strawberry tongue, and dry fissured lips. This clinical picture can resemble TSS and scarlet fever, but clues to the diagnosis of Kawasaki's disease are cervical lymphadenopathy, cheilitis, and thrombocytosis. The most serious associated systemic finding in this disease is coronary aneurysms secondary to arteritis. Aneurysms may lead to sudden death, primarily within the first 30 days of the illness. Scarlatiniform eruptions are also seen in the early phase of SSSS (see "Vesicles/Bullae," above) and as reactions to drugs.
 
Urticaria

(Table 53-14)Urticaria (hives) are transient lesions that are composed of a central wheal surrounded by an erythematous halo. Individual lesions are round, oval, or figurate and are often pruritic. Acute and chronic urticaria have a wide variety of allergic etiologies and reflect edema in the dermis. Urticarial lesions can also be seen in patients with mastocytosis (urticaria pigmentosa), hypo- or hyperthyroidism, and systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (Still's disease). In both juvenile- and adult-onset Still's disease, the lesions coincide with the fever spike, are transient, and are due to dermal infiltrates of neutrophils.

Table 53-14 Causes of Urticaria and Angioedema

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Acute and chronic urticariaa  
  B. Physical urticaria 
    1. Dermatographism 
    2. Solar urticariab  
    3. Cold urticariab  
    4. Cholinergic urticariab  
  C. Angioedema (hereditary and acquired)b  
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Urticarial vasculitis 
  B. Hepatitis B or C infection 
  C. Serum sickness 
  D. Angioedema (hereditary and acquired) 
 


a A small minority develop anaphylaxis.

b Also systemic.
 

The common physical urticarias include dermatographism, solar urticaria, cold urticaria, and cholinergic urticaria. Patients with dermatographism exhibit linear wheals following minor pressure or scratching of the skin. It is a common disorder, affecting ~5% of the population. Solar urticaria characteristically occurs within minutes of sun exposure and is a skin sign of one systemic disease〞 erythropoietic protoporphyria. In addition to the urticaria, these patients have subtle pitted scarring of the nose and hands. Cold urticaria is precipitated by exposure to the cold, and therefore exposed areas are usually affected. In occasional patients, the disease is associated with abnormal circulating proteins〞more commonly cryoglobulins and less commonly cryofibrinogens. Additional systemic symptoms include wheezing and syncope, thus explaining the need for these patients to avoid swimming in cold water. Cholinergic urticaria is precipitated by heat, exercise, or emotion and is characterized by small wheals with relatively large flares. It is occasionally associated with wheezing.

Whereas urticarias are the result of dermal edema, subcutaneous edema leads to the clinical picture of angioedema. Sites of involvement include the eyelids, lips, tongue, larynx, and gastrointestinal tract as well as the subcutaneous tissue. Angioedema occurs alone or in combination with urticaria, including urticarial vasculitis and the physical urticarias. Both acquired and hereditary (autosomal dominant) forms of angioedema occur (Chap. 317), and in the latter, urticaria is rarely, if ever, seen.

Urticarial vasculitis is an immune complex disease that may be confused with simple urticaria. In contrast to simple urticaria, individual lesions tend to last longer than 24 h and usually develop central petechiae that can be observed even after the urticarial phase has resolved. The patient may also complain of burning rather than pruritus. On biopsy, there is a leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the small blood vessels. Although many cases of urticarial vasculitis are idiopathic in origin, it can be a reflection of an underlying systemic illness such as lupus erythematosus, Sj?gren's syndrome, or hereditary complement deficiency. There is a spectrum of urticarial vasculitis that ranges from purely cutaneous to multisystem involvement. The most common systemic signs and symptoms are arthralgias and/or arthritis, nephritis, and crampy abdominal pain, with asthma and chronic obstructive lung disease seen less often. Hypocomplementemia occurs in one- to two-thirds of patients, even in the idiopathic cases. Urticarial vasculitis can also be seen in patients with hepatitis B and hepatitis C infections, serum sickness, and serum sickness每like illnesses (e.g., due to cefaclor, minocycline).
 
Papulonodular Skin Lesions

(Table 53-15) In the papulonodular diseases, the lesions are elevated above the surface of the skin and may coalesce to form plaques. The location, consistency, and color of the lesions are the keys to their diagnosis; this section is organized on the basis of color.

Table 53-15 Papulonodular Skin Lesions According to Color Groups

 
 
I. White 
  A. Calcinosis cutis 
II. Skin-colored 
  A. Rheumatoid nodules 
  B. Neurofibromas (von Recklinghausen's disease) 
  C. Angiofibromas (tuberous sclerosis, MEN syndrome, type 1) 
  D. Neuromas (MEN syndrome, type 2b) 
  E. Adnexal tumors 
    1. Basal cell carcinomas (nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome) 
    2. Tricholemmomas (Cowden disease) 
  F. Osteomas (Gardner syndrome) 
  G. Primary cutaneous disorders 
    1. Epidermal inclusion cystsa
  
    2. Lipomas 
III. Pink/translucentb
  
  A. Amyloidosis 
  B. Papular mucinosis 
IV. Yellow 
  A. Xanthomas 
  B. Tophi 
  C. Necrobiosis lipoidica 
  D. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum 
  E. Sebaceous adenomas (Torre syndrome) 
V. Redb
  
  A. Papules 
    1. Angiokeratomas (Fabry disease) 
    2. Bacillary angiomatosis (primarily in AIDS) 
  B. Papules/plaques 
    1. Cutaneous lupus 
    2. Lymphoma cutis 
    3. Leukemia cutis 
    4. Sweet syndrome 
  C. Nodules 
    1. Panniculitis 
    2. Cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa 
    3. Systemic vasculitis 
  D. Primary cutaneous disorders 
    1. Arthropod bites 
    2. Cherry hemangiomas 
    3. Infections, e.g., erysipelas, sporotrichosis 
    4. Polymorphous light eruption 
    5. Lymphocytoma cutis (pseudolymphoma) 
VI. Red-brownb
  
  A. Sarcoidosis 
  B. Sweet's syndrome 
  C. Urticaria pigmentosa 
  D. Erythema elevatum diutinum (chronic leukocytoclastic vasculitis) 
  E. Lupus vulgaris 
VII. Blueb
  
  A. Venous malformations (e.g., blue rubber bleb syndrome) 
  B. Primary cutaneous disorders 
    1. Venous lake 
    2. Blue nevus 
VIII. Violaceous 
  A. Lupus pernio (sarcoidosis) 
  B. Lymphoma cutis 
  C. Cutaneous lupus 
IX. Purple 
  A. Kaposi's sarcoma 
  B. Angiosarcoma 
  C. Palpable purpura (see Table 53-16) 
X. Brown-blackc
  
XI. Any color 
  A. Metastases 
 


a If multiple with childhood onset, consider Gardner syndrome.

b May have darker hue in more darkly pigmented individuals.

c See also "Hyperpigmentation."

Abbreviation: MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.
 

White Lesions

In calcinosis cutis there are firm white to white-yellow papules with an irregular surface. When the contents are expressed, a chalky white material is seen. Dystrophic calcification is seen at sites of previous inflammation or damage to the skin. It develops in acne scars as well as on the distal extremities of patients with scleroderma and in the subcutaneous tissue and intermuscular fascial planes in DM. The latter is more extensive and is more commonly seen in children. An elevated calcium phosphate product, most commonly due to secondary hyperparathyroidism in the setting of renal failure, can lead to nodules of metastatic calcinosis cutis, which tend to be subcutaneous and periarticular. These patients can also develop calcification of muscular arteries and subsequent ischemic necrosis (calciphylaxis).

Skin-Colored Lesions

There are several types of skin-colored lesions, including epidermoid inclusion cysts, lipomas, rheumatoid nodules, neurofibromas, angiofibromas, neuromas, and adnexal tumors such as tricholemmomas. Both epidermoid inclusion cysts and lipomas are very common mobile subcutaneous nodules〞the former are rubbery and drain cheeselike material (sebum and keratin) if incised. Lipomas are firm and somewhat lobulated on palpation. When extensive facial epidermoid inclusion cysts develop during childhood or there is a family history of such lesions, the patient should be examined for other signs of Gardner syndrome, including osteomas and desmoid tumors. Rheumatoid nodules are firm 0.5- to 4-cm nodules that favor the extensor aspect of joints, especially the elbows. They are seen in ~20% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 6% of patients with Still's disease. Biopsies of the nodules show palisading granulomas. Similar lesions that are smaller and shorter-lived are seen in rheumatic fever.

Neurofibromas (benign Schwann cell tumors) are soft papules or nodules that exhibit the "button-hole" sign; that is, they invaginate into the skin with pressure in a manner similar to a hernia. Single lesions are seen in normal individuals, but multiple neurofibromas, usually in combination with six or more CALM measuring >1.5 cm (see "Hyperpigmentation," above), axillary freckling, and multiple Lisch nodules, are seen in von Recklinghausen's disease (NF type I; Chap. 379). In some patients, the neurofibromas are localized and unilateral due to somatic mosaicism.

Angiofibromas are firm pink to skin-colored papules that measure from 3 mm to a few centimeters in diameter. When multiple lesions are located on the central cheeks (adenoma sebaceum), the patient has tuberous sclerosis or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome, type 1. The former is an autosomal disorder due to mutations in two different genes, and the associated findings are discussed in the section on ash leaf spots as well as in Chap. 379.

Neuromas (benign proliferations of nerve fibers) are also firm, skin-colored papules. They are more commonly found at sites of amputation and as rudimentary supernumerary digits. However, when there are multiple neuromas on the eyelids, lips, distal tongue, and/or oral mucosa, the patient should be investigated for other signs of the MEN syndrome, type 2b. Associated findings include marfanoid habitus, protuberant lips, intestinal ganglioneuromas, and medullary thyroid carcinoma (>75% of patients; Chap. 351).

Adnexal tumors are derived from pluripotent cells of the epidermis that can differentiate toward hair, sebaceous, apocrine, or eccrine glands or remain undifferentiated. Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) are examples of adnexal tumors that have little or no evidence of differentiation. Clinically, they are translucent papules with rolled borders, telangiectasias, and central erosion. BCCs commonly arise in sun-damaged skin of the head and neck as well as the upper trunk. When a patient has multiple BCCs, especially prior to age 30, the possibility of the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome should be raised. It is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and is associated with jaw cysts, palmar and plantar pits, frontal bossing, medulloblastomas, and calcification of the falx cerebri and diaphragma sellae. Tricholemmomas are also skin-colored adnexal tumors but differentiate toward hair follicles and can have a wartlike appearance. The presence of multiple tricholemmomas on the face and cobblestoning of the oral mucosa points to the diagnosis of Cowden disease (multiple hamartoma syndrome) due to mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)  gene. Internal organ involvement (in decreasing order of frequency) includes fibrocystic disease and carcinoma of the breast, adenomas and carcinomas of the thyroid, and gastrointestinal polyposis. Keratoses of the palms, soles, and dorsal aspect of the hands are also seen.

Pink Lesions

The cutaneous lesions associated with primary systemic amyloidosis are often pink in color and translucent. Common locations are the face, especially the periorbital and perioral regions, and flexural areas. On biopsy, homogeneous deposits of amyloid are seen in the dermis and in the walls of blood vessels; the latter lead to an increase in vessel wall fragility. As a result, petechiae and purpura develop in clinically normal skin as well as in lesional skin following minor trauma, hence the term pinch purpura. Amyloid deposits are also seen in the striated muscle of the tongue and result in macroglossia.

Even though specific mucocutaneous lesions are rarely seen in secondary amyloidosis and are present in only ~30% of the patients with primary amyloidosis, a rapid diagnosis of systemic amyloidosis can be made by an examination of abdominal subcutaneous fat. By special staining, deposits are seen around blood vessels or individual fat cells in 40每50% of patients. There are also three forms of amyloidosis that are limited to the skin and that should not be construed as cutaneous lesions of systemic amyloidosis. They are macular amyloidosis (upper back), lichenoid amyloidosis (usually lower extremities), and nodular amyloidosis. In macular and lichenoid amyloidosis, the deposits are composed of altered epidermal keratin. Early-onset macular and lichenoid amyloidosis have been associated with MEN syndrome, type 2a.

Patients with multicentric reticulohistiocytosis also have pink-colored papules and nodules on the face and mucous membranes as well as on the extensor surface of the hands and forearms. They have a polyarthritis that can mimic rheumatoid arthritis clinically. On histologic examination, the papules have characteristic giant cells that are not seen in biopsies of rheumatoid nodules. Pink to skin-colored papules that are firm, 2每5 mm in diameter, and often in a linear arrangement are seen in patients with papular mucinosis. This disease is also referred to as generalizedlichen myxedematosus or scleromyxedema. The latter name comes from the induration of the face and extremities that may accompany the papular eruption. Biopsy specimens of the papules show localized mucin deposition, and serum protein electrophoresis and/or immunofixation electrophoresis demonstrates a monoclonal spike of IgG, usually with a  light chain.

Yellow Lesions

Several systemic disorders are characterized by yellow-colored cutaneous papules or plaques〞hyperlipidemia (xanthomas), gout (tophi), diabetes (necrobiosis lipoidica), pseudoxanthoma elasticum, and Torre syndrome (sebaceous tumors). Eruptive xanthomas are the most common form of xanthomas and are associated with hypertriglyceridemia (types I, III, IV, and V). Crops of yellow papules with erythematous halos occur primarily on the extensor surfaces of the extremities and the buttocks, and they spontaneously involute with a fall in serum triglycerides. Increased -lipoproteins (primarily types II and III) result in one or more of the following types of xanthoma: xanthelasma, tendon xanthomas, and plane xanthomas. Xanthelasma are found on the eyelids, whereas tendon xanthomas are frequently associated with the Achilles and extensor finger tendons; plane xanthomas are flat and favor the palmar creases, face, upper trunk, and scars. Tuberous xanthomas are frequently associated with hypertriglyceridemia, but they are also seen in patients with hypercholesterolemia (type II) and are found most frequently over the large joints or hand. Biopsy specimens of xanthomas show collections of lipid-containing macrophages (foam cells).

Patients with several disorders, including biliary cirrhosis, can have a secondary form of hyperlipidemia with associated tuberous and planar xanthomas. However, patients with plasma cell dyscrasias have normolipemic flat xanthomas. This latter form of xanthoma may be 12 cm in diameter and is most frequently seen on the upper trunk or side of the neck. It is important to note that the most common setting for eruptive xanthomas is uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. The least specific sign for hyperlipidemia is xanthelasma, because at least 50% of the patients with this finding have normal lipid profiles.

In tophaceous gout, there are deposits of monosodium urate in the skin around the joints, particularly those of the hands and feet. Additional sites of tophi formation include the helix of the ear and the olecranon and prepatellar bursae. The lesions are firm, yellow in color, and occasionally discharge a chalky material. Their size varies from 1 mm to 7 cm, and the diagnosis can be established by polarization of the aspirated contents of a lesion. Lesions of necrobiosis lipoidica are found primarily on the shins (90%), and patients can have diabetes mellitus or develop it subsequently. Characteristic findings include a central yellow color, atrophy (transparency), telangiectasias, and a red to red-brown border. Ulcerations can also develop within the plaques. Biopsy specimens show necrobiosis of collagen and granulomatous inflammation.

In pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), due to mutations in the gene ABCC6, there is an abnormal deposition of calcium on the elastic fibers of the skin, eye, and blood vessels. In the skin, the flexural areas such as the neck, axillae, antecubital fossae, and inguinal area are the primary sites of involvement. Yellow papules coalesce to form reticulated plaques that have an appearance similar to that of plucked chicken skin. In severely affected skin, hanging, redundant folds develop. Biopsy specimens of involved skin show swollen and irregularly clumped elastic fibers with deposits of calcium. In the eye, the calcium deposits in Bruch's membrane lead to angioid streaks and choroiditis; in the arteries of the heart, kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and extremities, the deposits lead to angina, hypertension, gastrointestinal bleeding, and claudication, respectively. Long-term administration of d-penicillamine can lead to PXE-like skin changes as well as elastic fiber alterations in internal organs.

Adnexal tumors that have differentiated toward sebaceous glands include sebaceous adenoma, sebaceous carcinoma, and sebaceous hyperplasia. Except for sebaceous hyperplasia, which is commonly seen on the face, these tumors are fairly rare. Patients with Torre syndrome have one or more sebaceous adenoma(s), and they can also have sebaceous carcinomas and sebaceous hyperplasia as well as keratoacanthomas. The internal manifestations of Torre syndrome include multiple carcinomas of the gastrointestinal tract (primarily colon) as well as cancers of the larynx, genitourinary tract, and breast.

Red Lesions

Cutaneous lesions that are red in color have a wide variety of etiologies; in an attempt to simplify their identification, they will be subdivided into papules, papules/plaques, and subcutaneous nodules. Common red papules include arthropod bites and cherry hemangiomas; the latter are small, bright-red, dome-shaped papules that represent benign proliferation of capillaries. In patients with AIDS (see Chapter 189), the development of multiple red hemangioma-like lesions points to bacillary angiomatosis, and biopsy specimens show clusters of bacilli that stain positive with the Warthin-Starry stain; the pathogens have been identified as Bartonella henselae and B. quintana. Disseminated visceral disease is seen primarily in immunocompromised hosts but can occur in immunocompetent individuals.

Multiple angiokeratomas are seen in Fabry disease, an X-linked recessive lysosomal storage disease that is due to a deficiency of -galactosidase A. The lesions are red to red-blue in color and can be quite small in size (1每3 mm), with the most common location being the lower trunk. Associated findings include chronic renal failure, peripheral neuropathy, and corneal opacities (cornea verticillata). Electron photomicrographs of angiokeratomas and clinically normal skin demonstrate lamellar lipid deposits in fibroblasts, pericytes, and endothelial cells that are diagnostic of this disease. Widespread acute eruptions of erythematous papules are discussed in the section on exanthems.

There are several infectious diseases that present as erythematous papules or nodules in a lymphocutaneous or sporotrichoid pattern, i.e., in a linear arrangement along the lymphatic channels. The two most common etiologies are Sporothrix schenckii (sporotrichosis) and the atypical mycobacterium M. marinum. The organisms are introduced as a result of trauma, and a primary inoculation site is often seen in addition to the lymphatic nodules. Additional causes include Nocardia, Leishmania, and other dimorphic fungi; culture of lesional tissue will aid in the diagnosis.

The diseases that are characterized by erythematous plaques with scale are reviewed in the papulosquamous section, and the various forms of dermatitis are discussed in the section on erythroderma. Additional disorders in the differential diagnosis of red papules/plaques include erysipelas, polymorphous light eruption (PMLE), cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia (lymphocytoma cutis), cutaneous lupus, lymphoma cutis, and leukemia cutis. The first three diseases represent primary cutaneous disorders. PMLE is characterized by erythematous papules and plaques in a primarily sun-exposed distribution〞dorsum of the hand, extensor forearm, and upper trunk. Lesions follow exposure to UV-B and/or UV-A, and in higher latitudes, PMLE is most severe in the late spring and early summer. A process referred to as "hardening" occurs with continued UV exposure, and the eruption fades, but in temperate climates, it will recur in the spring. PMLE must be differentiated from cutaneous lupus, and this is accomplished by observation of the natural history, histologic examination, and direct immunofluorescence of the lesions. Cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia (pseudolymphoma) is a benign polyclonal proliferation of lymphocytes in the skin that presents as infiltrated pink-red to red-purple papules and plaques; it must be distinguished from lymphoma cutis.

Several types of red plaques are seen in patients with systemic lupus, including (1) erythematous urticarial plaques across the cheeks and nose in the classic butterfly rash; (2) erythematous discoid lesions with fine or "carpet-tack" scale, telangiectasias, central hypopigmentation, peripheral hyperpigmentation, follicular plugging, and atrophy located on the face, scalp, external ears, arms, and upper trunk; and (3) psoriasiform or annular lesions of subacute cutaneous lupus with hypopigmented centers located primarily on the extensor arms and upper trunk. Additional mucocutaneous findings include (1) a violaceous flush on the face and V of the neck; (2) photosensitivity; (3) urticarial vasculitis (see "Urticaria," above); (4) lupus panniculitis (see below); (5) diffuse alopecia; (6) alopecia secondary to discoid lesions; (7) periungual telangiectasias and erythema; (8) EM-like lesions that may become bullous; (9) oral ulcers; and (10) distal ulcerations secondary to Raynaud's phenomenon, vasculitis, or livedoid vasculopathy. Patients with only discoid lesions usually have the form of lupus that is limited to the skin. However, 2每10% of these patients eventually develop systemic lupus. Direct immunofluorescence of involved skin shows deposits of IgG or IgM and C3 in a granular distribution along the dermal-epidermal junction.

In lymphoma cutis, there is a proliferation of malignant lymphocytes in the skin, and the clinical appearance resembles that of cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia〞infiltrated pink-red to red-purple papules and plaques. Lymphoma cutis can occur anywhere on the surface of the skin, whereas the sites of predilection for lymphocytomas include the malar ridge, tip of the nose, and earlobes. Patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphomas have specific cutaneous lesions more often than those with Hodgkin's disease, and, occasionally, the skin nodules precede the development of extracutaneous non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or represent the only site of involvement (e.g., primary cutaneous B cell lymphoma). Arcuate lesions are sometimes seen in lymphoma and lymphocytoma cutis as well as in CTCL. Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma that develops in association with HTLV-1 infection is characterized by cutaneous plaques, hypercalcemia, and circulating CD25+ lymphocytes. Leukemia cutis has the same appearance as lymphoma cutis, and specific lesions are seen more commonly in monocytic leukemias than in lymphocytic or granulocytic leukemias. Cutaneous chloromas (granulocytic sarcomas) may precede the appearance of circulating blasts in acute myelogenous leukemia and, as such, represent a form of aleukemic leukemia cutis.

Common causes of erythematous subcutaneous nodules include inflamed epidermoid inclusion cysts, acne cysts, and furuncles. Panniculitis, an inflammation of the fat, also presents as subcutaneous nodules and is frequently a sign of systemic disease. There are several forms of panniculitis, including erythema nodosum, erythema induratum/nodular vasculitis, lupus profundus, lipodermatosclerosis, 1-antitrypsin deficiency, factitial, and fat necrosis secondary to pancreatic disease. Except for erythema nodosum, these lesions may break down and ulcerate or heal with a scar. The shin is the most common location for the nodules of erythema nodosum, whereas the calf is the most common location for lesions of erythema induratum. In erythema nodosum, the nodules are initially red but then develop a blue color as they resolve. Patients with erythema nodosum but no underlying systemic illness can still have fever, malaise, leukocytosis, arthralgias, and/or arthritis. However, the possibility of an underlying illness should be excluded, and the most common associations are streptococcal infections, upper respiratory viral infections, sarcoidosis, and inflammatory bowel disease in addition to drugs (oral contraceptives, sulfonamides, penicillins, bromides, iodides). Less common associations include bacterial gastroenteritis (Yersinia, Salmonella) and coccidioidomycosis followed by tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, brucellosis, and infections with Chlamydophila pneumoniae or Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, or hepatitis B virus.

Erythema induratum and nodular vasculitis have overlapping features clinically and histologically, and whether they represent two separate entities or the ends of a single disease spectrum is a point of debate; in general, the latter is usually idiopathic and the former is associated with the presence of M. tuberculosis DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) within skin lesions. The lesions of lupus panniculitis are found primarily on the cheeks, upper arms, and buttocks (sites of abundant fat) and are seen in both the cutaneous and systemic forms of lupus. The overlying skin may be normal, erythematous, or have the changes of discoid lupus. The subcutaneous fat necrosis that is associated with pancreatic disease is presumably secondary to circulating lipases and is seen in patients with pancreatic carcinoma as well as in patients with acute and chronic pancreatitis. In this disorder, there may be an associated arthritis, fever, and inflammation of visceral fat. Histologic examination of deep incisional biopsy specimens will aid in the diagnosis of the particular type of panniculitis.

Subcutaneous erythematous nodules are also seen in cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) and as a manifestation of systemic vasculitis, e.g., systemic PAN, allergic granulomatosis, or granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) (Chap. 326). Cutaneous PAN presents with painful subcutaneous nodules and ulcers within a red-purple, netlike pattern of livedo reticularis. The latter is due to slowed blood flow through the superficial horizontal venous plexus. The majority of lesions are found on the lower extremity, and while arthralgias and myalgias may accompany cutaneous PAN, there is no evidence of systemic involvement. In both the cutaneous and systemic forms of vasculitis, skin biopsy specimens of the associated nodules will show the changes characteristic of a vasculitis; the size of the vessel involved will depend on the particular disease.

Red-Brown Lesions

The cutaneous lesions in sarcoidosis (Chap. 329) are classically red to red-brown in color, and with diascopy (pressure with a glass slide), a yellow-brown residual color is observed that is secondary to the granulomatous infiltrate. The waxy papules and plaques may be found anywhere on the skin, but the face is the most common location. Usually there are no surface changes, but occasionally the lesions will have scale. Biopsy specimens of the papules show "naked" granulomas in the dermis, i.e., granulomas surrounded by a minimal number of lymphocytes. Other cutaneous findings in sarcoidosis include annular lesions with an atrophic or scaly center, papules within scars, hypopigmented macules and papules, alopecia, acquired ichthyosis, erythema nodosum, and lupus pernio (see below).

The differential diagnosis of sarcoidosis includes foreign-body granulomas produced by chemicals such as beryllium and zirconium, late secondary syphilis, and lupus vulgaris. Lupus vulgaris is a form of cutaneous tuberculosis that is seen in previously infected and sensitized individuals. There is often underlying active tuberculosis elsewhere, usually in the lungs or lymph nodes. Lesions occur primarily in the head and neck region and are red-brown plaques with a yellow-brown color on diascopy. Secondary scarring and squamous cell carcinomas can develop within the plaques. Cultures or PCR analysis of the lesions should be performed because it is rare for the acid-fast stain to show bacilli within the dermal granulomas.

Sweets syndrome is characterized by red to red-brown plaques and nodules that are frequently painful and occur primarily on the head, neck, and upper (and, less often, lower) extremities. The patients also have fever, neutrophilia, and a dense dermal infiltrate of neutrophils in the lesions. In ~10% of the patients, there is an associated malignancy, most commonly acute myelogenous leukemia. Sweet's syndrome has also been reported with inflammatory bowel disease, systemic lupus, and solid tumors (primarily of the genitourinary tract) as well as drugs [e.g., all-trans-retinoic acid, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)]. The differential diagnosis includes neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis; atypical forms of pyoderma gangrenosum; and, occasionally, cellulitis. Extracutaneous sites of involvement include joints, muscles, eye, kidney (proteinuria, occasionally glomerulonephritis), and lung (neutrophilic infiltrates). The idiopathic form of Sweet's syndrome is seen more often in women, following a respiratory tract infection.

A generalized distribution of red-brown macules and papules is seen in the form of mastocytosis known as urticaria pigmentosa (Chap. 317). Each lesion represents a collection of mast cells in the dermis, with hyperpigmentation of the overlying epidermis. Stimuli such as rubbing cause these mast cells to degranulate, and this leads to the formation of localized urticaria (Darier's sign). Additional symptoms can result from mast cell degranulation and include headache, flushing, diarrhea, and pruritus. Mast cells also infiltrate various organs such as the liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal tract, and accumulations of mast cells in the bones may produce either osteosclerotic or osteolytic lesions on radiographs. In the majority of these patients, however, the internal involvement remains indolent. A subtype of chronic cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis, erythema elevatum diutinum (EED), also presents with papules that are red-brown in color. The papules coalesce into plaques on the extensor surfaces of knees, elbows, and the small joints of the hand. Flares of EED have been associated with streptococcal infections.

Blue Lesions

Lesions that are blue in color are the result of either vascular ectasias and tumors or melanin pigment in the dermis. Venous lakes (ectasias) are compressible dark-blue lesions that are found commonly in the head and neck region. Venous malformations are also compressible blue papulonodules and plaques that can occur anywhere on the body, including the oral mucosa. When there are multiple rather than single congenital lesions, the patient may have the blue rubber bleb syndrome or Maffucci's syndrome. Patients with the blue rubber bleb syndrome also have vascular anomalies of the gastrointestinal tract that may bleed, whereas patients with Maffucci's syndrome have associated dyschondroplasia and osteochondromas. Blue nevi (moles) are seen when there are collections of pigment-producing nevus cells in the dermis. These benign papular lesions are dome-shaped and occur most commonly on the dorsum of the hand or foot or in the head and neck region.

Violaceous Lesions

Violaceous papules and plaques are seen in lupus pernio, lymphoma cutis, and cutaneous lupus. Lupus pernio is a particular type of sarcoidosis that involves the tip and alar rim of the nose as well as the earlobes, with lesions that are violaceous in color rather than red-brown. This form of sarcoidosis is associated with involvement of the upper respiratory tract. The plaques of lymphoma cutis and cutaneous lupus may be red or violaceous in color and were discussed above.

Purple Lesions

Purple-colored papules and plaques are seen in vascular tumors, such as Kaposis sarcoma (Chap. 189) and angiosarcoma, and when there is extravasation of red blood cells into the skin in association with inflammation, as in palpable purpura (see "Purpura," below). Patients with congenital or acquired AV fistulas and venous hypertension can develop purple papules on the lower extremities that can resemble Kaposi's sarcoma clinically and histologically; this condition is referred to as pseudo-Kaposi sarcoma (acral angiodermatitis). Angiosarcoma is found most commonly on the scalp and face of elderly patients or within areas of chronic lymphedema and presents as purple papules and plaques. In the head and neck region, the tumor often extends beyond the clinically defined borders and may be accompanied by facial edema.

Brown and Black Lesions

Brown- and black-colored papules are reviewed in "Hyperpigmentation," above.

Cutaneous Metastases

These are discussed last because they can have a wide range of colors. Most commonly, they present as either firm, skin-colored subcutaneous nodules or firm, red to red-brown papulonodules. The lesions of lymphoma cutis range from pink-red to plum in color, whereas metastatic melanoma can be pink, blue, or black in color. Cutaneous metastases develop from hematogenous or lymphatic spread and are most often due to the following primary carcinomas: in men, melanoma, oropharynx, lung, and colon; and in women, breast, melanoma, and ovary. These metastatic lesions may be the initial presentation of the carcinoma, especially when the primary site is the lung.
 
Purpura

(Table 53-16)Purpura are seen when there is an extravasation of red blood cells into the dermis and, as a result, the lesions do not blanch with pressure. This is in contrast to those erythematous or violet-colored lesions that are due to localized vasodilatation〞they do blanch with pressure. Purpura (3 mm) and petechiae (2 mm) are divided into two major groups: palpable and nonpalpable. The most frequent causes of nonpalpable petechiae and purpura are primary cutaneous disorders such as trauma, solar (actinic) purpura, and capillaritis. Less common causes are steroid purpura and livedoid vasculopathy (see "Ulcers," below). Solar purpura are seen primarily on the extensor forearms, while steroid purpura secondary to potent topical glucocorticoids or endogenous or exogenous Cushing's syndrome can be more widespread. In both cases, there is alteration of the supporting connective tissue that surrounds the dermal blood vessels. In contrast, the petechiae that result from capillaritis are found primarily on the lower extremities. In capillaritis, there is an extravasation of erythrocytes as a result of perivascular lymphocytic inflammation. The petechiae are bright red, 1每2 mm in size, and scattered within annular or coin-shaped yellow-brown macules. The yellow-brown color is caused by hemosiderin deposits within the dermis.

Table 53-16 Causes of Purpura

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Nonpalpable 
    1. Trauma 
    2. Solar (actinic, senile) purpura 
    3. Steroid purpura 
    4. Capillaritis 
    5. Livedoid vasculopathy in the setting of venous hypertensiona
  
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Nonpalpable 
    1. Clotting disturbances 
       a. Thrombocytopenia (including ITP) 
       b. Abnormal platelet function 
       c. Clotting factor defects 
    2. Vascular fragility 
       a. Amyloidosis 
       b. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
       c. Scurvy 
    3. Thrombi 
       a. Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
       b. Monoclonal cryoglobulinemia 
       c. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis 
       d. Thrombocytosis 
       e. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
       f. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome 
       g. Warfarin reaction 
       h. Homozygousprotein C or protein S deficiency 
    4. Emboli 
       a. Cholesterol 
       b. Fat 
    5. Possible immune complex 
       a. Gardner-Diamond syndrome (autoerythrocyte sensitivity) 
       b. Waldenstr?m's hypergammaglobulinemic purpura 
  B. Palpable 
    1. Vasculitis 
       a. Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis 
       b. Polyarteritis nodosa 
    2. Embolib
  
       a. Acute meningococcemia 
       b. Disseminated gonococcal infection 
       c. Rocky Mountain spotted fever 
       d. Ecthyma gangrenosum 
 


a Also associated with underlying disorders that lead to hypercoagulability, e.g. factor V Leiden, protein C dysfunction/deficiency.

b Bacterial, fungal, or parasitic.

Abbreviation: ITP, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
 

Systemic causes of nonpalpable purpura fall into several categories, and those secondary to clotting disturbances and vascular fragility will be discussed first. The former group includes thrombocytopenia (Chap. 115), abnormal platelet function as is seen in uremia, and clotting factor defects. The initial site of presentation for thrombocytopenia-induced petechiae is the distal lower extremity. Capillary fragility leads to nonpalpable purpura in patients with systemic amyloidosis (see "Papulonodular Skin Lesions," above), disorders of collagen production such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and scurvy. In scurvy, there are flattened corkscrew hairs with surrounding hemorrhage on the lower extremities, in addition to gingivitis. Vitamin C is a cofactor for lysyl hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in the posttranslational modification of procollagen that is necessary for cross-link formation.

In contrast to the previous group of disorders, the purpura (noninflammatory with a retiform outline) seen in the following group of diseases are associated with thrombi formation within vessels. It is important to note that these thrombi are demonstrable in skin biopsy specimens. This group of disorders includes disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), monoclonal cryoglobulinemia, thrombocytosis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and reactions to warfarin and heparin (heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis). DIC is triggered by several types of infection (gram-negative, gram-positive, viral, and rickettsial) as well as by tissue injury and neoplasms. Widespread purpura and hemorrhagic infarcts of the distal extremities are seen. Similar lesions are found in purpura fulminans, which is a form of DIC associated with fever and hypotension that occurs more commonly in children following an infectious illness such as varicella, scarlet fever, or an upper respiratory tract infection. In both disorders, hemorrhagic bullae can develop in involved skin.

Monoclonal cryoglobulinemia is associated with multiple myeloma, Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and lymphoma. Purpura, primarily of the lower extremities, and hemorrhagic infarcts of the fingers and toes are seen in these patients. Exacerbations of disease activity can follow cold exposure or an increase in serum viscosity. Biopsy specimens show precipitates of the cryoglobulin within dermal vessels. Similar deposits have been found in the lung, brain, and renal glomeruli. Patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura can also have hemorrhagic infarcts as a result of intravascular thromboses. Additional signs include thrombocytopenic purpura, fever, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.

Administration of warfarin can result in painful areas of erythema that become purpuric and then necrotic with an adherent black eschar; the condition is referred to as warfarin-induced necrosis. This reaction is seen more often in women and in areas with abundant subcutaneous fat〞breasts, abdomen, buttocks, thighs, and calves. The erythema and purpura develop between the third and tenth day of therapy, most likely as a result of a transient imbalance in the levels of anticoagulant and procoagulant vitamin K每dependent factors. Continued therapy does not exacerbate preexisting lesions, and patients with an inherited or acquired deficiency of protein C are at increased risk for this particular reaction as well as for purpura fulminans.

Purpura secondary to cholesterol emboli are usually seen on the lower extremities of patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease. They often follow anticoagulant therapy or an invasive vascular procedure such as an arteriogram but also occur spontaneously from disintegration of atheromatous plaques. Associated findings include livedo reticularis, gangrene, cyanosis, and ischemic ulcerations. Multiple step sections of the biopsy specimen may be necessary to demonstrate the cholesterol clefts within the vessels. Petechiae are also an important sign of fat embolism and occur primarily on the upper body 2每3 days after a major injury. By using special fixatives, the emboli can be demonstrated in biopsy specimens of the petechiae. Emboli of tumor or thrombus are seen in patients with atrial myxomas and marantic endocarditis.

In the Gardner-Diamond syndrome (autoerythrocyte sensitivity), female patients develop large ecchymoses within areas of painful, warm erythema. Intradermal injections of autologous erythrocytes or phosphatidyl serine derived from the red cell membrane can reproduce the lesions in some patients; however, there are instances where a reaction is seen at an injection site of the forearm but not in the midback region. The latter has led some observers to view Gardner-Diamond syndrome as a cutaneous manifestation of severe emotional stress. More recently, the possibility of platelet dysfunction (as assessed via aggregation studies) has been raised. Waldenstr?ms hypergammaglobulinemic purpura is a chronic disorder characterized by petechiae on the lower extremities. There are circulating complexes of IgG每anti-IgG molecules, and exacerbations are associated with prolonged standing or walking.

Palpable purpura are further subdivided into vasculitic and embolic. In the group of vasculitic disorders, cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis, also known as leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LCV), is the one most commonly associated with palpable purpura (Chap. 326). Underlying etiologies include drugs (e.g., antibiotics), infections (e.g., hepatitis C virus), and autoimmune connective tissue diseases (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, Sj?gren syndrome, lupus). Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura (HSP) is a subtype of acute LCV that is seen primarily in children and adolescents following an upper respiratory infection. The majority of lesions are found on the lower extremities and buttocks. Systemic manifestations include fever, arthralgias (primarily of the knees and ankles), abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, and nephritis. Direct immunofluorescence examination shows deposits of IgA within dermal blood vessel walls. Renal disease is of particular concern in adults with HSP. In polyarteritis nodosa, specific cutaneous lesions result from a vasculitis of arterial vessels (arteritis) or there may be an associated LCV. Arteritis leads to an infarct of the skin, and this explains the irregular outline of the purpura (see below).

Several types of infectious emboli can give rise to palpable purpura. These embolic lesions are usually irregular in outline as opposed to the lesions of LCV, which are circular in outline. The irregular outline is indicative of a cutaneous infarct, and the size corresponds to the area of skin that received its blood supply from that particular arteriole or artery. The palpable purpura in LCV are circular because the erythrocytes simply diffuse out evenly from the postcapillary venules as a result of inflammation. Infectious emboli are most commonly due to gram-negative cocci (meningococcus, gonococcus), gram-negative rods (Enterobacteriaceae), and gram-positive cocci (Staphylococcus). Additional causes include Rickettsia and, in immunocompromised patients, Candida and other opportunistic fungi.

The embolic lesions in acute meningococcemia are found primarily on the trunk, lower extremities, and sites of pressure, and a gunmetal-gray color often develops within them. Their size varies from a few millimeters to several centimeters, and the organisms can be cultured from the lesions. Associated findings include a preceding upper respiratory tract infection; fever; meningitis; DIC; and, in some patients, a deficiency of the terminal components of complement. In disseminated gonococcal infection (arthritis-dermatitis syndrome), a small number of papules and vesicopustules with central purpura or hemorrhagic necrosis are found on the distal extremities. Additional symptoms include arthralgias, tenosynovitis, and fever. To establish the diagnosis, a Gram stain of these lesions should be performed. Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a tick-borne disease that is caused by R. rickettsii. A several-day history of fever, chills, severe headache, and photophobia precedes the onset of the cutaneous eruption. The initial lesions are erythematous macules and papules on the wrists, ankles, palms, and soles. With time, the lesions spread centripetally and become purpuric.

Lesions of ecthyma gangrenosum begin as edematous, erythematous papules or plaques and then develop central purpura and necrosis. Bullae formation also occurs in these lesions, and they are frequently found in the girdle region. The organism that is classically associated with ecthyma gangrenosum is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but other gram-negative rods such as Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and Serratia can produce similar lesions. In immunocompromised hosts, the list of potential pathogens is expanded to include Candida and other opportunistic fungi (e.g., Aspergillus, Fusarium).
 
Ulcers

The approach to the patient with a cutaneous ulcer is outlined in Table 53-17. Peripheral vascular diseases of the extremities are reviewed in Chap. 249, as is Raynaud's phenomenon.

Table 53-17 Causes of Mucocutaneous Ulcers

 
 
I. Primary cutaneous disorders 
  A. Peripheral vascular disease (Chap. 249) 
    1. Venous 
    2. Arteriala  
  B. Livedoid vasculopathy in the setting of venous hypertensionb  
  C. Squamous cell carcinoma, e.g., within scars, basal cell carcinomas 
  D. Infections, e.g., ecthyma caused by Streptococcus (Chap. 136) 
  E. Physical, e.g., trauma, pressure 
  F. Drugs, e.g., hydroxyurea 
II. Systemic diseases 
  A. Lower legs 
    1. Small-vessel and medium-vessel vasculitisc  
    2. Hemoglobinopathies (Chap. 104) 
    3. Cryoglobulinemia,c cryofibrinogenemia  
    4. Cholesterol embolic  
    5. Necrobiosis lipoidicad  
    6. Antiphospholipid syndrome (Chap. 116) 
    7. Neuropathice (Chap. 344) 
    8. Panniculitis 
    9. Kaposi's sarcoma, acral angiodermatitis 
  B. Hands and feet 
    1. Raynaud's phenomenon (Chap. 249) 
    2. Buerger disease 
  C. Generalized 
    1. Pyoderma gangrenosum, but most commonly legs 
    2. Calciphylaxis (Chap. 353) 
    3. Infections, e.g., dimorphic fungi, leishmaniasis 
    4. Lymphoma 
  D. Face, especially perioral, and anogenital 
    1. Chronic herpes simplexf  
III. Mucosal 
  A. Beh?et's syndrome (Chap. 327) 
  B. Erythema multiforme major, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, TEN 
  C. Primary blistering disorders (Chap. 54) 
  D. Lupus erythematosus, lichen planus 
  E. Inflammatory bowel disease 
  F. Acute HIV infection 
  G. Reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter's syndrome) 
 


a Underlying atherosclerosis.

b Also associated with underlying disorders that lead to hypercoagulability, e.g., factor V Leiden, protein C dysfunction/deficiency, anti-phospholipid antibodies.

c Reviewed in section on Purpura.

d Reviewed in section on Papulonodular Skin Lesions.

e Favors plantar surface of the foot.

f Sign of immunosuppression.

Abbreviation: TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.
 

Livedoid vasculopathy (livedoid vasculitis; atrophie blanche) represents a combination of a vasculopathy plus intravascular thrombosis. Purpuric lesions and livedo reticularis are found in association with painful ulcerations of the lower extremities. These ulcers are often slow to heal, but when they do, irregularly shaped white scars form. The majority of cases are secondary to venous hypertension, but possible underlying illnesses include cryofibrinogenemia and disorders of hypercoagulability, e.g., the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (Chaps. 117 and 320 ).

In pyoderma gangrenosum, the border of untreated ulcers has a characteristic appearance consisting of an undermined necrotic violaceous edge and a peripheral erythematous halo. The ulcers often begin as pustules that then expand rather rapidly to a size as large as 20 cm. Although these lesions are most commonly found on the lower extremities, they can arise anywhere on the surface of the body, including sites of trauma (pathergy). An estimated 30每50% of cases are idiopathic, and the most common associated disorders are ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. Less commonly, pyoderma gangrenosum is associated with seropositive rheumatoid arthritis, acute and chronic myelogenous leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, and myelofibrosis. Additional findings in these patients, even those with idiopathic disease, are cutaneous anergy and a monoclonal gammopathy, usually IgA. Because the histology of pyoderma gangrenosum may be nonspecific (dermal infiltrate of neutrophils when in untreated state), the diagnosis requires clinicopathologic correlation, in particular, the exclusion of similar-appearing ulcers such as necrotizing vasculitis, Meleney's ulcer (synergistic infection at a site of trauma or surgery), dimorphic fungi, cutaneous amebiasis, spider bites, and factitial. In the myeloproliferative disorders, the ulcers may be more superficial with a pustulobullous border, and these lesions provide a connection between classic pyoderma gangrenosum and acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome).
 
Fever and Rash

The major considerations in a patient with a fever and a rash are inflammatory diseases versus infectious diseases. In the hospital setting, the most common scenario is a patient who has a drug rash plus a fever secondary to an underlying infection. However, it should be emphasized that a drug reaction can lead to both a cutaneous eruption and a fever ("drug fever"), especially in the setting of DRESS or AGEP. Additional inflammatory diseases that are often associated with a fever include pustular psoriasis, erythroderma, and Sweet's syndrome. Lyme disease, secondary syphilis, and viral and bacterial exanthems (see "Exanthems," above) are examples of infectious diseases that produce a rash and a fever. Lastly, it is important to determine whether or not the cutaneous lesions represent septic emboli (see "Purpura," above). Such lesions usually have evidence of ischemia in the form of purpura, necrosis, or impending necrosis (gunmetal-gray color). In the patient with thrombocytopenia, however, purpura can be seen in inflammatory reactions such as morbilliform drug eruptions and infectious lesions.
 
Further Readings

Bolognia JL et al: Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2008 

 
Braverman IM: Skin Signs of Systemic Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998 

 
Callen JP et al: Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2009 

 
Mckee PH et al: Pathology of the Skin, 3rd ed. London, Elsevier, 2005 

 
Spitz JL: Genodermatoses: A Clinical Guide to Genetic Skin Disorders, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004 

 
 

^^
Immunologically Mediated Skin Diseases: Introduction

A number of immunologically mediated skin diseases and immunologically mediated systemic disorders with cutaneous manifestations are now recognized as distinct entities with consistent clinical, histologic, and immunopathologic findings. Clinically, these disorders are characterized by morbidity (pain, pruritus, disfigurement) and, in some instances, by mortality (largely due to loss of epidermal barrier function and/or secondary infection). The major features of the more common immunologically mediated skin diseases are summarized in this chapter (Table 54-1) as are the systemic disorders with cutaneous manifestations.

Table 54-1 Immunologically Mediated Blistering Diseases

 
 
Disease Clinical Histology Immunopathology Autoantigensa  
Pemphigus foliaceus Crusts and shallow erosions on scalp, central face, upper chest, and back Acantholytic blister formed in superficial layer of epidermis Cell surface deposits of IgG on keratinocytes Dsg1 
Pemphigus vulgaris Flaccid blisters, denuded skin, oromucosal lesions Acantholytic blister formed in suprabasal layer of epidermis Cell surface deposits of IgG on keratinocytes Dsg3 (plus Dsg1 in patients with skin involvement) 
Paraneoplastic pemphigus Painful stomatitis with papulosquamous or lichenoid eruptions that progress to blisters Acantholysis, keratinocyte necrosis and vacuolar interface dermatitis Cell surface deposits of IgG and C3 on keratinocytes and (variably) similar immunoreactants in epidermal BMZ Plakin protein family members and desmosomal cadherins (see text for details) 
Bullous pemphigoid Large tense blisters on flexor surfaces and trunk Subepidermal blister with eosinophil-rich infiltrate Linear band of IgG and/or C3 in epidermal BMZ BPAG1, BPAG2 
Pemphigoid gestationis Pruritic, urticarial plaques, rimmed by vesicles and bullae on the trunk and extremities Teardrop-shaped, subepidermal blisters in dermal papillae; eosinophil-rich infiltrate Linear band of C3 in epidermal BMZ BPAG2 (plus BPAG1 in some patients) 
Linear IgA disease Pruritic small papules on extensor surfaces; occasionally larger, arciform blisters Subepidermal blister with neutrophil-rich infiltrate Linear band of IgA in epidermal BMZ BPAG2 (see text for specific details) 
Cicatricial pemphigoid Erosive and/or blistering lesions of mucous membranes and possibly the skin; scarring of some sites Subepidermal blister that may or may not include a leukocytic infiltrate Linear band of IgG, IgA, and/or C3 in epidermal BMZ BPAG2, laminin-332, or others 
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita Blisters, erosions, scars, and milia on sites exposed to trauma; widespread, inflammatory, tense blisters may be seen initially Subepidermal blister that may or may not include a leukocytic infiltrate Linear band of IgG and/or C3 in epidermal BMZ Type VII collagen 
Dermatitis herpetiformis Extremely pruritic small papules and vesicles on elbows, knees, buttocks, and posterior neck Subepidermal blister with neutrophils in dermal papillae Granular deposits of IgA in dermal papillae Epidermal transglutaminase 
 


a Autoantigens bound by these patients' autoantibodies are defined as follows: Dsg1, desmoglein 1; Dsg3, desmoglein 3; BPAG1, bullous pemphigoid antigen 1; BPAG2, bullous pemphigoid antigen 2.

Abbreviation: BMZ, basement membrane zone.
 
 
Autoimmune Cutaneous Diseases

Pemphigus Vulgaris

Pemphigus refers to a group of autoantibody-mediated intraepidermal blistering diseases characterized by loss of cohesion between epidermal cells (a process termed acantholysis). Manual pressure to the skin of these patients may elicit the separation of the epidermis (Nikolsky's sign). This finding, while characteristic of pemphigus, is not specific to this group of disorders and is also seen in toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and a few other skin diseases.

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a mucocutaneous blistering disease that predominates in patients >40 years. PV typically begins on mucosal surfaces and often progresses to involve the skin. PV is characterized by fragile, flaccid blisters that rupture to produce extensive denudation of mucous membranes and skin (Fig. 54-1). PV typically involves the mouth, scalp, face, neck, axilla, groin, and trunk. PV may be associated with severe skin pain; some patients experience pruritus as well. Lesions usually heal without scarring, except at sites complicated by secondary infection or mechanically induced dermal wounds. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is usually present at sites of healed lesions for some time.

Figure 54-1

 
 
 
 
Pemphigus vulgaris. A. Pemphigus vulgaris demonstrating flaccid bullae that are easily ruptured, resulting in multiple erosions and crusted plaques. B. Pemphigus vulgaris almost invariably involves the oral mucosa and may present with erosions involving the gingiva, buccal mucosa, palate, posterior pharynx, or the tongue. (B, Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD;with permission.)
 
 

Biopsies of early lesions demonstrate intraepidermal vesicle formation secondary to loss of cohesion between epidermal cells (i.e., acantholytic blisters). Blister cavities contain acantholytic epidermal cells, which appear as round homogeneous cells containing hyperchromatic nuclei. Basal keratinocytes remain attached to the epidermal basement membrane; hence, blister formation is within the suprabasal portion of the epidermis. Lesional skin may contain focal collections of intraepidermal eosinophils within blister cavities; dermal alterations are slight, often limited to an eosinophil- predominant leukocytic infiltrate. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of lesional or intact patient skin shows deposits of IgG on the surface of keratinocytes; deposits of complement components are typically found in lesional but not uninvolved skin. Deposits of IgG on keratinocytes are derived from circulating autoantibodies directed against cell-surface autoantigens. Such circulating autoantibodies can be demonstrated in 80每90% of PV patients by indirect immunofluorescence microscopy; monkey esophagus is the optimal substrate for these studies. Patients with PV have IgG autoantibodies directed against desmogleins (Dsgs), transmembrane desmosomal glycoproteins that belong to the cadherin family of calcium-dependent adhesion molecules. Such autoantibodies can be precisely quantitated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Patients with early PV (i.e., mucosal disease) have IgG autoantibodies directed against Dsg3; patients with advanced PV (i.e., mucocutaneous disease) have IgG autoantibodies directed against both Dsg3 and Dsg1. Experimental studies have shown that autoantibodies from patients with PV are pathogenic (i.e., responsible for blister formation) and that their titer correlates with disease activity. Recent studies have shown that the anti-Dsg autoantibody profile in these patients' sera as well as the tissue distribution of Dsg3 and Dsg1 determine the site of blister formation in patients with pemphigus. Coexpression of Dsg3 and Dsg1 by epidermal cells protects against pathogenic IgG directed against either cadherin but not pathogenic autoantibodies directed against both.

PV can be life threatening. Prior to the availability of glucocorticoids, the mortality ranged from 60每90%; the current mortality is ~5%. Common causes of morbidity and mortality are infection and complications of treatment with glucocorticoids. Bad prognostic factors include advanced age, widespread involvement, and the requirement for high doses of glucocorticoids (with or without other immunosuppressive agents) for control of disease. The course of PV in individual patients is variable and difficult to predict. Some patients achieve remission, while others may require long-term treatment or succumb to complications of their disease or its treatment. The mainstay of treatment is systemic glucocorticoids. Patients with moderate to severe PV are usually started on prednisone, 1 mg/kg per day. If new lesions continue to appear after 1每2 weeks of treatment, the dose may need to be increased and/or combined with other immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine (2每2.5 mg/kg per d), mycophenolate mofetil (20每35 mg/kg per d), or cyclophosphamide (1每2 mg/kg per d). Patients with severe, treatment-resistant disease may derive benefit from plasmapheresis [six high-volume exchanges (i.e., 2每3 L per exchange) over ~2 weeks], IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) (2 g/kg over 3每5 days every 6每8 weeks), or rituximab (375 mg/m2 per week x 4, or 1,000 mg on days 1 and 15). It is important to bring severe or progressive disease under control quickly to lessen the severity and/or duration of this disorder. Accordingly, some have suggested that rituximab and daily glucocorticoids should be used early in PV patients to avert the development of treatment-resistant disease.

Pemphigus Foliaceus

Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is distinguished from PV by several features. In PF, acantholytic blisters are located high within the epidermis, usually just beneath the stratum corneum. Hence, PF is a more superficial blistering disease than PV. The distribution of lesions in the two disorders is much the same, except that in PF, mucous membranes are almost always spared. Patients with PF rarely demonstrate intact blisters but rather exhibit shallow erosions associated with erythema, scale, and crust formation. Mild cases of PF resemble severe seborrheic dermatitis; severe PF may cause extensive exfoliation. Sun exposure (ultraviolet irradiation) may be an aggravating factor. Fogo selvagem (FS), an endemic form of PF thought to develop as a consequence of environmental stimuli (e.g., insect bites), is found in south central rural Brazil as well as selected sites in Latin America and Tunisia.

Patients with PF have immunopathologic features in common with PV. Specifically, direct immunofluorescence microscopy of perilesional skin demonstrates IgG on the surface of keratinocytes. Similarly, patients with PF have circulating IgG autoantibodies directed against the surface of keratinocytes. In PF, autoantibodies are directed against Dsg1, a 160-kDa desmosomal cadherin. These autoantibodies can be quantitated by ELISA. As noted for PV, the autoantibody profile in patients with PF (i.e., anti-Dsg1 IgG) and the tissue distribution of this autoantigen (i.e., expression in oral mucosa that is compensated by coexpression of Dsg3) are thought to account for the distribution of lesions in this disease.

Although pemphigus has been associated with several autoimmune diseases, its association with thymoma and/or myasthenia gravis is particularly notable. To date, >30 cases of thymoma and/or myasthenia gravis have been reported in association with pemphigus, usually with PF. Patients may also develop pemphigus as a consequence of drug exposure; drug-induced pemphigus usually resembles PF rather than PV. Drugs containing a thiol group in their chemical structure (e.g., penicillamine, captopril, enalapril) are most commonly associated with drug-induced pemphigus. Nonthiol drugs linked to pemphigus include penicillins, cephalosporins, and piroxicam. It has been suggested that thiol- and nonthiol-containing drugs induce pemphigus via biochemical and immunologic mechanisms, respectively. Hence, the better prognosis upon drug withdrawal in cases of pemphigus induced by thiol-containing medications. Some cases of drug-induced pemphigus are durable and require treatment with systemic glucocorticoids and/or immunosuppressive agents.

PF is generally a less severe disease than PV and carries a better prognosis. Localized disease can sometimes be treated with topical or intralesional glucocorticoids; more active cases can usually be controlled with systemic glucocorticoids. Patients with severe, treatment-resistant disease may require more aggressive interventions as described above for patients with PV.

Paraneoplastic Pemphigus

Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is an autoimmune acantholytic mucocutaneous disease associated with an occult or confirmed neoplasm. Patients with PNP typically show painful mucosal erosive lesions in association with papulosquamous and/or lichenoid eruptions that often progress to blisters. Palm and sole involvement are common in these patients and raise the possibility that prior reports of neoplasia-associated erythema multiforme actually may have represented unrecognized cases of PNP. Biopsies of lesional skin from these patients show varying combinations of acantholysis, keratinocyte necrosis, and vacuolar-interface dermatitis. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of patient's skin shows deposits of IgG and complement on the surface of keratinocytes and (variably) similar immunoreactants in the epidermal basement membrane zone. Patients with PNP have IgG autoantibodies against cytoplasmic proteins that are members of the plakin family (e.g., desmoplakins I and II, bullous pemphigoid antigen 1, envoplakin, periplakin, and plectin) and cell-surface proteins that are members of the cadherin family (e.g., Dsg1 and Dsg3). Passive transfer studies have shown that autoantibodies from patients with PNP are pathogenic.

The predominant neoplasms associated with PNP are non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, thymoma, spindle cell tumors, Waldenstr?m's macroglobulinemia, and Castleman's disease; the latter is particularly common among children with PNP. Rare cases of seronegative PNP have been reported in patients with B cell malignancies previously treated with rituximab. In addition to severe skin lesions, many patients with PNP develop life-threatening bronchiolitis obliterans. PNP is generally resistant to conventional therapies (i.e., those used to treat PV); rarely patients may improve (or even remit) following ablation or removal of underlying neoplasms.

Bullous Pemphigoid

Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is a polymorphic autoimmune subepidermal blistering disease usually seen in the elderly. Initial lesions may consist of urticarial plaques; most patients eventually display tense blisters on either normal-appearing or erythematous skin (Fig. 54-2). The lesions are usually distributed over the lower abdomen, groin, and flexor surface of the extremities; oral mucosal lesions are found in some patients. Pruritus may be nonexistent or severe. As lesions evolve, tense blisters tend to rupture and be replaced by erosions with or without surmounting crust. Nontraumatized blisters heal without scarring. The major histocompatibility complex class II allele HLA-DQ1*0301 is prevalent in patients with BP. Despite isolated reports, several studies have shown that patients with BP do not have an increased incidence of malignancy in comparison with appropriately age- and gender-matched controls.

Figure 54-2

 
 
 
Bullous pemphigoid with tense vesicles and bullae on erythematous, urticarial bases. (Courtesy of the Yale Resident's Slide Collection; with permission).
 
 

Biopsies of early lesional skin demonstrate subepidermal blisters and histologic features that roughly correlate with the clinical character of the particular lesion under study. Lesions on normal-appearing skin generally show a sparse perivascular leukocytic infiltrate with some eosinophils; conversely, biopsies of inflammatory lesions typically show an eosinophil-rich infiltrate at sites of vesicle formation and in perivascular areas. In addition to eosinophils, cell-rich lesions also contain mononuclear cells and neutrophils. It is not possible to distinguish BP from other subepidermal blistering diseases by routine histologic studies alone.

Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of normal-appearing perilesional skin from patients with BP shows linear deposits of IgG and/or C3 in the epidermal basement membrane. The sera of ~70% of these patients contain circulating IgG autoantibodies that bind the epidermal basement membrane of normal human skin in indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. IgG from an even higher percentage of patients shows reactivity to the epidermal side of 1 M NaCl split skin [an alternative immunofluorescence microscopy test substrate used to distinguish circulating IgG anti-basement membrane autoantibodies in patients with BP from those in patients with similar, yet different, subepidermal blistering diseases (see below)]. In BP, circulating autoantibodies recognize 230- and 180-kDa hemidesmosome-associated proteins in basal keratinocytes [i.e., bullous pemphigoid antigen (BPAG)1 and BPAG2, respectively]. Autoantibodies against BPAG2 are thought to deposit in situ, activate complement, produce dermal mast cell degranulation, and generate granulocyte-rich infiltrates that cause tissue damage and blister formation.

BP may persist for months to years, with exacerbations or remissions. Extensive involvement may result in widespread erosions and compromise cutaneous integrity; deaths may occur in elderly and/or debilitated patients. The mainstay of treatment is systemic glucocorticoids. Patients with local or minimal disease can sometimes be controlled with topical glucocorticoids alone; patients with more extensive lesions generally respond to systemic glucocorticoids either alone or in combination with immunosuppressive agents. Patients will usually respond to prednisone, 0.75每1 mg/kg per d. In some instances, azathioprine (2每2.5 mg/kg per d), mycophenolate mofetil (20每35 mg/kg per d), or cyclophosphamide (1每2 mg/kg per d) are necessary adjuncts.

Pemphigoid Gestationis

Pemphigoid gestationis (PG), also known as herpes gestationis, is a rare, nonviral, subepidermal blistering disease of pregnancy and the puerperium. PG may begin during any trimester of pregnancy or present shortly after delivery. Lesions are usually distributed over the abdomen, trunk, and extremities; mucous membrane lesions are rare. Skin lesions in these patients may be quite polymorphic and consist of erythematous urticarial papules and plaques, vesiculopapules, and/or frank bullae. Lesions are almost always very pruritic. Severe exacerbations of PG frequently occur after delivery, typically within 24每48 hours. PG tends to recur in subsequent pregnancies, often beginning earlier during such gestations. Brief flare-ups of disease may occur with resumption of menses and may develop in patients later exposed to oral contraceptives. Occasionally, infants of affected mothers demonstrate transient skin lesions.

Biopsies of early lesional skin show teardrop-shaped subepidermal vesicles forming in dermal papillae in association with an eosinophil-rich leukocytic infiltrate. Differentiation of PG from other subepidermal bullous diseases by light microscopy is difficult. However, direct immunofluorescence microscopy of perilesional skin from PG patients reveals the immunopathologic hallmark of this disorder〞linear deposits of C3 in epidermal basement membrane. These deposits develop as a consequence of complement activation produced by low titer IgG anti-basement membrane autoantibodies directed against BPAG2, the same hemidesmosome-associated protein that is targeted by autoantibodies in patients with BP〞a subepidermal bullous disease that resembles PG clinically, histologically, and immunopathologically.

The goals of therapy in patients with PG are to prevent the development of new lesions, relieve intense pruritus, and care for erosions at sites of blister formation. Many patients require treatment with moderate doses of daily glucocorticoids (i.e., 20每40 mg prednisone) at some point in their course. Mild cases (or brief flare-ups) may be controlled by vigorous use of potent topical glucocorticoids. Infants born of mothers with PG appear to be at increased risk of being slightly premature or "small for dates." Current evidence suggests that there is no difference in the incidence of uncomplicated live births in PG patients treated with systemic glucocorticoids and in those managed more conservatively. If systemic glucocorticoids are administered, newborns are at risk for development of reversible adrenal insufficiency.

Dermatitis Herpetiformis

Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) is an intensely pruritic, papulovesicular skin disease characterized by lesions symmetrically distributed over extensor surfaces (i.e., elbows, knees, buttocks, back, scalp, and posterior neck) (see Fig. 51-8). Primary lesions in this disorder consist of papules, papulovesicles, or urticarial plaques. Because pruritus is prominent, patients may present with excoriations and crusted papules but no observable primary lesions. Patients sometimes report that their pruritus has a distinctive burning or stinging component; the onset of such local symptoms reliably heralds the development of distinct clinical lesions 12每24 hours later. Almost all DH patients have an associated, usually subclinical, gluten-sensitive enteropathy (Chap. 294), and >90% express the HLA-B8/DRw3 and HLA-DQw2 haplotypes. DH may present at any age, including childhood; onset in the second to fourth decades is most common. The disease is typically chronic.

Biopsy of early lesional skin reveals neutrophil-rich infiltrates within dermal papillae. Neutrophils, fibrin, edema, and microvesicle formation at these sites are characteristic of early disease. Older lesions may demonstrate nonspecific features of a subepidermal bulla or an excoriated papule. Because the clinical and histologic features of this disease can be variable and resemble other subepidermal blistering disorders, the diagnosis is confirmed by direct immunofluorescence microscopy of normal-appearing perilesional skin. Such studies demonstrate granular deposits of IgA (with or without complement components) in the papillarydermis and along the epidermal basement membrane zone. IgA deposits in the skin are unaffected by control of disease with medication; however, these immunoreactants diminish in intensity or disappear in patients maintained for long periods on a strict gluten-free diet (see below). Patients with DH have granular deposits of IgA in their epidermal basement membrane zone and should be distinguished from individuals with linear IgA deposits at this site (see below).

Although most DH patients do not report overt gastrointestinal symptoms or have laboratory evidence of malabsorption, biopsies of the small bowel usually reveal blunting of intestinal villi and a lymphocytic infiltrate in the lamina propria. As is true for patients with celiac disease, this gastrointestinal abnormality can be reversed by a gluten-free diet. Moreover, if maintained, this diet alone may control the skin disease and eventuate in clearance of IgA deposits from these patients' epidermal basement membrane zones. Subsequent gluten exposure in such patients alters the morphology of their small bowel, elicits a flare-up of their skin disease, and is associated with the reappearance of IgA in their epidermal basement membrane zones. As in patients with celiac disease, dietary gluten sensitivity in patients with DH is associated with IgA antiendomysial autoantibodies that target tissue transglutaminase. Recent studies indicate that patients with DH also have high-avidity IgA autoantibodies against epidermal transglutaminase 3 and that the latter is co-localized with granular deposits of IgA in the papillarydermis of DH patients. Patients with DH also have an increased incidence of thyroid abnormalities, achlorhydria, atrophic gastritis, and antigastric parietal cell autoantibodies. These associations likely relate to the high frequency of the HLA-B8/DRw3 haplotype in these patients, because this marker is commonly linked to autoimmune disorders. The mainstay of treatment of DH is dapsone, a sulfone. Patients respond rapidly (24每48 hours) to dapsone (50每200 mg/d), but require careful pretreatment evaluation and close follow-up to ensure that complications are avoided or controlled. All patients on >100 mg/d dapsone will have some hemolysis and methemoglobinemia, which are expected pharmacologic side effects of this agent. Gluten restriction can control DH and lessen dapsone requirements; this diet must rigidly exclude gluten to be of maximal benefit. Many months of dietary restriction may be necessary before a beneficial result is achieved. Good dietary counseling by a trained dietitian is essential.

Linear IgA Disease

Linear IgA disease, once considered a variant form of dermatitis herpetiformis, is actually a separate and distinct entity. Clinically, these patients may resemble individuals with DH, BP, or other subepidermal blistering diseases. Lesions typically consist of papulovesicles, bullae, and/or urticarial plaques predominantly on central or flexural sites. Oral mucosal involvement occurs in some patients. Severe pruritus resembles that seen in patients with DH. Patients with linear IgA disease do not have an increased frequency of the HLA-B8/DRw3 haplotype or an associated enteropathy and, hence, are not candidates for treatment with a gluten-free diet.

Histologic alterations in early lesions may be virtually indistinguishable from those in DH. However, direct immunofluorescence microscopy of normal-appearing perilesional skin reveals linear deposits of IgA (and often C3) in the epidermal basement membrane zone. Most patients with linear IgA disease demonstrate circulating IgA anti-basement membrane autoantibodies directed against neoepitopes in the proteolytically processed extracellular domain of BPAG2. These patients generally respond to treatment with dapsone, 50每200 mg/d.

Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita

Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA) is a rare, noninherited, polymorphic, chronic, subepidermal blistering disease. (The inherited form is discussed in Chap. 363.) Patients with classic or noninflammatory EBA have blisters on noninflamed skin, atrophic scars, milia, nail dystrophy, and oral lesions. Because lesions generally occur at sites exposed to minor trauma, classic EBA is considered to be a mechanobullous disease. Other patients with EBA have widespread inflammatory scarring and bullous lesions that resemble severe BP. Inflammatory EBA may evolve into the classic, noninflammatory form of this disease. Rarely patients present with lesions that predominate on mucous membranes. The HLA-DR2 haplotype is found with increased frequency in EBA patients. Recent studies suggest that EBA is sometimes associated with inflammatory bowel disease (especially Crohn's disease).

The histology of lesional skin varies depending on the character of the lesion being studied. Noninflammatory bullae show subepidermal blisters with a sparse leukocytic infiltrate and resemble those in patients with porphyria cutanea tarda. Inflammatory lesions consist of neutrophil-rich subepidermal blisters. EBA patients have continuous deposits of IgG (and frequently C3) in a linear pattern within the epidermal basement membrane zone. Ultrastructurally, these immunoreactants are found in the sublamina densa region in association with anchoring fibrils. Approximately 50% of EBA patients have demonstrable circulating IgG anti-basement membrane autoantibodies directed against type VII collagen〞the collagen species that comprises anchoring fibrils. Such IgG autoantibodies bind the dermal side of 1 M NaCl split skin (in contrast to IgG autoantibodies in patients with BP). Studies have shown that passive transfer of experimental or patient IgG directed against type VII collagen can produce lesions in mice that clinically, histologically, and immunopathologically resemble those seen in patients with inflammatory EBA.

Treatment of EBA is generally unsatisfactory. Some patients with inflammatory EBA may respond to systemic glucocorticoids, either alone or in combination with immunosuppressive agents. Other patients (especially those with neutrophil-rich inflammatory lesions) may respond to dapsone. The chronic, noninflammatory form of this disease is largely resistant to treatment, although some patients may respond to cyclosporine, azathioprine, or IVIg.

Cicatricial Pemphigoid

Cicatricial pemphigoid (CP) is a rare, acquired, subepithelial immunobullous disease characterized by erosive lesions of mucous membranes and skin that result in scarring of at least some sites of involvement. Common sites of involvement include the oral mucosa (especially the gingiva) and conjunctiva; other sites that may be affected include the nasopharyngeal, laryngeal, esophageal, and anogenital mucosa. Skin lesions (present in about one-third of patients) tend to predominate on the scalp, face, and upper trunk and generally consist of a few scattered erosions or tense blisters on an erythematous or urticarial base. CP is typically a chronic and progressive disorder. Serious complications may arise as a consequence of ocular, laryngeal, esophageal, or anogenital lesions. Erosive conjunctivitis may result in shortened fornices, symblephara, ankyloblepharon, entropion, corneal opacities, and (in severe cases) blindness. Similarly, erosive lesions of the larynx may cause hoarseness, pain, and tissue loss that, if unrecognized and untreated, may eventuate in complete destruction of the airway. Esophageal lesions may result in stenosis and/or strictures that could place patients at risk for aspiration. Strictures might also complicate anogenital involvement.

Biopsies of lesional tissue generally demonstrate subepithelial vesiculobullae and a mononuclear leukocytic infiltrate. Neutrophils and eosinophils may be seen in biopsies of early lesions; older lesions may demonstrate a scant leukocytic infiltrate and fibrosis. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of perilesional tissue typically demonstrates deposits of IgG, IgA, and/or C3 in the epidermal basement membrane of these patients. Because many of these patients show no evidence of circulating anti-basement membrane autoantibodies, testing of perilesional skin is important diagnostically. Although CP was once thought to be a single nosologic entity, it is now largely regarded as a disease phenotype that may develop as a consequence of an autoimmune reaction against a variety of different molecules in epidermal basement membrane (e.g., BPAG2, laminin-332, type VII collagen, and other antigens yet to be completely defined). Recent studies suggest that CP patients with anti-laminin-332 autoantibodies have an increased relative risk for cancer. Treatment of CP is largely dependent upon sites of involvement. Due to potentially severe complications, patients with ocular, laryngeal, esophageal, and/or anogenital involvement require aggressive systemic treatment with dapsone, prednisone, or the latter in combination with another immunosuppressive agent (e.g., azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, or cyclophosphamide) or IVIg. Less threatening forms of the disease may be managed with topical or intralesional glucocorticoids.
 
Autoimmune Systemic Diseases with Prominent Cutaneous Features

Dermatomyositis

The cutaneous manifestations of dermatomyositis (Chap. 388) are often distinctive, but, at times, they may resemble those of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (Chap. 319), scleroderma (Chap. 323), or other overlapping connective tissue diseases (Chap. 323). The extent and severity of cutaneous disease may or may not correlate with the extent and severity of the myositis. The cutaneous manifestations of dermatomyositis are similar, whether the disease appears in children or the elderly, except that calcification of subcutaneous tissue is a common late sequela in childhood dermatomyositis.

The cutaneous signs of dermatomyositis may precede or follow the development of myositis by weeks to years. Cases lacking muscle involvement (i.e., dermatomyositis sine myositis) have also been reported. The most common manifestation is a purple-red discoloration of the upper eyelids, sometimes associated with scaling ("heliotrope" erythema; Fig. 54-3) and periorbital edema. Erythema on the cheeks and nose in a "butterfly" distribution may resemble the malar eruption of SLE. Erythematous or violaceous scaling patches are common on the upper anterior chest; posterior neck; scalp; and the extensor surfaces of the arms, legs, and hands. Erythema and scaling may be particularly prominent over the elbows, knees, and the dorsal interphalangeal joints. Approximately one-third of patients have violaceous, flat-topped papules over the dorsal interphalangeal joints that are pathognomonic of dermatomyositis (Gottron's sign or Gottron's papules; Fig. 54-4). These lesions can be contrasted with the erythema and scaling on the dorsum of the fingers that spares the skin over the interphalangeal joints of some SLE patients. Periungual telangiectasia may be prominent. Lacy or reticulated erythema may be associated with fine scaling on the extensor surfaces of the thighs and upper arms. Other patients, particularly those with long-standing disease, develop areas of hypopigmentation, hyperpigmentation, mild atrophy, and telangiectasia known as poikiloderma. Poikiloderma is rare in both SLE and scleroderma and, thus, can serve as a clinical sign that distinguishes dermatomyositis from these two diseases. Cutaneous changes may be similar in scleroderma and dermatomyositis and may include thickening and binding down of the skin of the hands (sclerodactyly) as well as Raynaud's phenomenon. However, the presence of severe muscle disease, Gottron's papules, heliotrope erythema, and poikiloderma serve to distinguish patients with dermatomyositis. Skin biopsy of erythematous, scaling lesions of dermatomyositis may reveal only mild nonspecific inflammation but sometimes may show changes indistinguishable from those found in SLE, including epidermal atrophy, hydropic degeneration of basal keratinocytes, edema of the upper dermis, and a mild mononuclear cell infiltrate. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of lesional skin is usually negative, although granular deposits of immunoglobulin(s) and complement in the epidermal basement membrane zone have been described in some patients. Treatment should be directed at the systemic disease. Topical glucocorticoids are sometimes useful; patients should avoid exposure to ultraviolet irradiation and aggressively use photoprotective measures including use of broad-spectrum sunscreens.

Figure 54-3

 
 
 
Dermatomyositis. Periorbital violaceous erythema characterizes the classic heliotrope rash. (Courtesy of James Krell, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure 54-4

 
 
 
Gottron's sign. Dermatomyositis often involves the hands as erythematous flat-topped papules over the knuckles (Gottron's sign). Periungual telangiectases are also evident.
 
 

Lupus Erythematosus

The cutaneous manifestations of lupus erythematosus (LE) (Chap. 319) can be divided into acute, subacute, and chronic types. Acute cutaneous LE is characterized by erythema of the nose and malar eminences in a "butterfly" distribution (Fig. 54-5). The erythema is often sudden in onset, accompanied by edema and fine scale, and correlated with systemic involvement. Patients may have widespread involvement of the face as well as erythema and scaling of the extensor surfaces of the extremities and upper chest. These acute lesions, while sometimes evanescent, usually last for days and are often associated with exacerbations of systemic disease. Skin biopsy of acute lesions may show only a sparse dermal infiltrate of mononuclear cells and dermal edema. In some instances, cellular infiltrates around blood vessels and hair follicles are notable, as is hydropic degeneration of basal cells of the epidermis. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of lesional skin frequently reveals deposits of immunoglobulin(s) and complement in the epidermal basement membrane zone. Treatment is aimed at control of systemic disease; photoprotection in this as well as in other forms of LE is very important.

Figure 54-5

 
 
 
 
A. Acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus showing prominent, scaly, malar erythema. Involvement of other sun-exposed sites is also common. B. Acute cutaneous LE on the upper chest demonstrating brightly erythematous and slightly edematous papules and plaques. (B, Courtesy of Robert Swerlick, MD; with permission.)
 
 


Subacutecutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) is characterized by a widespread photosensitive, nonscarring eruption. Most of these patients have SLE in which renal and CNS involvement is mild or absent. SCLE may present as a papulosquamous eruption that resembles psoriasis or annular lesions that resemble those seen in erythema multiforme. In the papulosquamous form, discrete erythematous papules arise on the back, chest, shoulders, extensor surfaces of the arms, and the dorsum of the hands; lesions are uncommon on the face, flexor surfaces of the arms, and below the waist. These slightly scaling papules tend to merge into large plaques, some with a reticulate appearance. The annular form involves the same areas and presents with erythematous papules that evolve into oval, circular, or polycyclic lesions. The lesions of SCLE are more widespread but have less tendency for scarring than do lesions of discoid LE. Skin biopsy reveals a dense mononuclear cell infiltrate around hair follicles and blood vessels in the superficial dermis, combined with hydropic degeneration of basal cells in the epidermis. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of lesional skin reveals deposits of immunoglobulin(s) in the epidermal basement membrane zone in about one-half of these cases. A particulate pattern of IgG deposition throughout the epidermis has been associated with SCLE. Most SCLE patients have anti-Ro autoantibodies. Local therapy alone is usually unsuccessful. Most patients require treatment with aminoquinoline antimalarials. Low-dose therapy with oral glucocorticoids is sometimes necessary. Photoprotective measures against both ultraviolet B and A wavelengths are very important.

Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE, also called chronic cutaneous LE) is characterized by discrete lesions, most often found on the face, scalp, and/or external ears. The lesions are erythematous papules or plaques with a thick, adherent scale that occludes hair follicles (follicular plugging). When the scale is removed, its underside shows small excrescences that correlate with the openings of hair follicles (so-called "carpet tacking"), a finding relatively specific for DLE. Long-standing lesions develop central atrophy, scarring, and hypopigmentation but frequently have erythematous, sometimes raised borders (Fig. 54-6). These lesions persist for years and tend to expand slowly. Only 5每10% of patients with DLE meet the American Rheumatism Association criteria for SLE. However, typical discoid lesions are frequently seen in patients with SLE. Biopsy of DLE lesions shows hyperkeratosis, follicular plugging, atrophy of the epidermis, hydropic degeneration of basal keratinocytes, and a mononuclear cell infiltrate adjacent to epidermal, adnexal, and microvascular basement membranes. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrates immunoglobulin(s) and complement deposits at the basement membrane zone in ~90% of cases. Treatment is focused on control of local cutaneous disease and consists mainly of photoprotection and topical or intralesional glucocorticoids. If local therapy is ineffective, use of aminoquinoline antimalarials may be indicated.

Figure 54-6

 
 
 
Discoid lupus erythematosus. Violaceous, hyperpigmented, atrophic plaques, often with evidence of follicular plugging, which may result in scarring, are characteristic of discoid lupus erythematosus (also called chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus).
 
 

Scleroderma and Morphea

The skin changes of scleroderma (Chap. 323) usually begin on the hands, feet, and face, with episodes of recurrent nonpitting edema. Sclerosis of the skin begins distally on the fingers (sclerodactyly) and spreads proximally, usually accompanied by resorption of bone of the fingertips, which may have punched out ulcers, stellate scars, or areas of hemorrhage (Fig. 54-7). The fingers may actually shrink in size and become sausage-shaped, and because the fingernails are usually unaffected, the nails may curve over the end of the fingertips. Periungual telangiectases are usually present, but periungual erythema is rare. In advanced cases, the extremities show contractures and calcinosis cutis. Facial involvement includes a smooth, unwrinkled brow, taut skin over the nose, shrinkage of tissue around the mouth, and perioral radial furrowing (Fig. 54-8). Matlike telangiectases are often present, particularly on the face and hands. Involved skin feels indurated, smooth, and bound to underlying structures; hyper- and hypopigmentation are also often present. Raynaud's phenomenon (i.e., cold-induced blanching, cyanosis, and reactive hyperemia) is present in almost all patients and can precede development of scleroderma by many years. Linear scleroderma is a limited form of disease that presents in a linear, bandlike distribution and tends to involve deep as well as superficial layers of skin. The combination of calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia has been termed the CREST syndrome. Anticentromere antibodies have been reported in a very high percentage of patients with the CREST syndrome but in only a small minority of patients with scleroderma. Skin biopsy reveals thickening of the dermis and homogenization of collagen bundles. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy of lesional skin is usually negative.

Figure 54-7

 
 
 
Scleroderma showing acral sclerosis and focal digital ulcers.
 
 

Figure 54-8

 
 
 
Scleroderma often eventuates in development of an expressionless, masklike facies.
 
 

Morphea is characterized by localized thickening and sclerosis of skin; it dominates on the trunk. This disorder may affect children or adults. Morphea begins as erythematous or flesh-colored plaques that become sclerotic, develop central hypopigmentation, and demonstrate an erythematous border. In most cases, patients have one or a few lesions, and the disease is termed localized morphea. In some patients, widespread cutaneous lesions may occur without systemic involvement. This form is called generalized morphea. Many adults with generalized morphea have concomitant rheumatic or other autoimmune disorders. Skin biopsy of morphea is indistinguishable from that of scleroderma. Scleroderma and morphea are usually quite resistant to therapy. For this reason, physical therapy to prevent joint contractures and to maintain function is employed and is often helpful. Treatment options for early, rapidly progressive disease include phototherapy (UVA1 or PUVA) or methotrexate 15每20 mg per week alone or in combination with daily glucocorticoids.

Diffuse fasciitis with eosinophilia is a clinical entity that can sometimes be confused with scleroderma. There is usually the sudden onset of swelling, induration, and erythema of the extremities frequently following significant physical exertion. The proximal portions of extremities (arms, forearms, thighs, legs) are more often involved than are the hands and feet. While the skin is indurated, it is usually not bound down as in scleroderma; contractures may occur early secondary to fascial involvement. The latter may also cause muscle groups to be separated and veins to appear depressed (i.e., the "groove sign"). These skin findings are accompanied by peripheral blood eosinophilia, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and sometimes hypergammaglobulinemia. Deep biopsy of affected areas of skin reveals inflammation and thickening of the deep fascia overlying muscle. An inflammatory infiltrate composed of eosinophils and mononuclear cells is usually found. Patients with eosinophilic fasciitis appear to be at increased risk to develop bone marrow failure or other hematologic abnormalities. While the ultimate course of eosinophilic fasciitis is uncertain, many patients respond favorably to treatment with prednisone in doses ranging from 40每60 mg/d.

The eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, a disorder reported in epidemic numbers in 1989 and linked to ingestion of l-tryptophan manufactured by a single company in Japan, is a multisystem disorder characterized by debilitating myalgias and absolute eosinophilia in association with varying combinations of arthralgias, pulmonary symptoms, and peripheral edema. In a later phase (3每6 months after initial symptoms), these patients often develop localized sclerodermatous skin changes, weight loss, and/or neuropathy (Chap. 323). The precise cause of this syndrome, which may resemble other sclerotic skin conditions, is unknown. However, the implicated lots of l-tryptophan contained the contaminant 1,1-ethylidene bis[tryptophan]. This contaminant may be pathogenic or a marker for another substance that provokes the disorder.
 
Further Readings

Anhalt GJ: Paraneoplastic pemphigus. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 9:29, 2004 [PMID: 14870982] 

 
Olasz EB, Yancey KB: Bullous pemphigoid and related subepidermal autoimmune blistering diseases, in Current Directions in Autoimmunity: Dermatologic Immunity, BJ Nickoloff, FO Nestle (eds). Basel, Karger Press, 2008, pp 141-166 

 
Payne AS et al: Desmosomes and disease: Pemphigus and bullous impetigo. Curr Opin Cell Biol 16:536, 2004 [PMID: 15363804] 

 
Sontheimer RD: Skin manifestations of systemic autoimmune connective tissue disease: Diagnostics and therapeutics. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 18:429, 2004 [PMID: 15158749] 
 
 

^^
Cutaneous Drug Reactions: Introduction

Cutaneous reactions are among the most frequent adverse reactions to drugs. Most are benign, but a few can be life threatening. Prompt recognition of severe reactions, drug withdrawal, and appropriate therapeutic interventions can minimize toxicity. This chapter focuses on adverse cutaneous reactions to systemic medications; it covers their incidence, patterns, and pathogenesis and provides some practical guidelines on treatment, assessment of causality, and future use of drugs.
 
Use of Prescription Drugs in the United States

In the United States, more than 3 billion prescriptions for over 60,000 drug products, which include more than 2000 different active agents, are dispensed annually. Hospital inpatients alone annually receive about 120 million courses of drug therapy, and half of adult Americans receive prescription drugs on a regular outpatient basis. Many patients use over-the-counter medicines that may cause adverse cutaneous reactions.
 
Incidence of Cutaneous Reactions

Several large cohort studies established that acute cutaneous reaction to drugs affected about 3% of hospital inpatients. Reactions usually occur a few days to 4 weeks after initiation of therapy.

Many drugs of common use are associated with a 1每2% rate of "rashes" during premarketing clinical trials. The risk is often higher when medications are used in general, unselected populations. The rate may reach 3每7% for amoxicillin, sulfamethoxazole, and many anticonvulsants. It may be even higher with anti-HIV agents.

In addition to acute eruptions, a variety of skin diseases can be induced or exacerbated by prolonged use of drugs (e.g., pruritus, pigmentation, nail or hair disorders, psoriasis, pemphigoid, and pemphigus). These drug reactions are not frequent, but neither their incidence nor their impact on public health has been evaluated.

In a series of 48,005 inpatients over a 20-year period, morbilliform rash (91%) and urticaria (6%) were the most frequent skin reactions. Severe reactions are actually too rare to be detected in such cohorts. Although rare, severe cutaneous reactions to drugs have an important impact on health and on the risk-versus-benefit evaluation of medicines because of significant sequelae, including mortality. In one prospective study in the hospital setting, adverse drug rash was responsible for hospitalization, increased the duration of hospital stay, or was life threatening. Some populations are at increased risk of drug reactions: patients with collagen vascular diseases, bone marrow graft recipients, and those with acute Epstein-Barr virus infection. The pathophysiology underlying this association is unknown. It has also been established that HIV infection increases the risk of drug allergy, including severe hypersensitivity reactions (Chap. 189). This was true for many drugs but has been evaluated mainly with sulfamethoxazole. Up to 40% of HIV-infected patients had skin reactions when treated with high doses, and about 15% reacted to the same dosage that induced eruption in 3每5% of non-HIV-infected populations. How HIV promotes sensitivity to certain medications or their metabolites remains unclear.
 
Pathogenesis of Drug Reactions

The skin is commonly affected by adverse drug reactions. The list of conditions that can be triggered by medications includes nearly all dermatologic diseases. Adverse cutaneous responses to drugs can arise as a result of immunologic or nonimmunologic mechanisms. Examples of responses that arise from nonimmunologic mechanisms are pigmentary changes related to accumulation in the dermis of amiodarone, antimalarials, minocycline, quinolones, alteration of hair follicles by antimetabolites, and lipodystrophy associated with metabolic effects of anti-HIV medications. These side effects are mostly toxic, predictable, and often can be avoided in part by simple preventive measures.

Immunologic Drug Reactions

Evidence suggests an immunologic basis for most acute drug eruptions, benign or severe. Drug-specific T cell clones can be derived from the blood or from skin lesions of patients with a variety of drug allergies, strongly suggesting that drugs can be recognized as antigens by human T cells and that these T cells play a role in drug allergy. Specific clones were obtained with penicillin G, amoxicillin, cephalosporins, sulfamethoxazole, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, lamotrigine (i.e., many of the medications that are frequently a cause of drug eruptions). Both CD4 and CD8 clones have been obtained; however, their specific roles in the manifestations of allergy have not been elucidated. Drug presentation to T cells was MHC-restricted and may involve hapten-peptide complexes formed between drugs or reactive metabolites and endogenous cell-surface proteins.

Once a drug has induced an immune response, the final phenotype of the reaction probably depends on the nature of effectors: cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells in blistering and certain hypersensitivity reactions, chemokines for reactions mediated by neutrophils or eosinophils, and collaboration with B cells for production of specific antibodies for urticarial reactions.

Immediate Reactions

Immediate reactions depend on the release of mediators of inflammation by tissue mast cells or circulating basophilic leukocytes. These mediators include histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, platelet-activating factor, enzymes, and proteoglycans. Drugs can trigger mediator release either directly ("anaphylactoid" reaction) or through IgE-specific antibodies. These reactions usually manifest in the skin and gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems (Chap. 317). Primary symptoms and signs include pruritus, urticaria, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, bronchospasm, laryngeal edema, and, occasionally, anaphylactic shock with hypotension and death. They occur within minutes of drug exposure. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including aspirin, and radiocontrast media are frequent causes of direct mast cell degranulation or anaphylactoid reactions, which can occur on first exposure. Penicillins and muscle relaxants used in general anesthesia are the most frequent causes of IgE-dependent reactions to drugs, which require prior sensitization. Release of mediators is triggered when polyvalent drug protein conjugates cross-link IgE molecules fixed to sensitized cells. Certain routes of administration favor different clinical patterns (e.g., gastrointestinal effects from oral route, circulatory effects from intravenous route).

Immune Complex每Dependent Reactions

Serum sickness is produced by tissue deposition of circulating immune complexes with consumption of complement. It is characterized by fever, arthritis, nephritis, neuritis, edema, and an urticarial, papular, or purpuric rash (Chap. 326). First described following administration of nonhuman sera, it currently occurs in the setting of monoclonal antibodies and other similar medications. In classic serum sickness, symptoms develop 6 days or more after exposure to a drug, the latent period representing the time needed to synthesize antibody. Cephalosporin administration may be associated with a clinically similar "serum sickness-like" reaction in children. The mechanism of this reaction is unknown but is unrelated to complement activation and lacks immune complex formation, vasculitis, or renal disease.

Cutaneous or systemic vasculitis, a relatively rare cutaneous complication of drugs, may also be a result of immune complex deposition (Chap. 326).

Delayed Hypersensitivity

Delayed hypersensitivity directed by drug-specific T cells is probably the most important mechanism in the etiology of the most common drug eruptions〞morbilliform eruptions〞and also of rare and severe forms such as hypersensitivity syndrome, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). Drug-specific T cells have been detected in these types of drug eruptions. It remains unknown why T cell stimulation by medications leads to reactions that are clinically so diverse.

Contrary to what has been believed for years, the antigen is more often the native drug itself than its metabolites. Drug-specific cytotoxic T cells have been detected in the skin lesions of fixed drug eruptions and of TEN. In TEN, blisters that result from accumulation of interstitial fluid under the necrotic epidermis contain T lymphocytes reactive to autologous lymphocytes and keratinocytes in a drug-specific, HLA-restricted, and perforin/granzyme-mediated pathway.

Drug-specific clones producing CXCL8, a neutrophil-attracting chemokine, were obtained from skin biopsies of patients with AGEP, a neutrophil-mediated drug reaction.

Genetic Factors and Cutaneous Drug Reactions

Genetic determinants may predispose individuals to severe drug reactions by affecting either drug metabolism or immune responses to drugs. Polymorphisms in cytochrome P450 enzymes may increase susceptibility to drug toxicity, highlighting a role for differential pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic effects. It has also been suspected that a slow acetylator phenotype increases the risk of rash from sulfonamides. However, in two large prospective cohorts of HIV-infected patients treated with sulfonamides, no association of drug eruption with acetylation genotype was found.

Associations between drug hypersensitivities and HLAhaplotypes also suggest a key role for immune mechanisms. Hypersensitivity to the anti-HIV medication abacavir is strongly associated with HLA B*5701. In Taiwan, within a homogeneous Han Chinese population, a 100% association was observed between SJS or TEN related to carbamazepine and HLA B*1502. In the same population, another 100% association was found between SJS, TEN, or hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) related to allopurinol and HLA B*5801. Additional adverse cutaneous drug reactions have been linked to other HLA haplotypes. However, the strong associations found in Taiwan have not been observed in other countries with more heterogeneous populations. Development of molecular screening tests for abacavir hypersensitivity is under way as a model for implementing individualized pharmacogenetic screening in clinical practice.
 
Clinical Presentation of Cutaneous Drug Reactions

Nonimmune Cutaneous Reactions

Exacerbation or Induction of Dermatologic Diseases

A variety of drugs can exacerbate preexisting diseases or sometimes induce a disease that may or may not disappear after withdrawal of the inducing medication. For example, NSAIDs, lithium, beta blockers, TNF-cytokine antagonists, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can exacerbate plaque psoriasis, while antimalarials and withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids can worsen pustular psoriasis. Acne may be induced by glucocorticoids, androgens, lithium, and antidepressants. Minocycline and thiazide diuretics may exacerbate subacute systemic lupus erythematosus; and pemphigus can be induced by D-penicillamine, captopril, and other ACE inhibitors. Furosemide is associated with drug-induced bullous pemphigoid. The hypothesis that a drug may be responsible should always be considered, especially in cases with atypical clinical presentation.

Photosensitivity Eruptions

Photosensitivity eruptions are usually most marked in sun-exposed areas but may extend to sun-protected areas. The mechanism is almost always phototoxicity. Phototoxic reactions resemble sunburn and can occur with first exposure to a drug. Blistering may occur in drug-related pseudoporphyria. The severity of the reactions depends on the tissue level of the drug, its efficiency as a photosensitizer, and the extent of exposure to the activating wavelengths of ultraviolet light (Chap. 56).

Common orally administered photosensitizing drugs include many fluoroquinolones and tetracycline antibiotics. Other drugs less frequently encountered are chlorpromazine, thiazides, and several NSAIDs (ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam). Voriconazole may result in severe photosensitivity and accelerated photo-induced aging in certain organ transplant recipients.

Because UV-A and visible light, which trigger these reactions, are not easily absorbed by nonopaque sunscreens and are transmitted through window glass, photosensitivity reactions may be difficult to block. Photosensitivity reactions abate with removal of either the drug or ultraviolet radiation, use of high-potency sunscreens that block UV-A light, and treating the reaction as one would a sunburn. Rarely, individuals develop persistent reactivity to light, necessitating long-term avoidance of sun exposure.

Pigmentation Changes

Drugs, either systemic or topical, may cause a variety of pigmentary changes in the skin. Oral contraceptives may induce melasma. Long-term minocycline, pefloxacin, and amiodarone may cause blue-gray pigmentation. Long-term, high-dose phenothiazine results in gray-brown pigmentation of sun-exposed areas. Numerous cancer chemotherapeutic agents may be associated with characteristic patterns of pigmentation (e.g., bleomycin, busulfan, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, hydroxyurea, and methotrexate). Pigmentation changes may also occur in mucous membranes (busulfan), nails (zidovudine), hair, and teeth.

Warfarin Necrosis of Skin

This rare reaction usually occurs between the third and tenth days of therapy with warfarin, usually in women. Common sites are breasts, thighs, and buttocks (Fig. 55-1). Lesions are sharply demarcated, erythematous, indurated, and purpuric and may progress to form large, irregular, hemorrhagic bullae with eventual necrosis and slow-healing eschar formation. These lesions can be life threatening.

Figure 55-1

 
 
 
Warfarin necrosis.
 
 

Development of the syndrome is unrelated to drug dose, and the course is not altered by discontinuation of the drug after onset of the eruption. Warfarin reactions are associated with protein C deficiency. Warfarin anticoagulation in heterozygotes for protein C deficiency causes a precipitous fall in circulating levels of protein C, permitting hypercoagulability and thrombosis in the cutaneous microvasculature, with consequent areas of necrosis. Similar reactions have been associated with heparin. Heparin-induced necrosis may have clinically similar features but is probably due to heparin-induced platelet aggregation with subsequent occlusion of blood vessels; it can affect areas adjacent to the injection site or more distant sites if infused.

Warfarin-induced cutaneous necrosis is treated with vitamin K, heparin, and intensive wound care. Treatment with protein C concentrates may also be helpful.

Drug-Induced Hair Disorders

Drug-Induced Hair Loss

Medications may affect hair follicles at two different phases of their growth cycle: anagen (growth) or telogen (resting). Anagen effluvium occurs within days of drug administration, especially with antimetabolite or other chemotherapeutic drugs. In contrast, in telogen effluvium, the delay is 2 to 4 months following initiation of a new medication, or after childbirth, acute illness, or severe stress. In drug-related cases, both present as diffuse nonscarring alopecia most often reversible after discontinuation of the responsible agent.

The prevalence and severity of alopecia depend on the drug as well as on an individual's predisposition. A considerable number of drugs have been reported to induce hair loss. These include antineoplastic agents (alkylating agents, bleomycin, vinca alkaloids, platinum compounds), anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, valproate), antihypertensive drugs (beta blockers), antidepressants, antithyroid drugs, interferons (IFNs), oral contraceptives, and cholesterol-lowering agents.

Hirsutism

Hirsutism is an excessive growth of terminal hair with masculine hair growth pattern in a female, most often on the face and trunk. Hirsutism results from androgenic stimulation of hormone-sensitive hair follicles.

Anabolic steroids, oral contraceptives of the nonsteroid progesterone type, testosterone, and corticotropin can induce hirsutism.

Hypertrichosis

Hypertrichosis differs from hirsutism by being located mainly on the forehead and temporal regions of the face. It is usually reversible. Drugs responsible for hypertrichosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, glucocorticoids, vasodilators (diazoxide, minoxidil), diuretics (acetazolamide), anticonvulsants (phenytoin), immunosuppressive agents, psoralens, and zidovudine.

Changes in hair color or structure are uncommon adverse effects from medications. Hair discoloration may occur with chloroquine, IFN-, chemotherapeutic agents, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Changes in hair structure have been observed in patients given epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors.

Drug-Induced Nail Disorders

Drug-related nail disorders usually involve several or all 20 nails and need months to resolve after withdrawal of the offending agent. The pathogenesis is most often toxic. Drug-induced nail changes include Beau's line (transverse depression of the nail plate), onycholysis (detachment of the distal part of the nail plate), onychomadesis (detachment of the proximal part of the nail plate), pigmentation, and paronychia (inflammation of periungual skin).

Onycholysis

Onycholysis occurs with tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, phenothiazines, and psoralens, as well as in persons taking NSAIDs, captopril, retinoids, sodium valproate, and many chemotherapeutic agents such as anthracyclines or taxanes including paclitaxel and docetaxel. The risk of onycholysis in patients receiving cytotoxic drugs can be increased by exposure to sunlight.

Onychomadesis

Onychomadesis is caused by temporary arrest of nail matrix mitotic activity. Common drugs reported to induce onychomadesis include carbamazepine, lithium, retinoids, and chemotherapeutic agents such as cyclophosphamide and vincristine.

Paronychia

Paronychia and multiple pyogenic granuloma with progressive and painful periungual abscess of fingers and toes are a side effect of systemic retinoids, lamivudine, indinavir, and anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (cetuximab, gefitinib).

Nail Discoloration

Some drugs〞including anthracyclines, taxanes, fluorouracil, and zidovudine〞may induce nail bed hyperpigmentation through melanocyte stimulation. It appears to be reversible and dose-dependent.

Pruritus

Pruritus is a common symptom of most drug eruptions, but it may also occur without skin lesions as the only manifestation of drug intolerance. Severe pruritus may occur in up to 50% of African patients treated with antimalarials and leads to poor compliance. It is much rarer in Caucasians.

Immune Cutaneous Reactions: Benign

Maculopapular Eruptions

Morbilliform or maculopapular eruptions (Fig. 55-2) are the most common of all drug-induced reactions, often start on the trunk or intertriginous areas, and consist of erythematous macules and papules that are frequently symmetric and may become confluent. Involvement of mucous membranes is unusual, with the exception of scaly lips; the eruption may be associated with moderate to severe pruritus and fever. Diagnosis is rarely assisted by laboratory testing. Skin biopsy is useless because it shows normal skin or very mild and nonspecific changes. A viral exanthem is the principal differential diagnostic consideration, especially in children, and graft-versus-host-disease in the proper clinical setting. Absence of enanthems; absence of symptoms in ears, nose, throat, and upper respiratory tract; and polymorphism of the skin lesions support a drug rather than a viral eruption.

Figure 55-2

 
 
 
Morbilliform drug eruption.
 
 

Maculopapular reactions usually develop within 1 week of initiation of therapy and last less than 2 weeks. Occasionally, these eruptions decrease with continued use of the responsible drug. Because the eruption may also worsen, the suspect drug should be discontinued unless it is essential. Oral antihistamines, emollients, and soothing baths may help relieve pruritus. Short courses of potent topical glucocorticoids can reduce inflammation and symptoms. Systemic glucocorticoid treatment is rarely indicated.

Urticaria/Angioedema

Urticaria is the second most frequent type of cutaneous reaction to drugs. However, "drug allergy" explains no more than 10每20% of acute urticaria cases. It is a skin reaction characterized by pruritic, red wheals of varying size. Individual lesions rarely last more than 24 hours. Deep edema within dermal and subcutaneous tissues is known as angioedema. Angioedema may involve respiratory and gastrointestinal mucous membranes. Urticaria and angioedema may be part of a life-threatening anaphylactic reaction.

Drug-induced urticaria may be caused by three mechanisms: an IgE-dependent mechanism, circulating immune complexes (serum sickness), and nonimmunologic activation of effector pathways. IgE-dependent urticarial reactions usually occur within 36 hours of drug exposure but can occur within minutes. Immune complex每induced urticaria associated with serum sickness usually occurs 6每12 days after first exposure. In this syndrome, the urticarial eruption may be accompanied by fever, hematuria, arthralgias, hepatic dysfunction, and neurologic symptoms. Certain drugs, such as NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II antagonists, and radiographic dyes, may induce urticarial reactions, angioedema, and anaphylaxis in the absence of drug-specific antibody through direct mast-cell degranulation.

Although ACE inhibitors, aspirin, penicillin, and blood products are the most frequent causes of urticarial eruptions, urticaria has been observed in association with nearly all drugs. Drugs may also cause chronic urticaria, which lasts more than 6 weeks. Aspirin frequently exacerbates this problem.

The treatment of urticaria or angioedema depends on the severity of the reaction and the rate at which it is evolving. In severe cases with respiratory or cardiovascular compromise, epinephrine is the mainstay of therapy, but its effect is reduced in patients using beta blockers. Treatment with systemic glucocorticoids, sometimes administered IV, is helpful. In addition to drug withdrawal, for patients with only cutaneous symptoms and without symptoms of angioedema or anaphylaxis, oral antihistamines are usually sufficient.

Fixed Drug Eruptions

These reactions are characterized by one or more sharply demarcated, erythematous lesions, sometimes leading to a blister. Hyperpigmentation often results after resolution of the acute inflammation. With rechallenge, the lesion recurs in the same (i.e., fixed) location. Lesions often involve the lips, hands, legs, face, genitalia, and oral mucosa and cause a burning sensation. Most patients have multiple lesions. Fixed drug eruptions have been associated with pseudoephedrine (frequently a nonpigmented reaction), phenolphthalein (in laxatives), sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and barbiturates. Patch testing has been used in Europe to help establish the etiology.

Immune Cutaneous Reactions: Severe

Vasculitis

Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis often presents as palpable purpuric lesions that may be generalized or limited to the lower extremities or other dependent areas (Chap. 326). Urticarial lesions, ulcers, and hemorrhagic blisters also occur. Vasculitis may involve other organs, including the liver, kidney, brain, and joints. Drugs are implicated as a cause of 10每15% of all cases of vasculitides. Infection, malignancy, and collagen vascular disease are responsible for the majority non-drug related cases.

Propylthiouracil induces a cutaneousvasculitis that is accompanied by leukopenia and splenomegaly. Direct immunofluorescent changes in these lesions suggest immune-complex deposition. Drugs implicated in vasculitis include allopurinol, thiazides, sulfonamides, other antimicrobials, and several NSAIDs. The presence of eosinophils in the perivascular infiltrate of skin biopsy suggests a drug etiology.

Pustular Eruptions

AGEP is a rare reaction pattern that is often associated with exposure to drugs. Usually beginning on the face or intertriginous areas, small nonfollicular pustules overlying erythematous and edematous skin may coalesce and lead to superficial ulceration. Differentiating this eruption from TEN in its initial stages may be difficult. A skin biopsy is important and shows scattered pustules in the upper part of the epidermis instead of the full-thickness necrosis that characterizes TEN. Fever is present with elevated neutrophil counts, and sepsis is often suspected. Acute pustular psoriasis is the principal differential diagnostic consideration. AGEP often begins within a few days of initiating drug treatment, most notably antibiotics. For other associated drugs (e.g., diltiazem, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, or terbinafine), AGEP begins later: 7每14 days after initiation of treatment.

Hypersensitivity Syndrome

Initially described with phenytoin, hypersensitivity syndrome〞a multiorgan drug-induced reaction〞is also known as DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS). It presents as a widespread erythematous eruption that may become purpuric or lichenoid and is accompanied by many of the following features: fever, facial and periorbital edema, tender and generalized lymphadenopathy, leukocytosis (often with atypical lymphocytes and eosinophilia), hepatitis, and sometimes nephritis or pneumonitis. The cutaneous reaction usually begins 2 to 8 weeks after the drug is started and lasts longer than mild eruptions after drug cessation. Signs and symptoms may persist for several weeks, especially those associated with hepatitis. The eruption recurs with rechallenge, and cross-reactions among aromatic anticonvulsants, including phenytoin, carbamazepine, and barbiturates, are frequent. Other drugs causing this syndrome include lamotrigine, minocycline, dapsone, allopurinol, and sulfo- namides, as well as abacavir and zalcitabine in HIV-infected patients. Hypersensitivity to reactive drug metabolites, hydroxylamine for sulfamethoxazole, and arene oxide for aromatic anticonvulsants may be involved in the pathogenesis of DRESS. Reactivation of herpes viruses, especially of herpes virus 6, has been reported to be frequent in this syndrome. The role of virus infection is still unclear; it may contribute to long-lasting manifestations such as hepatitis or encephalitis. Mortality rates as high as 10% have been reported; mortality is highest in association with hepatitis. Systemic glucocorticoids (prednisone, 1.5每2 mg/kg per d) should be started with slow taper over 8每12 weeks. Topical, high-potency glucocorticoids may also be helpful. In all cases, rapid withdrawal of the suspected drug is required. Patients should be closely monitored for resolution of organ dysfunction and for development of late-onset autoimmune thyroiditis (up to 6 months).

Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

SJS and TEN are characterized by blisters and epidermal detachment resulting from epidermal necrosis in the absence of substantial dermal inflammation. The term Stevens-Johnson syndrome is now used to describe cases with blisters developing on target lesions, dusky or purpuric macules in which mucosal involvement is significant, and total body surface area blistering and eventual detachment is <10%. The term Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis overlap is used to describe cases with 10每30% detachment, and TEN is used to describe cases with >30% detachment. Erythema multiforme major is now considered by most to be different from SJS. Erythema multiforme (EM) is characterized by mucosal involvement and true "target" lesions or atypical raised target lesions often more acrally distributed and with limited extent of skin detachment. EM is most often triggered by infection, particularly herpes simplex virus or mycoplasma pneumoniae.

Patients with SJS, SJS/TEN, or TEN initially present with acute symptoms, painful skin lesions, fever >39∼C (102.2∼F), sore throat, and conjunctivitis resulting from mucosal membrane and ocular lesions. Intestinal and pulmonary involvements are associated with a poor prognosis, as are a greater extent of epidermal detachment and older age. About 10% and 30% of SJS- and TEN-affected persons die from their disease, respectively. Drugs that most commonly cause SJS or TEN are sulfonamides, nevirapine, allopurinol, lamotrigine, aromatic anticonvulsants, and the oxicam NSAIDs. At this time, SJS or TEN have no treatment of proven efficacy. The best results come from early diagnosis, immediate discontinuation of any suspected drug, supportive therapy, and paying close attention to ocular complications and infection. Frozen-section skin biopsy may aid in rapid diagnosis. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy (prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg) may be useful early in the evolution of the disease, but long-term systemic glucocorticoid use has been associated with higher mortality. After initial enthusiasm for the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the treatment of SJS/TEN, some recent data suggest IVIG is unlikely to benefit these patients. Randomized studies to more definitively assess the potential benefit of systemic glucocorticoids and IVIG are lacking and difficult to perform but are necessary.
 
Drugs of Special Interest

Allopurinol

Together with sulfonamides and antiepileptics, allopurinol is a frequent cause of mild maculopapular eruptions (in at least 3% of users) and may also cause more severe reactions including hypersensitivity/DRESS and SJS/TEN; patients with HLA B*5801 are highly susceptible to these severe reactions.

Anti-HIV Medications

In clinical trials, combinations of highly active antiretroviral treatments were frequently associated with 10% "drug eruptions." Two drugs, nevirapine and abacavir, have been associated with specific risks.

Nevirapine has both a high risk of maculopapular eruptions and a very high risk (about 1 in 1000) of SJS or TEN. Progressive escalation of daily doses has been shown to decrease the risk of mild eruption but does not abrogate the risk of severe reactions.

Abacavir is associated with a 4每8% risk of a hypersensitivity reaction, which is remarkable because of the association of symptoms suggesting a type I hypersensitivity reaction (dyspnea, diarrhea, low blood pressure, shock on rechallenge) as well as signs of delayed hypersensitivity (rash, late onset hepatitis). The risk is lower in patients of African ancestry and strongly correlated with HLA B*5701. Evidence supports patch testing for abacavir hypersensitivity, and additional molecular screening methods are being developed to identify susceptible individuals.

Penicillin

Incidence of cutaneous reactions due to penicillin is about 1%. About 85% of cutaneous reactions are morbilliform, and about 10% are urticaria or angioedema. Anaphylaxis and serum sickness appear to be due to IgE antibodies in serum.

Delayed reactions, mainly maculopapular eruptions, are much more common with aminopenicillins, involving 4每7% of users. The question of cross-reactivity between -lactam antibiotics and preventing the risk of anaphylaxis is discussed below ("Management of a Patient with a Drug Eruption"). Approximately 10% of patients with penicillin allergies will also develop allergic reactions to cephalosporin class antibiotics.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs

Most NSAIDs, including aspirin, cause immediate, allergy-like symptoms in susceptible individuals. Approximately 1% of persons experience urticaria or angioedema, and rare individuals (0.5%) experience rhinosinusitis and asthma.

Urticaria/angioedema may be delayed up to 24 hours and may occur at any age. The rhinosinusitis-asthma syndrome generally develops within 1 hour of drug administration. Recurrences are frequent and can be complicated by nasal and sinus infection, polyposis, bloody discharge, and nasal eosinophilia. In many individuals with this syndrome, potentially life-threatening asthma may ensue whenever NSAIDs are subsequently ingested. Proof of the association of symptoms and NSAID use requires either clear-cut history of symptoms following drug ingestion or an oral challenge. That procedure must be conducted only in a hospital setting by experienced personnel. Cross-reactivity between NSAIDs that inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX) 1 is common, while reactivity to COX-2 inhibitors is less frequent. The reaction is pharmacologic, and patients who are sensitive to NSAIDs cannot be identified by assessment of IgE antibody to aspirin, lymphocyte sensitization, or in vitro immunologic testing.

Other reactions can also occur with NSAIDs, including phototoxicity with many agents, a pattern of pseudoporphyria being often related to naproxen, hypersensitivity/DRESS (oxicam derivatives, COX-2 inhibitors), and SJS or TEN (phenylbutazone, oxicam derivatives).

Radiocontrast Media

Many patients are exposed to radiocontrast agents, which can be a cause of adverse drug reactions. High-osmolality radiocontrast media were about five times more likely to induce urticaria (1%) or anaphylaxis than were newer low-osmolality media. Severe reactions are rare with either type of contrast media. About one-third of those with mild reactions to previous exposure react on re-exposure. Pretreatment with prednisone and diphenhydramine reduces reaction rates. Persons with a reaction to a high-osmolality contrast media should be given low-osmolality media if later contrast studies are required.

A new association between certain types of gadolinium contrast and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a condition of sclerosing skin with rare internal organ involvement, has been reported; advanced renal compromise may be an important risk factor.

Anticonvulsants

Phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine are associated with many types of severe reactions in adults and a high incidence of less-severe reactions in children. These drugs carry the highest risk of SJS, TEN, and hypersensitivity syndrome in immunologically normal patients. There are strong HLA associations with anticonvulsant-induced toxicity in Han Chinese (see above). Aromatic anticonvulsants can induce a pseudolymphoma syndrome and induce gingival hyperplasia.

The overall rate of lamotrigine associated rash is lower in patients whose doses are slowly increased, but whether or not the risk of more severe reactions is reduced by slow dose escalation is less clear. Patients who also use valproate, which increases lamotrigine levels and half life, have a higher risk of skin reactions.

Sulfonamides

Antibacterial sulfonamides cause cutaneous eruptions at a high rate and are among the drugs most frequently implicated in SJS and TEN. The combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim frequently induces adverse cutaneous reactions in patients with AIDS (Chap. 182). Desensitization is often successful in AIDS patients with morbilliform eruptions but is not recommended in AIDS patients who manifested erythroderma or a bullous reaction in response to their earlier sulfonamide exposure.

Reaction rates are much lower with nonantibiotic sulfonamides, including diuretics or antidiabetic agents. Cross-reactivity between antibiotic and nonantibiotic sulfonamides is at most infrequent.

Vancomycin

Vancomycin causes two unusual but recognizable cutaneous reactions: linear IgA bullous dermatosis (a transient, blistering eruption) and red man syndrome. Red man syndrome occurs during rapid IV infusion of vancomycin. This is thought to be a histamine-related anaphylactoid reaction characterized by flushing, diffuse maculopapular eruption, hypotension, and, in rare cases, cardiac arrest.

Agents Used in Cancer Chemotherapy

Because many agents used in cancer chemotherapy inhibit cell division, rapidly proliferating elements of the skin, including hair, mucous membranes, and appendages, are sensitive to their effects. As a result, stomatitis and alopecia are among the most frequent dose-dependent side effects of chemotherapy. Various nail abnormalities have been described: onycholysis, dystrophy, Beau's lines, white lines, and pigmentation. Sterile cellulitis and phlebitis and ulceration of pressure areas occur with many of these agents. Also reported is acral erythema, which begins with dysesthesia followed by redness and a painful edematous eruption of the palms and soles, and is caused by cytarabine, doxorubicin, methotrexate, hydroxyurea, and 5-fluorouracil. Pyridoxine alleviates symptoms of acral erythema. Urticaria, angioedema, and exfoliative dermatitis also have been seen, as has local and diffuse hyperpigmentation.

Hypersensitivity to carboplatin or cisplatin is not rare (with an incidence of 10每20%) among patients receiving multiple treatments with these drugs. It is probably IgE mediated. Moderate to severe reactions, including respiratory distress and hypotension, are also observed in 10每20% of patients receiving paclitaxel regardless of premedication with glucocorticoids and histamine H(1) and H(2) antagonists.

Cetuximab and other EGF receptor antagonists induce follicular eruptions and nail toxicity after a mean interval of 10 days in a majority of patients. Xerosis, eczematous eruptions, and pruritus also frequently occur with EGF receptor antagonists. The severity of the eruption correlates with a better anticancer effect. Systemic antibiotics, topical antiacne treatments, and supportive care are helpful. Sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, may result in follicular eruptions and bullous palmoplantar eruptions with dysesthesia.

Glucocorticoids

Both systemic and topical glucocorticoids cause a variety of skin changes, including acneiform eruptions, atrophy, striae, and other stigmata of Cushing's syndrome. And, in sufficiently high doses, glucocorticoids can retard wound healing. Patients using glucocorticoids are at higher risk for bacterial, yeast, and fungal skin infections that may be misinterpreted as drug eruptions but are instead drug side effects. Allergy to glucocorticoids may also occur either as contact dermatitis to topical formulations or as systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis.

Biologic Therapies

These include cytokines, cytokine antagonists, and monoclonal antibodies.

Injection-site reactions are the most frequent adverse events. The severity varies from mild redness to deep inflammation and necrosis. In most cases, the treatment can be continued and the severity of reactions will decrease with time.

Like all foreign proteins, monoclonal antibodies may induce urticaria, angioedema, anaphylactic reactions, and serum sickness. Production of inactivating antibodies to the drug may occur, classically with infliximab, and may be prevented by concomitant administration of low-dose methotrexate.

Alopecia is a common complication of IFN-. A nonspecific, highly pruritic "dermatitis" is frequent in patients receiving IFN and ribavirin for hepatitis C.

Induction or exacerbation of various immune-mediated disorders, especially lupus erythematosus, has been reported with interleukin 2, IFN-, and antitumor necrosis factor .

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor may induce various neutrophilic dermatoses, including Sweet's syndrome and pyoderma gangrenosum, and can exacerbate psoriasis.

Antimalarial Agents

Antimalarial agents are used as therapy for several skin diseases, including the skin manifestations of lupus and polymorphous light eruption, but they can also induce cutaneous reactions. The most frequent is pruritus, which occurs in up to 50% of African patients receiving chloroquine and may be severe enough to lead to discontinuation of treatment.

Pigmentation disturbances, including black pigmentation of the face, mucous membranes, and pretibial and subungual areas, occur with antimalarials. Quinacrine (mepacrine) causes generalized, cutaneous yellow discoloration. Less frequent reactions include pustular eruptions (AGEP) and hypersensitivity/DRESS.
 
Management of a Patient with a Drug Eruption

There are four main questions to answer regarding an eruption:

Is it a drug reaction?

Is it a severe eruption or the onset of a form that may become severe?

Which drug(s) are suspected, and which drug(s) should be withdrawn?

What is recommended for future use of drugs?

Early Diagnosis of Severe Eruptions

Rapid recognition of adverse drug reactions that may become serious or life threatening is paramount. Table 55-1 lists clinical and laboratory features that, if present, suggest that the reaction may be serious. Table 55-2 provides key features of the most serious adverse cutaneous reactions. Intensity of symptoms and rapid progression of signs should raise the suspicion of a severe eruption. Any doubt should lead to prompt consultation with a dermatologist and/or referral of the patient to a specialized center.

Table 55-1 Clinical and Laboratory Findings Associated with More Serious Drug-Induced Cutaneous Clinical Findings

 
 
Cutaneous  
  Generalized erythema 
  Facial edema or central facial involvement 
  Skin pain 
  Palpable purpura 
  Target lesions 
  Skin necrosis 
  Blisters or epidermal detachment 
  Positive Nikolsky's sign 
  Mucous membrane erosions 
  Urticaria 
  Swelling of tongue 
General  
  High fever [temperature >40∼C (>104∼F)] 
  Enlarged lymph nodes 
  Arthralgias or arthritis 
  Shortness of breath, wheezing, hypotension 
Laboratory results  
  Eosinophil count >1000/L 
  Lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes 
  Abnormal liver or kidney function tests 
 


Source: Adapted from Roujeau and Stern.
 
Table 55-2 Clinical Features of Severe Cutaneous Drug Reactions

 
 
Diagnosis Mucosal Lesions Typical Skin Lesions Frequent Signs and Symptoms Alternative Causes Not Related to Drugs 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome Erosions usually at two or more sites Small blisters on dusky purpuric macules or atypical targets; rare areas of confluence; detachment 10% of body surface area Most cases involve fever 10-20% cause not determined 
Toxic epidermal necrolysisa
  Erosions usually at two or more sites Individual lesions like those seen in Stevens-Johnson syndrome; confluent erythema; outer layer of epidermis separates readily from basal layer with lateral pressure; large sheet of necrotic epidermis; total detachment of >30% of body surface area Nearly all cases involve fever, "acute skin failure," leukopenia 10每20% cause not determined 
Hypersensitivity syndrome Infrequent Severe exanthematous rash (may become purpuric), exfoliative dermatitis, facial edema 30每50% of cases involve fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis, nephritis, carditis, eosinophilia, atypical lymphocytes Cutaneous lymphoma 
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis About 20% erosions mouth, tongue Initially nonfollicular small pustules overlying edematous erythema, sometimes leading to superficial erosions Fever, burning, pruritus, facial swelling, leukocytosis, hypocalcemia Infection 
Serum sickness or reactions resembling serum sickness Absent Morbilliform lesions, sometimes with urticaria Fever, arthralgias Infection 
Anticoagulant-induced necrosis Infrequent Erythema then purpura and necrosis, especially of fatty areas Pain in affected areas Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, septicemia 
Angioedema Often involved Urticaria or swelling of central part of face Respiratory distress, cardiovascular collapse Insect stings, foods 
 


a Overlap of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis with features of both and attachment of 10每30% of body surface area may occur.

Source: Adapted from Roujeau and Stern.
 

Confirmation of Drug Reaction

The probability of drug etiology varies with the pattern of the reaction. Only fixed drug eruptions are always drug-induced. Morbilliform eruptions are usually viral in children and drug-induced in adults. Among severe reactions, drugs account for 10每20% for anaphylaxis and vasculitis and between 70每90% for AGEP, DRESS, SJS, or TEN. Skin biopsy helps in characterizing the reaction but does not indicate drug causality. Blood counts and liver and renal function tests are important for evaluating organ involvement. The association of mild elevation of liver enzymes and high eosinophil count is frequent but not specific for a drug reaction. Blood tests that could identify an alternative cause, antihistone antibody tests, and serology or polymerase chain reaction for infections may be of great importance for final assessment of etiology.

What Drug(S) to Suspect and Withdraw

Most cases of drug eruptions occur during the first course of treatment with a new medication. A notable exception is IgE-mediated urticaria and anaphylaxis that need presensitization and develop a few minutes to a few hours after rechallenge. Characteristic time of onset to drug reaction: 4每14 days for morbilliform eruptions, 5每28 days for SJS/TEN, and 14每48 days for DRESS. Medications introduced for the first time in the relevant time frame are prime suspects. Two other important elements to suspect causality at this stage are (1) previous experience with the drug in the population and (2) alternative etiologic candidates.

The decision to continue or discontinue any medication will depend on the severity of the reaction, the severity of the primary disease, the degree of suspicion of causality, and the feasibility of an alternative safer treatment. In severe drug reactions, elimination of all possible suspect drugs or unnecessary medications should be attempted. Some rashes may disappear when "treating through" a benign drug-related eruption as seen in patients with AIDS treated for opportunistic infections with antibacterial sulfonamides. The decision to treat through an eruption should, however, remain the exception and withdrawal of every suspect drug the general rule. On the other hand, drugs that are not suspected and are important for the patient, (e.g., antihypertensive agents) generally should not be quickly withdrawn. This approach prevents reluctance to future use of these agents.

Recommendation for Future Use of Drugs

The aims are (1) to prevent the recurrence of the drug eruption and (2) not to compromise future treatments by contraindicating otherwise useful medications.

Begin with thorough assessment of drug causality. Drug causality is evaluated based on timing of the reaction, evaluation of other possible causes, effect of drug withdrawal or continuation, and knowledge of medications that have been associated with the observed reaction. Combination of these criteria leads to considering the causality as definite, probable, possible, or unlikely.

A drug with "unlikely" causality or that has been continued when the reaction improved or was reintroduced without a reaction can be administered safely.

A drug with a "definite" or "probable" causality should be contraindicated, and a warning card or medical alert tag (e.g., wristband) given to the patient.

A drug with a "possible" causality may be submitted to further investigations depending on the expected need for future treatment.

The usefulness of drug tests is still debated. Many in vitro immunologic assays have been developed, but the predictive value of these tests has not been validated in any large series of affected patients; these tests exist primarily for research and not clinical purposes.

In patients with history suggesting immediate IgE-mediated reactions to penicillin, skin testing with major and minor determinants of penicillins or cephalosporins has proved useful for identifying patients at risk of anaphylactic reactions to these agents. However, skin tests themselves carry a small risk of anaphylaxis. Negative skin tests do not totally rule out IgE-mediated reactivity, but the risk of anaphylaxis in response to penicillin administration in patients with negative skin tests is about 1% while about two-thirds of patients with a positive skin test experience an allergic response on rechallenge.

For patients with late drug reactions, the clinical usefulness of skin tests is more questionable. At least one of a combination of several tests (prick, patch, and intradermal) is positive in 50每70% of patients with a reaction "definitely" attributed to a single medication. This low sensitivity probably contributes to the fact that readministration of drugs that had been tested negative resulted in up to 17% eruptions.

Cross-Sensitivity

Because of the possibility of cross-sensitivity among chemically related drugs, many physicians recommend avoidance of not only the medication that induced the reaction but also all drugs of the same pharmacologic class.

There are two types of cross-sensitivity. Reactions that depend on a pharmacologic interaction may recur with all drugs that target the same pathway, whether they are structurally similar or not. This is the case with angioedema caused by NSAIDs and ACE inhibitors. In this situation, the risk of recurrence varies from drug to drug in a particular class; however, avoidance of all drugs in the class is usually recommended. Immune recognition of structurally related drugs is the second mechanism by which cross-sensitivity occurs. A classic example is hypersensitivity to aromatic antiepileptics (barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine) with up to 50% reaction to a second drug in patients who reacted to one. For other drugs, in vitro as well as in vivo data have suggested that cross-reactivity existed only between compounds with very similar chemical structures. Sulfamethoxazole-specific lymphocytes may occasionally recognize a few other antibacterial sulfonamides but not diuretics, antidiabetic drugs, or anti-COX2 NSAIDs with a sulfonamide group.

Recent data suggest that although the risk of a drug eruption to another drug was increased in persons with a prior reaction, "cross-sensitivity" was probably not the explanation. As an example, persons with a history of an allergic-like reaction to penicillin were at higher risk to develop a reaction to antibacterial sulfonamides than to cephalosporin.

These data suggest that the list of drugs to avoid after a drug reaction should be limited to the causative one(s) and to a few very similar medications.

Because of growing evidence that some severe cutaneous reactions to drugs are associated with HLAgenes, it is probably wise to recommend that first-degree family members of patients with severe cutaneous reactions also should avoid these causative medications.

Desensitization can be considered in those with a history of reaction to a medication that must be used again. Efficacy of such procedures has been demonstrated in cases of immediate reaction to penicillin and positive skin tests, anaphylactic reactions to platinum chemotherapy, and delayed reactions to sulfonamides in patients with AIDS. Various protocols are available, including oral and parenteral approaches. Oral desensitization appears to have a lower risk of serious anaphylactic reactions. However, desensitization carries the risk of anaphylaxis regardless of how it is performed and should be performed in monitored clinical settings such as an intensive care unit. After desensitization, many patients experience non-life-threatening reactions during therapy with the culprit drug.

Reporting

Any severe reaction to drugs should be reported to a regulatory agency or to pharmaceutical companies (e.g., MedWatch, http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/default.htm). Because severe reactions are too rare to be detected in premarketing clinical trials, spontaneous reports are of critical importance for early detection of unexpected life-threatening events. To be useful, the report should contain enough details to permit ascertainment of severity and drug causality. This permits recognition of similar cases that may be reported from several different sources.
 
Further Readings

Auquier-Dunant A et al: Severe cutaneous adverse reactions. Correlations between clinical patterns and causes of erythema multiforme majus, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Results of an international prospective study. Arch Dermatol 138:1019, 2002 [PMID: 12164739] 

 
Bachot N, Roujeau JC: Differential diagnosis of severe cutaneous drug eruptions. Am J Clin Dermatol 4:561, 2003 [PMID: 12862499] 

 
Bigby M: Rates of cutaneous reactions to drugs. Arch Dermatol 137:765, 2001 [PMID: 11405768] 

 
Eliaszewicz M et al: Prospective evaluation of risk factors of cutaneous drug reactions to sulfonamides in patients with AIDS. J Am Acad Dermatol 47:40, 2002 [PMID: 12077579] 

 
Fiszenson-Albala F et al: A 6 month prospective survey of cutaneous drug reactions in a hospital setting. Br J Dermatol 149:1018, 2003 [PMID: 14632808] 

 
Fox LP: Nail toxicity associated with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 56:460, 2007 [PMID: 17147969] 

 
Hirsch LJ et al: Predictors of lamotrigine-associated rash. Epilepsia 47:318, 2006 [PMID: 16499755] 

 
Hung SI et al: HLA B*5801 allele as a genetic marker for severe cutaneous reactions caused by allopurinol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:4134, 2005 [PMID: 15743917] 

 
Lange-Asschenfeldt C et al: Cutaneous adverse reactions to psychotropic drugs: data from a multicenter surveillance program. J Clin Psychiatry 70:1258, 2009 [PMID: 19538904] 

 
Lin D, Tucker MJ, Rieder MJ: Increased adverse drug reactions to antimicrobials and anticonvulsants in patients with HIV infection. Ann Pharm 40:1594, 2006 [PMID: 16912251] 

 
Mockenhaupt M et al: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Assessment of medication risks with emphasis on recently marketed drugs. The EuroSCAR-Study. J Invest Dermatol 128:35, 2008 [PMID: 17805350] 

 
Perazella MA: Advanced kidney disease, gadolinium and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: the perfect storm. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens Epub: 2009 

 
Phillips EJ, Mallal SA: HLA and drug-induced toxicity. Curr Opin Mol Therap 11:231, 2009 [PMID: 19479656] 

 
Racette AJ et al: Photoaging and phototoxicity from long-term voriconazole treatment in a 15-year-old girl. J Am Acad Dermatol 52:(S81), 2005 

 
Roujeau JC, Stern RS: Severe adverse cutaneous reactions to drugs. N Engl J Med 331:1272, 1994 [PMID: 7794310] 
 
 

^^
Cutaneous Drug Reactions: Introduction

Cutaneous reactions are among the most frequent adverse reactions to drugs. Most are benign, but a few can be life threatening. Prompt recognition of severe reactions, drug withdrawal, and appropriate therapeutic interventions can minimize toxicity. This chapter focuses on adverse cutaneous reactions to systemic medications; it covers their incidence, patterns, and pathogenesis and provides some practical guidelines on treatment, assessment of causality, and future use of drugs.
 
Use of Prescription Drugs in the United States

In the United States, more than 3 billion prescriptions for over 60,000 drug products, which include more than 2000 different active agents, are dispensed annually. Hospital inpatients alone annually receive about 120 million courses of drug therapy, and half of adult Americans receive prescription drugs on a regular outpatient basis. Many patients use over-the-counter medicines that may cause adverse cutaneous reactions.
 
Incidence of Cutaneous Reactions

Several large cohort studies established that acute cutaneous reaction to drugs affected about 3% of hospital inpatients. Reactions usually occur a few days to 4 weeks after initiation of therapy.

Many drugs of common use are associated with a 1每2% rate of "rashes" during premarketing clinical trials. The risk is often higher when medications are used in general, unselected populations. The rate may reach 3每7% for amoxicillin, sulfamethoxazole, and many anticonvulsants. It may be even higher with anti-HIV agents.

In addition to acute eruptions, a variety of skin diseases can be induced or exacerbated by prolonged use of drugs (e.g., pruritus, pigmentation, nail or hair disorders, psoriasis, pemphigoid, and pemphigus). These drug reactions are not frequent, but neither their incidence nor their impact on public health has been evaluated.

In a series of 48,005 inpatients over a 20-year period, morbilliform rash (91%) and urticaria (6%) were the most frequent skin reactions. Severe reactions are actually too rare to be detected in such cohorts. Although rare, severe cutaneous reactions to drugs have an important impact on health and on the risk-versus-benefit evaluation of medicines because of significant sequelae, including mortality. In one prospective study in the hospital setting, adverse drug rash was responsible for hospitalization, increased the duration of hospital stay, or was life threatening. Some populations are at increased risk of drug reactions: patients with collagen vascular diseases, bone marrow graft recipients, and those with acute Epstein-Barr virus infection. The pathophysiology underlying this association is unknown. It has also been established that HIV infection increases the risk of drug allergy, including severe hypersensitivity reactions (Chap. 189). This was true for many drugs but has been evaluated mainly with sulfamethoxazole. Up to 40% of HIV-infected patients had skin reactions when treated with high doses, and about 15% reacted to the same dosage that induced eruption in 3每5% of non-HIV-infected populations. How HIV promotes sensitivity to certain medications or their metabolites remains unclear.
 
Pathogenesis of Drug Reactions

The skin is commonly affected by adverse drug reactions. The list of conditions that can be triggered by medications includes nearly all dermatologic diseases. Adverse cutaneous responses to drugs can arise as a result of immunologic or nonimmunologic mechanisms. Examples of responses that arise from nonimmunologic mechanisms are pigmentary changes related to accumulation in the dermis of amiodarone, antimalarials, minocycline, quinolones, alteration of hair follicles by antimetabolites, and lipodystrophy associated with metabolic effects of anti-HIV medications. These side effects are mostly toxic, predictable, and often can be avoided in part by simple preventive measures.

Immunologic Drug Reactions

Evidence suggests an immunologic basis for most acute drug eruptions, benign or severe. Drug-specific T cell clones can be derived from the blood or from skin lesions of patients with a variety of drug allergies, strongly suggesting that drugs can be recognized as antigens by human T cells and that these T cells play a role in drug allergy. Specific clones were obtained with penicillin G, amoxicillin, cephalosporins, sulfamethoxazole, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, lamotrigine (i.e., many of the medications that are frequently a cause of drug eruptions). Both CD4 and CD8 clones have been obtained; however, their specific roles in the manifestations of allergy have not been elucidated. Drug presentation to T cells was MHC-restricted and may involve hapten-peptide complexes formed between drugs or reactive metabolites and endogenous cell-surface proteins.

Once a drug has induced an immune response, the final phenotype of the reaction probably depends on the nature of effectors: cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells in blistering and certain hypersensitivity reactions, chemokines for reactions mediated by neutrophils or eosinophils, and collaboration with B cells for production of specific antibodies for urticarial reactions.

Immediate Reactions

Immediate reactions depend on the release of mediators of inflammation by tissue mast cells or circulating basophilic leukocytes. These mediators include histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, platelet-activating factor, enzymes, and proteoglycans. Drugs can trigger mediator release either directly ("anaphylactoid" reaction) or through IgE-specific antibodies. These reactions usually manifest in the skin and gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems (Chap. 317). Primary symptoms and signs include pruritus, urticaria, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, bronchospasm, laryngeal edema, and, occasionally, anaphylactic shock with hypotension and death. They occur within minutes of drug exposure. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including aspirin, and radiocontrast media are frequent causes of direct mast cell degranulation or anaphylactoid reactions, which can occur on first exposure. Penicillins and muscle relaxants used in general anesthesia are the most frequent causes of IgE-dependent reactions to drugs, which require prior sensitization. Release of mediators is triggered when polyvalent drug protein conjugates cross-link IgE molecules fixed to sensitized cells. Certain routes of administration favor different clinical patterns (e.g., gastrointestinal effects from oral route, circulatory effects from intravenous route).

Immune Complex每Dependent Reactions

Serum sickness is produced by tissue deposition of circulating immune complexes with consumption of complement. It is characterized by fever, arthritis, nephritis, neuritis, edema, and an urticarial, papular, or purpuric rash (Chap. 326). First described following administration of nonhuman sera, it currently occurs in the setting of monoclonal antibodies and other similar medications. In classic serum sickness, symptoms develop 6 days or more after exposure to a drug, the latent period representing the time needed to synthesize antibody. Cephalosporin administration may be associated with a clinically similar "serum sickness-like" reaction in children. The mechanism of this reaction is unknown but is unrelated to complement activation and lacks immune complex formation, vasculitis, or renal disease.

Cutaneous or systemic vasculitis, a relatively rare cutaneous complication of drugs, may also be a result of immune complex deposition (Chap. 326).

Delayed Hypersensitivity

Delayed hypersensitivity directed by drug-specific T cells is probably the most important mechanism in the etiology of the most common drug eruptions〞morbilliform eruptions〞and also of rare and severe forms such as hypersensitivity syndrome, acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). Drug-specific T cells have been detected in these types of drug eruptions. It remains unknown why T cell stimulation by medications leads to reactions that are clinically so diverse.

Contrary to what has been believed for years, the antigen is more often the native drug itself than its metabolites. Drug-specific cytotoxic T cells have been detected in the skin lesions of fixed drug eruptions and of TEN. In TEN, blisters that result from accumulation of interstitial fluid under the necrotic epidermis contain T lymphocytes reactive to autologous lymphocytes and keratinocytes in a drug-specific, HLA-restricted, and perforin/granzyme-mediated pathway.

Drug-specific clones producing CXCL8, a neutrophil-attracting chemokine, were obtained from skin biopsies of patients with AGEP, a neutrophil-mediated drug reaction.

Genetic Factors and Cutaneous Drug Reactions

Genetic determinants may predispose individuals to severe drug reactions by affecting either drug metabolism or immune responses to drugs. Polymorphisms in cytochrome P450 enzymes may increase susceptibility to drug toxicity, highlighting a role for differential pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic effects. It has also been suspected that a slow acetylator phenotype increases the risk of rash from sulfonamides. However, in two large prospective cohorts of HIV-infected patients treated with sulfonamides, no association of drug eruption with acetylation genotype was found.

Associations between drug hypersensitivities and HLAhaplotypes also suggest a key role for immune mechanisms. Hypersensitivity to the anti-HIV medication abacavir is strongly associated with HLA B*5701. In Taiwan, within a homogeneous Han Chinese population, a 100% association was observed between SJS or TEN related to carbamazepine and HLA B*1502. In the same population, another 100% association was found between SJS, TEN, or hypersensitivity syndrome/drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) related to allopurinol and HLA B*5801. Additional adverse cutaneous drug reactions have been linked to other HLA haplotypes. However, the strong associations found in Taiwan have not been observed in other countries with more heterogeneous populations. Development of molecular screening tests for abacavir hypersensitivity is under way as a model for implementing individualized pharmacogenetic screening in clinical practice.
 
Clinical Presentation of Cutaneous Drug Reactions

Nonimmune Cutaneous Reactions

Exacerbation or Induction of Dermatologic Diseases

A variety of drugs can exacerbate preexisting diseases or sometimes induce a disease that may or may not disappear after withdrawal of the inducing medication. For example, NSAIDs, lithium, beta blockers, TNF-cytokine antagonists, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can exacerbate plaque psoriasis, while antimalarials and withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids can worsen pustular psoriasis. Acne may be induced by glucocorticoids, androgens, lithium, and antidepressants. Minocycline and thiazide diuretics may exacerbate subacute systemic lupus erythematosus; and pemphigus can be induced by D-penicillamine, captopril, and other ACE inhibitors. Furosemide is associated with drug-induced bullous pemphigoid. The hypothesis that a drug may be responsible should always be considered, especially in cases with atypical clinical presentation.

Photosensitivity Eruptions

Photosensitivity eruptions are usually most marked in sun-exposed areas but may extend to sun-protected areas. The mechanism is almost always phototoxicity. Phototoxic reactions resemble sunburn and can occur with first exposure to a drug. Blistering may occur in drug-related pseudoporphyria. The severity of the reactions depends on the tissue level of the drug, its efficiency as a photosensitizer, and the extent of exposure to the activating wavelengths of ultraviolet light (Chap. 56).

Common orally administered photosensitizing drugs include many fluoroquinolones and tetracycline antibiotics. Other drugs less frequently encountered are chlorpromazine, thiazides, and several NSAIDs (ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam). Voriconazole may result in severe photosensitivity and accelerated photo-induced aging in certain organ transplant recipients.

Because UV-A and visible light, which trigger these reactions, are not easily absorbed by nonopaque sunscreens and are transmitted through window glass, photosensitivity reactions may be difficult to block. Photosensitivity reactions abate with removal of either the drug or ultraviolet radiation, use of high-potency sunscreens that block UV-A light, and treating the reaction as one would a sunburn. Rarely, individuals develop persistent reactivity to light, necessitating long-term avoidance of sun exposure.

Pigmentation Changes

Drugs, either systemic or topical, may cause a variety of pigmentary changes in the skin. Oral contraceptives may induce melasma. Long-term minocycline, pefloxacin, and amiodarone may cause blue-gray pigmentation. Long-term, high-dose phenothiazine results in gray-brown pigmentation of sun-exposed areas. Numerous cancer chemotherapeutic agents may be associated with characteristic patterns of pigmentation (e.g., bleomycin, busulfan, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, hydroxyurea, and methotrexate). Pigmentation changes may also occur in mucous membranes (busulfan), nails (zidovudine), hair, and teeth.

Warfarin Necrosis of Skin

This rare reaction usually occurs between the third and tenth days of therapy with warfarin, usually in women. Common sites are breasts, thighs, and buttocks (Fig. 55-1). Lesions are sharply demarcated, erythematous, indurated, and purpuric and may progress to form large, irregular, hemorrhagic bullae with eventual necrosis and slow-healing eschar formation. These lesions can be life threatening.

Figure 55-1

 
 
 
Warfarin necrosis.
 
 

Development of the syndrome is unrelated to drug dose, and the course is not altered by discontinuation of the drug after onset of the eruption. Warfarin reactions are associated with protein C deficiency. Warfarin anticoagulation in heterozygotes for protein C deficiency causes a precipitous fall in circulating levels of protein C, permitting hypercoagulability and thrombosis in the cutaneous microvasculature, with consequent areas of necrosis. Similar reactions have been associated with heparin. Heparin-induced necrosis may have clinically similar features but is probably due to heparin-induced platelet aggregation with subsequent occlusion of blood vessels; it can affect areas adjacent to the injection site or more distant sites if infused.

Warfarin-induced cutaneous necrosis is treated with vitamin K, heparin, and intensive wound care. Treatment with protein C concentrates may also be helpful.

Drug-Induced Hair Disorders

Drug-Induced Hair Loss

Medications may affect hair follicles at two different phases of their growth cycle: anagen (growth) or telogen (resting). Anagen effluvium occurs within days of drug administration, especially with antimetabolite or other chemotherapeutic drugs. In contrast, in telogen effluvium, the delay is 2 to 4 months following initiation of a new medication, or after childbirth, acute illness, or severe stress. In drug-related cases, both present as diffuse nonscarring alopecia most often reversible after discontinuation of the responsible agent.

The prevalence and severity of alopecia depend on the drug as well as on an individual's predisposition. A considerable number of drugs have been reported to induce hair loss. These include antineoplastic agents (alkylating agents, bleomycin, vinca alkaloids, platinum compounds), anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, valproate), antihypertensive drugs (beta blockers), antidepressants, antithyroid drugs, interferons (IFNs), oral contraceptives, and cholesterol-lowering agents.

Hirsutism

Hirsutism is an excessive growth of terminal hair with masculine hair growth pattern in a female, most often on the face and trunk. Hirsutism results from androgenic stimulation of hormone-sensitive hair follicles.

Anabolic steroids, oral contraceptives of the nonsteroid progesterone type, testosterone, and corticotropin can induce hirsutism.

Hypertrichosis

Hypertrichosis differs from hirsutism by being located mainly on the forehead and temporal regions of the face. It is usually reversible. Drugs responsible for hypertrichosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, glucocorticoids, vasodilators (diazoxide, minoxidil), diuretics (acetazolamide), anticonvulsants (phenytoin), immunosuppressive agents, psoralens, and zidovudine.

Changes in hair color or structure are uncommon adverse effects from medications. Hair discoloration may occur with chloroquine, IFN-, chemotherapeutic agents, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Changes in hair structure have been observed in patients given epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors.

Drug-Induced Nail Disorders

Drug-related nail disorders usually involve several or all 20 nails and need months to resolve after withdrawal of the offending agent. The pathogenesis is most often toxic. Drug-induced nail changes include Beau's line (transverse depression of the nail plate), onycholysis (detachment of the distal part of the nail plate), onychomadesis (detachment of the proximal part of the nail plate), pigmentation, and paronychia (inflammation of periungual skin).

Onycholysis

Onycholysis occurs with tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, phenothiazines, and psoralens, as well as in persons taking NSAIDs, captopril, retinoids, sodium valproate, and many chemotherapeutic agents such as anthracyclines or taxanes including paclitaxel and docetaxel. The risk of onycholysis in patients receiving cytotoxic drugs can be increased by exposure to sunlight.

Onychomadesis

Onychomadesis is caused by temporary arrest of nail matrix mitotic activity. Common drugs reported to induce onychomadesis include carbamazepine, lithium, retinoids, and chemotherapeutic agents such as cyclophosphamide and vincristine.

Paronychia

Paronychia and multiple pyogenic granuloma with progressive and painful periungual abscess of fingers and toes are a side effect of systemic retinoids, lamivudine, indinavir, and anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies (cetuximab, gefitinib).

Nail Discoloration

Some drugs〞including anthracyclines, taxanes, fluorouracil, and zidovudine〞may induce nail bed hyperpigmentation through melanocyte stimulation. It appears to be reversible and dose-dependent.

Pruritus

Pruritus is a common symptom of most drug eruptions, but it may also occur without skin lesions as the only manifestation of drug intolerance. Severe pruritus may occur in up to 50% of African patients treated with antimalarials and leads to poor compliance. It is much rarer in Caucasians.

Immune Cutaneous Reactions: Benign

Maculopapular Eruptions

Morbilliform or maculopapular eruptions (Fig. 55-2) are the most common of all drug-induced reactions, often start on the trunk or intertriginous areas, and consist of erythematous macules and papules that are frequently symmetric and may become confluent. Involvement of mucous membranes is unusual, with the exception of scaly lips; the eruption may be associated with moderate to severe pruritus and fever. Diagnosis is rarely assisted by laboratory testing. Skin biopsy is useless because it shows normal skin or very mild and nonspecific changes. A viral exanthem is the principal differential diagnostic consideration, especially in children, and graft-versus-host-disease in the proper clinical setting. Absence of enanthems; absence of symptoms in ears, nose, throat, and upper respiratory tract; and polymorphism of the skin lesions support a drug rather than a viral eruption.

Figure 55-2

 
 
 
Morbilliform drug eruption.
 
 

Maculopapular reactions usually develop within 1 week of initiation of therapy and last less than 2 weeks. Occasionally, these eruptions decrease with continued use of the responsible drug. Because the eruption may also worsen, the suspect drug should be discontinued unless it is essential. Oral antihistamines, emollients, and soothing baths may help relieve pruritus. Short courses of potent topical glucocorticoids can reduce inflammation and symptoms. Systemic glucocorticoid treatment is rarely indicated.

Urticaria/Angioedema

Urticaria is the second most frequent type of cutaneous reaction to drugs. However, "drug allergy" explains no more than 10每20% of acute urticaria cases. It is a skin reaction characterized by pruritic, red wheals of varying size. Individual lesions rarely last more than 24 hours. Deep edema within dermal and subcutaneous tissues is known as angioedema. Angioedema may involve respiratory and gastrointestinal mucous membranes. Urticaria and angioedema may be part of a life-threatening anaphylactic reaction.

Drug-induced urticaria may be caused by three mechanisms: an IgE-dependent mechanism, circulating immune complexes (serum sickness), and nonimmunologic activation of effector pathways. IgE-dependent urticarial reactions usually occur within 36 hours of drug exposure but can occur within minutes. Immune complex每induced urticaria associated with serum sickness usually occurs 6每12 days after first exposure. In this syndrome, the urticarial eruption may be accompanied by fever, hematuria, arthralgias, hepatic dysfunction, and neurologic symptoms. Certain drugs, such as NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II antagonists, and radiographic dyes, may induce urticarial reactions, angioedema, and anaphylaxis in the absence of drug-specific antibody through direct mast-cell degranulation.

Although ACE inhibitors, aspirin, penicillin, and blood products are the most frequent causes of urticarial eruptions, urticaria has been observed in association with nearly all drugs. Drugs may also cause chronic urticaria, which lasts more than 6 weeks. Aspirin frequently exacerbates this problem.

The treatment of urticaria or angioedema depends on the severity of the reaction and the rate at which it is evolving. In severe cases with respiratory or cardiovascular compromise, epinephrine is the mainstay of therapy, but its effect is reduced in patients using beta blockers. Treatment with systemic glucocorticoids, sometimes administered IV, is helpful. In addition to drug withdrawal, for patients with only cutaneous symptoms and without symptoms of angioedema or anaphylaxis, oral antihistamines are usually sufficient.

Fixed Drug Eruptions

These reactions are characterized by one or more sharply demarcated, erythematous lesions, sometimes leading to a blister. Hyperpigmentation often results after resolution of the acute inflammation. With rechallenge, the lesion recurs in the same (i.e., fixed) location. Lesions often involve the lips, hands, legs, face, genitalia, and oral mucosa and cause a burning sensation. Most patients have multiple lesions. Fixed drug eruptions have been associated with pseudoephedrine (frequently a nonpigmented reaction), phenolphthalein (in laxatives), sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and barbiturates. Patch testing has been used in Europe to help establish the etiology.

Immune Cutaneous Reactions: Severe

Vasculitis

Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis often presents as palpable purpuric lesions that may be generalized or limited to the lower extremities or other dependent areas (Chap. 326). Urticarial lesions, ulcers, and hemorrhagic blisters also occur. Vasculitis may involve other organs, including the liver, kidney, brain, and joints. Drugs are implicated as a cause of 10每15% of all cases of vasculitides. Infection, malignancy, and collagen vascular disease are responsible for the majority non-drug related cases.

Propylthiouracil induces a cutaneousvasculitis that is accompanied by leukopenia and splenomegaly. Direct immunofluorescent changes in these lesions suggest immune-complex deposition. Drugs implicated in vasculitis include allopurinol, thiazides, sulfonamides, other antimicrobials, and several NSAIDs. The presence of eosinophils in the perivascular infiltrate of skin biopsy suggests a drug etiology.

Pustular Eruptions

AGEP is a rare reaction pattern that is often associated with exposure to drugs. Usually beginning on the face or intertriginous areas, small nonfollicular pustules overlying erythematous and edematous skin may coalesce and lead to superficial ulceration. Differentiating this eruption from TEN in its initial stages may be difficult. A skin biopsy is important and shows scattered pustules in the upper part of the epidermis instead of the full-thickness necrosis that characterizes TEN. Fever is present with elevated neutrophil counts, and sepsis is often suspected. Acute pustular psoriasis is the principal differential diagnostic consideration. AGEP often begins within a few days of initiating drug treatment, most notably antibiotics. For other associated drugs (e.g., diltiazem, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, or terbinafine), AGEP begins later: 7每14 days after initiation of treatment.

Hypersensitivity Syndrome

Initially described with phenytoin, hypersensitivity syndrome〞a multiorgan drug-induced reaction〞is also known as DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) and drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS). It presents as a widespread erythematous eruption that may become purpuric or lichenoid and is accompanied by many of the following features: fever, facial and periorbital edema, tender and generalized lymphadenopathy, leukocytosis (often with atypical lymphocytes and eosinophilia), hepatitis, and sometimes nephritis or pneumonitis. The cutaneous reaction usually begins 2 to 8 weeks after the drug is started and lasts longer than mild eruptions after drug cessation. Signs and symptoms may persist for several weeks, especially those associated with hepatitis. The eruption recurs with rechallenge, and cross-reactions among aromatic anticonvulsants, including phenytoin, carbamazepine, and barbiturates, are frequent. Other drugs causing this syndrome include lamotrigine, minocycline, dapsone, allopurinol, and sulfo- namides, as well as abacavir and zalcitabine in HIV-infected patients. Hypersensitivity to reactive drug metabolites, hydroxylamine for sulfamethoxazole, and arene oxide for aromatic anticonvulsants may be involved in the pathogenesis of DRESS. Reactivation of herpes viruses, especially of herpes virus 6, has been reported to be frequent in this syndrome. The role of virus infection is still unclear; it may contribute to long-lasting manifestations such as hepatitis or encephalitis. Mortality rates as high as 10% have been reported; mortality is highest in association with hepatitis. Systemic glucocorticoids (prednisone, 1.5每2 mg/kg per d) should be started with slow taper over 8每12 weeks. Topical, high-potency glucocorticoids may also be helpful. In all cases, rapid withdrawal of the suspected drug is required. Patients should be closely monitored for resolution of organ dysfunction and for development of late-onset autoimmune thyroiditis (up to 6 months).

Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

SJS and TEN are characterized by blisters and epidermal detachment resulting from epidermal necrosis in the absence of substantial dermal inflammation. The term Stevens-Johnson syndrome is now used to describe cases with blisters developing on target lesions, dusky or purpuric macules in which mucosal involvement is significant, and total body surface area blistering and eventual detachment is <10%. The term Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis overlap is used to describe cases with 10每30% detachment, and TEN is used to describe cases with >30% detachment. Erythema multiforme major is now considered by most to be different from SJS. Erythema multiforme (EM) is characterized by mucosal involvement and true "target" lesions or atypical raised target lesions often more acrally distributed and with limited extent of skin detachment. EM is most often triggered by infection, particularly herpes simplex virus or mycoplasma pneumoniae.

Patients with SJS, SJS/TEN, or TEN initially present with acute symptoms, painful skin lesions, fever >39∼C (102.2∼F), sore throat, and conjunctivitis resulting from mucosal membrane and ocular lesions. Intestinal and pulmonary involvements are associated with a poor prognosis, as are a greater extent of epidermal detachment and older age. About 10% and 30% of SJS- and TEN-affected persons die from their disease, respectively. Drugs that most commonly cause SJS or TEN are sulfonamides, nevirapine, allopurinol, lamotrigine, aromatic anticonvulsants, and the oxicam NSAIDs. At this time, SJS or TEN have no treatment of proven efficacy. The best results come from early diagnosis, immediate discontinuation of any suspected drug, supportive therapy, and paying close attention to ocular complications and infection. Frozen-section skin biopsy may aid in rapid diagnosis. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy (prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg) may be useful early in the evolution of the disease, but long-term systemic glucocorticoid use has been associated with higher mortality. After initial enthusiasm for the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the treatment of SJS/TEN, some recent data suggest IVIG is unlikely to benefit these patients. Randomized studies to more definitively assess the potential benefit of systemic glucocorticoids and IVIG are lacking and difficult to perform but are necessary.
 
Drugs of Special Interest

Allopurinol

Together with sulfonamides and antiepileptics, allopurinol is a frequent cause of mild maculopapular eruptions (in at least 3% of users) and may also cause more severe reactions including hypersensitivity/DRESS and SJS/TEN; patients with HLA B*5801 are highly susceptible to these severe reactions.

Anti-HIV Medications

In clinical trials, combinations of highly active antiretroviral treatments were frequently associated with 10% "drug eruptions." Two drugs, nevirapine and abacavir, have been associated with specific risks.

Nevirapine has both a high risk of maculopapular eruptions and a very high risk (about 1 in 1000) of SJS or TEN. Progressive escalation of daily doses has been shown to decrease the risk of mild eruption but does not abrogate the risk of severe reactions.

Abacavir is associated with a 4每8% risk of a hypersensitivity reaction, which is remarkable because of the association of symptoms suggesting a type I hypersensitivity reaction (dyspnea, diarrhea, low blood pressure, shock on rechallenge) as well as signs of delayed hypersensitivity (rash, late onset hepatitis). The risk is lower in patients of African ancestry and strongly correlated with HLA B*5701. Evidence supports patch testing for abacavir hypersensitivity, and additional molecular screening methods are being developed to identify susceptible individuals.

Penicillin

Incidence of cutaneous reactions due to penicillin is about 1%. About 85% of cutaneous reactions are morbilliform, and about 10% are urticaria or angioedema. Anaphylaxis and serum sickness appear to be due to IgE antibodies in serum.

Delayed reactions, mainly maculopapular eruptions, are much more common with aminopenicillins, involving 4每7% of users. The question of cross-reactivity between -lactam antibiotics and preventing the risk of anaphylaxis is discussed below ("Management of a Patient with a Drug Eruption"). Approximately 10% of patients with penicillin allergies will also develop allergic reactions to cephalosporin class antibiotics.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs

Most NSAIDs, including aspirin, cause immediate, allergy-like symptoms in susceptible individuals. Approximately 1% of persons experience urticaria or angioedema, and rare individuals (0.5%) experience rhinosinusitis and asthma.

Urticaria/angioedema may be delayed up to 24 hours and may occur at any age. The rhinosinusitis-asthma syndrome generally develops within 1 hour of drug administration. Recurrences are frequent and can be complicated by nasal and sinus infection, polyposis, bloody discharge, and nasal eosinophilia. In many individuals with this syndrome, potentially life-threatening asthma may ensue whenever NSAIDs are subsequently ingested. Proof of the association of symptoms and NSAID use requires either clear-cut history of symptoms following drug ingestion or an oral challenge. That procedure must be conducted only in a hospital setting by experienced personnel. Cross-reactivity between NSAIDs that inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX) 1 is common, while reactivity to COX-2 inhibitors is less frequent. The reaction is pharmacologic, and patients who are sensitive to NSAIDs cannot be identified by assessment of IgE antibody to aspirin, lymphocyte sensitization, or in vitro immunologic testing.

Other reactions can also occur with NSAIDs, including phototoxicity with many agents, a pattern of pseudoporphyria being often related to naproxen, hypersensitivity/DRESS (oxicam derivatives, COX-2 inhibitors), and SJS or TEN (phenylbutazone, oxicam derivatives).

Radiocontrast Media

Many patients are exposed to radiocontrast agents, which can be a cause of adverse drug reactions. High-osmolality radiocontrast media were about five times more likely to induce urticaria (1%) or anaphylaxis than were newer low-osmolality media. Severe reactions are rare with either type of contrast media. About one-third of those with mild reactions to previous exposure react on re-exposure. Pretreatment with prednisone and diphenhydramine reduces reaction rates. Persons with a reaction to a high-osmolality contrast media should be given low-osmolality media if later contrast studies are required.

A new association between certain types of gadolinium contrast and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a condition of sclerosing skin with rare internal organ involvement, has been reported; advanced renal compromise may be an important risk factor.

Anticonvulsants

Phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine are associated with many types of severe reactions in adults and a high incidence of less-severe reactions in children. These drugs carry the highest risk of SJS, TEN, and hypersensitivity syndrome in immunologically normal patients. There are strong HLA associations with anticonvulsant-induced toxicity in Han Chinese (see above). Aromatic anticonvulsants can induce a pseudolymphoma syndrome and induce gingival hyperplasia.

The overall rate of lamotrigine associated rash is lower in patients whose doses are slowly increased, but whether or not the risk of more severe reactions is reduced by slow dose escalation is less clear. Patients who also use valproate, which increases lamotrigine levels and half life, have a higher risk of skin reactions.

Sulfonamides

Antibacterial sulfonamides cause cutaneous eruptions at a high rate and are among the drugs most frequently implicated in SJS and TEN. The combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim frequently induces adverse cutaneous reactions in patients with AIDS (Chap. 182). Desensitization is often successful in AIDS patients with morbilliform eruptions but is not recommended in AIDS patients who manifested erythroderma or a bullous reaction in response to their earlier sulfonamide exposure.

Reaction rates are much lower with nonantibiotic sulfonamides, including diuretics or antidiabetic agents. Cross-reactivity between antibiotic and nonantibiotic sulfonamides is at most infrequent.

Vancomycin

Vancomycin causes two unusual but recognizable cutaneous reactions: linear IgA bullous dermatosis (a transient, blistering eruption) and red man syndrome. Red man syndrome occurs during rapid IV infusion of vancomycin. This is thought to be a histamine-related anaphylactoid reaction characterized by flushing, diffuse maculopapular eruption, hypotension, and, in rare cases, cardiac arrest.

Agents Used in Cancer Chemotherapy

Because many agents used in cancer chemotherapy inhibit cell division, rapidly proliferating elements of the skin, including hair, mucous membranes, and appendages, are sensitive to their effects. As a result, stomatitis and alopecia are among the most frequent dose-dependent side effects of chemotherapy. Various nail abnormalities have been described: onycholysis, dystrophy, Beau's lines, white lines, and pigmentation. Sterile cellulitis and phlebitis and ulceration of pressure areas occur with many of these agents. Also reported is acral erythema, which begins with dysesthesia followed by redness and a painful edematous eruption of the palms and soles, and is caused by cytarabine, doxorubicin, methotrexate, hydroxyurea, and 5-fluorouracil. Pyridoxine alleviates symptoms of acral erythema. Urticaria, angioedema, and exfoliative dermatitis also have been seen, as has local and diffuse hyperpigmentation.

Hypersensitivity to carboplatin or cisplatin is not rare (with an incidence of 10每20%) among patients receiving multiple treatments with these drugs. It is probably IgE mediated. Moderate to severe reactions, including respiratory distress and hypotension, are also observed in 10每20% of patients receiving paclitaxel regardless of premedication with glucocorticoids and histamine H(1) and H(2) antagonists.

Cetuximab and other EGF receptor antagonists induce follicular eruptions and nail toxicity after a mean interval of 10 days in a majority of patients. Xerosis, eczematous eruptions, and pruritus also frequently occur with EGF receptor antagonists. The severity of the eruption correlates with a better anticancer effect. Systemic antibiotics, topical antiacne treatments, and supportive care are helpful. Sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, may result in follicular eruptions and bullous palmoplantar eruptions with dysesthesia.

Glucocorticoids

Both systemic and topical glucocorticoids cause a variety of skin changes, including acneiform eruptions, atrophy, striae, and other stigmata of Cushing's syndrome. And, in sufficiently high doses, glucocorticoids can retard wound healing. Patients using glucocorticoids are at higher risk for bacterial, yeast, and fungal skin infections that may be misinterpreted as drug eruptions but are instead drug side effects. Allergy to glucocorticoids may also occur either as contact dermatitis to topical formulations or as systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis.

Biologic Therapies

These include cytokines, cytokine antagonists, and monoclonal antibodies.

Injection-site reactions are the most frequent adverse events. The severity varies from mild redness to deep inflammation and necrosis. In most cases, the treatment can be continued and the severity of reactions will decrease with time.

Like all foreign proteins, monoclonal antibodies may induce urticaria, angioedema, anaphylactic reactions, and serum sickness. Production of inactivating antibodies to the drug may occur, classically with infliximab, and may be prevented by concomitant administration of low-dose methotrexate.

Alopecia is a common complication of IFN-. A nonspecific, highly pruritic "dermatitis" is frequent in patients receiving IFN and ribavirin for hepatitis C.

Induction or exacerbation of various immune-mediated disorders, especially lupus erythematosus, has been reported with interleukin 2, IFN-, and antitumor necrosis factor .

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor may induce various neutrophilic dermatoses, including Sweet's syndrome and pyoderma gangrenosum, and can exacerbate psoriasis.

Antimalarial Agents

Antimalarial agents are used as therapy for several skin diseases, including the skin manifestations of lupus and polymorphous light eruption, but they can also induce cutaneous reactions. The most frequent is pruritus, which occurs in up to 50% of African patients receiving chloroquine and may be severe enough to lead to discontinuation of treatment.

Pigmentation disturbances, including black pigmentation of the face, mucous membranes, and pretibial and subungual areas, occur with antimalarials. Quinacrine (mepacrine) causes generalized, cutaneous yellow discoloration. Less frequent reactions include pustular eruptions (AGEP) and hypersensitivity/DRESS.
 
Management of a Patient with a Drug Eruption

There are four main questions to answer regarding an eruption:

Is it a drug reaction?

Is it a severe eruption or the onset of a form that may become severe?

Which drug(s) are suspected, and which drug(s) should be withdrawn?

What is recommended for future use of drugs?

Early Diagnosis of Severe Eruptions

Rapid recognition of adverse drug reactions that may become serious or life threatening is paramount. Table 55-1 lists clinical and laboratory features that, if present, suggest that the reaction may be serious. Table 55-2 provides key features of the most serious adverse cutaneous reactions. Intensity of symptoms and rapid progression of signs should raise the suspicion of a severe eruption. Any doubt should lead to prompt consultation with a dermatologist and/or referral of the patient to a specialized center.

Table 55-1 Clinical and Laboratory Findings Associated with More Serious Drug-Induced Cutaneous Clinical Findings

 
 
Cutaneous  
  Generalized erythema 
  Facial edema or central facial involvement 
  Skin pain 
  Palpable purpura 
  Target lesions 
  Skin necrosis 
  Blisters or epidermal detachment 
  Positive Nikolsky's sign 
  Mucous membrane erosions 
  Urticaria 
  Swelling of tongue 
General  
  High fever [temperature >40∼C (>104∼F)] 
  Enlarged lymph nodes 
  Arthralgias or arthritis 
  Shortness of breath, wheezing, hypotension 
Laboratory results  
  Eosinophil count >1000/L 
  Lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes 
  Abnormal liver or kidney function tests 
 


Source: Adapted from Roujeau and Stern.
 
Table 55-2 Clinical Features of Severe Cutaneous Drug Reactions

 
 
Diagnosis Mucosal Lesions Typical Skin Lesions Frequent Signs and Symptoms Alternative Causes Not Related to Drugs 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome Erosions usually at two or more sites Small blisters on dusky purpuric macules or atypical targets; rare areas of confluence; detachment 10% of body surface area Most cases involve fever 10-20% cause not determined 
Toxic epidermal necrolysisa
  Erosions usually at two or more sites Individual lesions like those seen in Stevens-Johnson syndrome; confluent erythema; outer layer of epidermis separates readily from basal layer with lateral pressure; large sheet of necrotic epidermis; total detachment of >30% of body surface area Nearly all cases involve fever, "acute skin failure," leukopenia 10每20% cause not determined 
Hypersensitivity syndrome Infrequent Severe exanthematous rash (may become purpuric), exfoliative dermatitis, facial edema 30每50% of cases involve fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis, nephritis, carditis, eosinophilia, atypical lymphocytes Cutaneous lymphoma 
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis About 20% erosions mouth, tongue Initially nonfollicular small pustules overlying edematous erythema, sometimes leading to superficial erosions Fever, burning, pruritus, facial swelling, leukocytosis, hypocalcemia Infection 
Serum sickness or reactions resembling serum sickness Absent Morbilliform lesions, sometimes with urticaria Fever, arthralgias Infection 
Anticoagulant-induced necrosis Infrequent Erythema then purpura and necrosis, especially of fatty areas Pain in affected areas Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, septicemia 
Angioedema Often involved Urticaria or swelling of central part of face Respiratory distress, cardiovascular collapse Insect stings, foods 
 


a Overlap of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis with features of both and attachment of 10每30% of body surface area may occur.

Source: Adapted from Roujeau and Stern.
 

Confirmation of Drug Reaction

The probability of drug etiology varies with the pattern of the reaction. Only fixed drug eruptions are always drug-induced. Morbilliform eruptions are usually viral in children and drug-induced in adults. Among severe reactions, drugs account for 10每20% for anaphylaxis and vasculitis and between 70每90% for AGEP, DRESS, SJS, or TEN. Skin biopsy helps in characterizing the reaction but does not indicate drug causality. Blood counts and liver and renal function tests are important for evaluating organ involvement. The association of mild elevation of liver enzymes and high eosinophil count is frequent but not specific for a drug reaction. Blood tests that could identify an alternative cause, antihistone antibody tests, and serology or polymerase chain reaction for infections may be of great importance for final assessment of etiology.

What Drug(S) to Suspect and Withdraw

Most cases of drug eruptions occur during the first course of treatment with a new medication. A notable exception is IgE-mediated urticaria and anaphylaxis that need presensitization and develop a few minutes to a few hours after rechallenge. Characteristic time of onset to drug reaction: 4每14 days for morbilliform eruptions, 5每28 days for SJS/TEN, and 14每48 days for DRESS. Medications introduced for the first time in the relevant time frame are prime suspects. Two other important elements to suspect causality at this stage are (1) previous experience with the drug in the population and (2) alternative etiologic candidates.

The decision to continue or discontinue any medication will depend on the severity of the reaction, the severity of the primary disease, the degree of suspicion of causality, and the feasibility of an alternative safer treatment. In severe drug reactions, elimination of all possible suspect drugs or unnecessary medications should be attempted. Some rashes may disappear when "treating through" a benign drug-related eruption as seen in patients with AIDS treated for opportunistic infections with antibacterial sulfonamides. The decision to treat through an eruption should, however, remain the exception and withdrawal of every suspect drug the general rule. On the other hand, drugs that are not suspected and are important for the patient, (e.g., antihypertensive agents) generally should not be quickly withdrawn. This approach prevents reluctance to future use of these agents.

Recommendation for Future Use of Drugs

The aims are (1) to prevent the recurrence of the drug eruption and (2) not to compromise future treatments by contraindicating otherwise useful medications.

Begin with thorough assessment of drug causality. Drug causality is evaluated based on timing of the reaction, evaluation of other possible causes, effect of drug withdrawal or continuation, and knowledge of medications that have been associated with the observed reaction. Combination of these criteria leads to considering the causality as definite, probable, possible, or unlikely.

A drug with "unlikely" causality or that has been continued when the reaction improved or was reintroduced without a reaction can be administered safely.

A drug with a "definite" or "probable" causality should be contraindicated, and a warning card or medical alert tag (e.g., wristband) given to the patient.

A drug with a "possible" causality may be submitted to further investigations depending on the expected need for future treatment.

The usefulness of drug tests is still debated. Many in vitro immunologic assays have been developed, but the predictive value of these tests has not been validated in any large series of affected patients; these tests exist primarily for research and not clinical purposes.

In patients with history suggesting immediate IgE-mediated reactions to penicillin, skin testing with major and minor determinants of penicillins or cephalosporins has proved useful for identifying patients at risk of anaphylactic reactions to these agents. However, skin tests themselves carry a small risk of anaphylaxis. Negative skin tests do not totally rule out IgE-mediated reactivity, but the risk of anaphylaxis in response to penicillin administration in patients with negative skin tests is about 1% while about two-thirds of patients with a positive skin test experience an allergic response on rechallenge.

For patients with late drug reactions, the clinical usefulness of skin tests is more questionable. At least one of a combination of several tests (prick, patch, and intradermal) is positive in 50每70% of patients with a reaction "definitely" attributed to a single medication. This low sensitivity probably contributes to the fact that readministration of drugs that had been tested negative resulted in up to 17% eruptions.

Cross-Sensitivity

Because of the possibility of cross-sensitivity among chemically related drugs, many physicians recommend avoidance of not only the medication that induced the reaction but also all drugs of the same pharmacologic class.

There are two types of cross-sensitivity. Reactions that depend on a pharmacologic interaction may recur with all drugs that target the same pathway, whether they are structurally similar or not. This is the case with angioedema caused by NSAIDs and ACE inhibitors. In this situation, the risk of recurrence varies from drug to drug in a particular class; however, avoidance of all drugs in the class is usually recommended. Immune recognition of structurally related drugs is the second mechanism by which cross-sensitivity occurs. A classic example is hypersensitivity to aromatic antiepileptics (barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine) with up to 50% reaction to a second drug in patients who reacted to one. For other drugs, in vitro as well as in vivo data have suggested that cross-reactivity existed only between compounds with very similar chemical structures. Sulfamethoxazole-specific lymphocytes may occasionally recognize a few other antibacterial sulfonamides but not diuretics, antidiabetic drugs, or anti-COX2 NSAIDs with a sulfonamide group.

Recent data suggest that although the risk of a drug eruption to another drug was increased in persons with a prior reaction, "cross-sensitivity" was probably not the explanation. As an example, persons with a history of an allergic-like reaction to penicillin were at higher risk to develop a reaction to antibacterial sulfonamides than to cephalosporin.

These data suggest that the list of drugs to avoid after a drug reaction should be limited to the causative one(s) and to a few very similar medications.

Because of growing evidence that some severe cutaneous reactions to drugs are associated with HLAgenes, it is probably wise to recommend that first-degree family members of patients with severe cutaneous reactions also should avoid these causative medications.

Desensitization can be considered in those with a history of reaction to a medication that must be used again. Efficacy of such procedures has been demonstrated in cases of immediate reaction to penicillin and positive skin tests, anaphylactic reactions to platinum chemotherapy, and delayed reactions to sulfonamides in patients with AIDS. Various protocols are available, including oral and parenteral approaches. Oral desensitization appears to have a lower risk of serious anaphylactic reactions. However, desensitization carries the risk of anaphylaxis regardless of how it is performed and should be performed in monitored clinical settings such as an intensive care unit. After desensitization, many patients experience non-life-threatening reactions during therapy with the culprit drug.

Reporting

Any severe reaction to drugs should be reported to a regulatory agency or to pharmaceutical companies (e.g., MedWatch, http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/default.htm). Because severe reactions are too rare to be detected in premarketing clinical trials, spontaneous reports are of critical importance for early detection of unexpected life-threatening events. To be useful, the report should contain enough details to permit ascertainment of severity and drug causality. This permits recognition of similar cases that may be reported from several different sources.
 
Further Readings

Auquier-Dunant A et al: Severe cutaneous adverse reactions. Correlations between clinical patterns and causes of erythema multiforme majus, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Results of an international prospective study. Arch Dermatol 138:1019, 2002 [PMID: 12164739] 

 
Bachot N, Roujeau JC: Differential diagnosis of severe cutaneous drug eruptions. Am J Clin Dermatol 4:561, 2003 [PMID: 12862499] 

 
Bigby M: Rates of cutaneous reactions to drugs. Arch Dermatol 137:765, 2001 [PMID: 11405768] 

 
Eliaszewicz M et al: Prospective evaluation of risk factors of cutaneous drug reactions to sulfonamides in patients with AIDS. J Am Acad Dermatol 47:40, 2002 [PMID: 12077579] 

 
Fiszenson-Albala F et al: A 6 month prospective survey of cutaneous drug reactions in a hospital setting. Br J Dermatol 149:1018, 2003 [PMID: 14632808] 

 
Fox LP: Nail toxicity associated with epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 56:460, 2007 [PMID: 17147969] 

 
Hirsch LJ et al: Predictors of lamotrigine-associated rash. Epilepsia 47:318, 2006 [PMID: 16499755] 

 
Hung SI et al: HLA B*5801 allele as a genetic marker for severe cutaneous reactions caused by allopurinol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:4134, 2005 [PMID: 15743917] 

 
Lange-Asschenfeldt C et al: Cutaneous adverse reactions to psychotropic drugs: data from a multicenter surveillance program. J Clin Psychiatry 70:1258, 2009 [PMID: 19538904] 

 
Lin D, Tucker MJ, Rieder MJ: Increased adverse drug reactions to antimicrobials and anticonvulsants in patients with HIV infection. Ann Pharm 40:1594, 2006 [PMID: 16912251] 

 
Mockenhaupt M et al: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Assessment of medication risks with emphasis on recently marketed drugs. The EuroSCAR-Study. J Invest Dermatol 128:35, 2008 [PMID: 17805350] 

 
Perazella MA: Advanced kidney disease, gadolinium and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: the perfect storm. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens Epub: 2009 

 
Phillips EJ, Mallal SA: HLA and drug-induced toxicity. Curr Opin Mol Therap 11:231, 2009 [PMID: 19479656] 

 
Racette AJ et al: Photoaging and phototoxicity from long-term voriconazole treatment in a 15-year-old girl. J Am Acad Dermatol 52:(S81), 2005 

 
Roujeau JC, Stern RS: Severe adverse cutaneous reactions to drugs. N Engl J Med 331:1272, 1994 [PMID: 7794310] 
 
 

^^
Solar Radiation

Sunlight is the most visible and obvious source of comfort in the environment. The sun provides the beneficial effects of warmth and vitamin D synthesis; however, acute and chronic sun exposure also have pathologic consequences. Few effects of sun exposure beyond those affecting the skin have been identified, but cutaneous exposure to sunlight is the major cause of human skin cancer and can have immunosuppressive effects as well.

The sun's energy reaching the earth's surface is limited to components of the ultraviolet (UV), the visible, and portions of the infrared spectra. The cutoff at the short end of the UV is at ~290 nm; this is due primarily to stratospheric ozone formed by highly energetic ionizing radiation, preventing penetration to the earth's surface of the shorter, more energetic, potentially more harmful wavelengths of solar radiation. Indeed, concern about destruction of the ozone layer by chlorofluorocarbons released into the atmosphere has led to international agreements to reduce production of those chemicals.

Measurements of solar flux indicate that there is a twentyfold regional variation in the amount of energy at 300 nm that reaches the earth's surface. This variability relates to seasonal effects, the path that sunlight traverses through ozone and air, the altitude (4% increase for each 300 m of elevation), the latitude (increasing intensity with decreasing latitude), and the amount of cloud cover, fog, and pollution.

The major components of the photobiologic action spectrum capable of affecting human skin include the UV and visible wavelengths between 290 and 700 nm. In addition, the wavelengths beyond 700 nm in the infrared spectrum primarily emit heat and in certain circumstances may exacerbate the pathologic effects of energy in the UV and visible spectra.

The UV spectrum reaching the earth represents <10% of total incident solar energy and is arbitrarily divided into two major segments, UV-B and UV-A, constituting the wavelengths from 290每400 nm. UV-B consists of wavelengths between 290 and 320 nm. This portion of the photobiologic action spectrum is the most efficient in producing redness or erythema in human skin and hence sometimes is known as the "sunburn spectrum." UV-A includes wavelengths between 320 and 400 nm and is ~1000-fold less efficient in producing skin redness than is UV-B.

The wavelengths between 400 and 700 nm are visible to the human eye. The photon energy in the visible spectrum is not capable of damaging human skin in the absence of a photosensitizing chemical. Without the absorption of energy by a molecule, there can be no photosensitivity. Thus, the absorption spectrum of a molecule is defined as the range of wavelengths absorbed by it, whereas the action spectrum for an effect of incident radiation is defined as the range of wavelengths that evoke the response.

Photosensitivity occurs when a photon-absorbing chemical (chromophore) present in the skin absorbs incident energy, becomes excited, and transfers the absorbed energy to various structures or to oxygen.

UV Radiation (UVR) and Skin Structure and Function

Skin consists of two major compartments: the outer epidermis, which is a stratified squamous epithelium, and the underlying dermis, which is rich in matrix proteins such as collagens and elastin. Both compartments are susceptible to damage from sun exposure. The epidermis and the dermis contain several chromophores capable of absorbing incident solar energy, including nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids. The outermost epidermal layer, the stratum corneum, is a major absorber of UV-B, and <10% of incident UV-B wavelengths penetrate through the epidermis to the dermis. Approximately 3% of radiation below 300 nm, 20% of radiation below 360 nm, and 33% of short visible radiation reaches the basal cell layer in untanned human skin. In contrast, UV-A readily penetrates to the dermis and is capable of altering structural and matrix proteins that contribute to photoaging of chronically sun-exposed skin, particularly in individuals of light complexion. Thus, longer wavelengths can penetrate more deeply into the skin.

Molecular Targets for UVR-Induced Skin Effects

Epidermal DNA, predominantly in keratinocytes and in Langerhans cells (LCs), which are dendritic antigen-presenting cells, absorbs UV-B and undergoes structural changes between adjacent pyrimidine bases (thymine or cytosine), including the formation of cyclobutane dimers and 6,4-photoproducts. These structural changes are potentially mutagenic and are found in most basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers. They can be repaired by cellular mechanisms that result in their recognition and excision and the restoration of normal base sequences. The efficient repair of these structural aberrations is crucial, since individuals with defective DNA repair are at high risk for the development of cutaneous cancer. For example, patients with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), an autosomal recessive disorder, are characterized by variably deficient repair of UV-induced photoproducts, and their skin phenotype often manifests the dry, leathery appearance of prematurely photoaged skin as well as basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas and melanoma in the first two decades of life. Studies in mice using knockout gene technology have verified the importance of functional genes regulating these repair pathways in preventing the development of UV-induced cancer. Furthermore, incorporation of a bacterial DNA repair enzyme, T4 endonuclease V, into liposomes in a product applied to the skin of patients with XP selectively removes cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and reduces the degree of solar damage and skin cancer. This approach also may benefit other patients who are susceptible to skin cancer, such as organ transplant recipients receiving chronic immunosuppressive drug therapy. DNA damage in LCs may contribute to the known immunosuppressive effects of UV-B (see "Immunologic Effects," below).

In addition to DNA, molecular oxygen is a target for incident solar UVR, leading to the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). These ROS can damage skin components, such as epidermal lipids, either free lipids in the stratum corneum or cell membrane lipids. UVR also can target proteins, leading to increased cross-linking and degradation of matrix proteins in the dermis and thus to photoaging changes known as solar elastosis.

Cutaneous Optics and Chromophores

Chromophores are endogenous or exogenous chemical components that can absorb physical energy. Endogenous chromophores are of two types: (1) normal components of skin, including nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and 7-dehydrocholesterol, the precursor of vitamin D, and (2) components that are synthesized elsewhere in the body that circulate in the bloodstream and diffuse into the skin, such as porphyrins. Normally, only trace amounts of porphyrins are present in the skin, but in selected diseases known as the porphyrias (Chap. 358), increased amounts are released into the circulation from the bone marrow and the liver and are transported to the skin, where they absorb incident energy both in the Soret band, around 400 nm (short visible), and to a lesser extent in the red portion of the visible spectrum (580每660 nm). This results in the generation of ROS that can mediate structural damage to the skin, manifested as erythema, edema, urticaria, or blister formation. It is of interest that photoexcited porphyrins are currently used therapeutically in treating nonmelanoma skin cancers and their precursor lesions, actinic keratoses. Known as photodynamic therapy (PDT), this modality generates ROS in the skin, leading to cell death. Topical photosensitizers used in PDT are the porphyrin precursors 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and methyl aminolevulinate (MAL), which are converted to porphyrins in the skin. It is believed that PDT targets tumor cells for destruction more selectively than it targets adjacent nonneoplastic cells. The efficacy of PDT requires appropriate timing of the application of MAL and ALA to the affected skin followed by exposure to artificial sources of visible light. High-intensity blue light has been used successfully for the treatment of thin actinic keratoses. Red light has a longer wavelength and penetrates more deeply into the skin and is more beneficial in the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinomas.

Acute Effects of Sun Exposure

The acute effects of skin exposure to sunlight include sunburn and vitamin D synthesis.

Sunburn

This painful skin condition is an acute inflammatory response of the skin predominantly to UV-B. Generally, an individual's ability to tolerate sunlight is inversely proportional to that individual's degree of melanin pigmentation. Melanin, a complex polymer of tyrosine derivatives, is synthesized in specialized epidermal dendritic cells known as melanocytes and is packaged into melanosomes that are transferred via dendritic process into keratinocytes, thereby providing photoprotection and simultaneously darkening the skin. Sun-induced melanogenesis is a consequence of increased tyrosinase activity in melanocytes. Central to the suntan response is the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R), and mutations in this gene account for the wide variation in human skin and hair color. The human MC1R gene encodes a 317-amino-acid G protein-coupled receptor (melanocortin receptor) that binds -melanocyte-stimulating hormone (-MSH), which is secreted in the skin mainly by keratinocytes in response to UVR. This UV-induced expression of -MSH is controlled by the tumor suppressor p53, and absence of functional p53 is known to ablate the tanning response in a mouse model. Activation of the melanocortin receptor leads to increased intracellular cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP) and protein kinase A activation, followed by increased transcription of microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF), which stimulates melanogenesis. Since the precursor of -MSH, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), is also the precursor of -endorphin, UVR results in increased pigmentation and -endorphin production, probably promoting sun-seeking behaviors.

The Fitzpatrick classification of human skin is a function of the efficiency of the epidermal-melanin unit and usually can be ascertained by asking an individual two questions: (1) Do you burn after sun exposure? and (2) Do you tan after sun exposure? The answers to these questions permit division of the population into six skin types varying from type I (always burn, never tan) to type VI (never burn, always tan) (Table 56-1).

Table 56-1 Skin Type and Sunburn Sensitivity (Fitzpatrick Classification)

 
 
Type Description 
I Always burn, never tan 
II Always burn, sometimes tan 
III Sometimes burn, sometimes tan 
IV Sometimes burn, always tan 
V Never burn, sometimes tan 
VI Never burn, always tan 
 

 

Sunburn erythema is due to vasodilation of dermal blood vessels. There is a lag in time between skin exposure to sunlight and the development of visible redness (usually 4每12 h), suggesting that an epidermal chromophore causes delayed production and/or release of vasoactive mediator(s), or cytokines, that diffuse to the dermal vasculature to evoke vasodilation.

The action spectrum for sunburn erythema includes UV-B and UV-A. Photons in the UV-B are at least 1000-fold more efficient than photons in the UV-A in evoking the response. However, UV-A may contribute to sunburn erythema at midday, when much more UV-A than UV-B is present in the solar spectrum. The erythema that accompanies the inflammatory response induced by UVR results from the orchestrated release of cytokines, along with growth factors or lipid mediators, and the generation of ROS. Furthermore, it is known that UV-induced activation of nuclear factor-B (NF-B)-dependent gene transcription can augment release of several proinflammatory cytokines and vasoactive mediators, including interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, vascular endothelial growth factor, prostaglandin E2 , and tumor necrosis factor . Local accumulation of these cytokines occurs in sunburned skin, providing chemotactic factors that attract neutrophils and macrophages, which can cause cell damage through generation of ROS. UVR also promotes infiltration of inflammatory cells through induced expression of adhesion molecules such as E-selectin and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on endothelial cells and ICAM-1 on keratinocytes. It is of interest that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can reduce sunburn erythema. UVR also has been shown to activate phospholipase A2, resulting in increased eicosanoids, such as prostaglandin E2, which is known to be a potent inducer of sunburn erythema, thereby explaining how cyclooxygenase inhibitors can reduce sunburn erythema.

Epidermal changes in sunburn include the induction of "sunburn cells," which are keratinocytes undergoing p53-dependent apoptosis as a defense for the elimination of cells that harbor UV- B-induced structural DNA damage.

Vitamin D Photochemistry

Cutaneous exposure to UV-B causes photolysis of epidermal 7-dehydrocholesterol, converting it to pre-vitamin D3 , which then undergoes a temperature-dependent isomerization to form the stable hormonevitamin D3. This compound then diffuses to the dermal vasculature and circulates to the liver and kidney, where it is converted to the dihydroxylated functional hormone 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3[1,25(OH)2D3]. Vitamin D metabolites from the circulation and those produced in the skin itself can augment epidermal differentiation signaling and inhibit keratinocyte proliferation. These effects on keratinocytes are used therapeutically in psoriasis with the topical application of synthetic vitamin D analogues. In addition, vitamin D is increasingly recognized to have beneficial effects in several other inflammatory conditions, and there is some evidence to suggest that it is associated with a reduced risk for various internal malignancies, aside from its classic physiologic effects on calcium metabolism and bone homeostasis. There is controversy regarding the risk/benefit of sun exposure in vitamin D homeostasis. At present, it is important to emphasize that there is no clear-cut evidence to suggest that the use of sunscreens substantially diminishes vitamin D levels. Since aging also substantially decreases the ability of human skin to photocatalytically produce vitamin D3, the widespread use of sunscreens that filter out UV-B has led to the concern that vitamin D deficiency may become a significant clinical problem in the elderly. However, the amount of sunlight needed to produce sufficient vitamin D is small and does not justify increased sun exposure or tanning behavior. Increased nutritional supplementation of vitamin D is advocated in patients with vitamin D deficiency rather than increasing UV exposure that is associated with carcinogenic and other types of photodamage.

Chronic Effects of Sun Exposure: Nonmalignant

The clinical features of photodamaged sun-exposed skin consist of wrinkling, blotchiness, and telangiectasia and a roughened, irregular, "weather-beaten" leathery appearance. Whether this photoaging represents accelerated chronologic aging or a separate and distinct process is not clear.

Within chronically sun-exposed epidermis, there is thickening (acanthosis) and morphologic heterogeneity within the basal cell layer. Higher but irregular melanosome content may be present in some keratinocytes, indicating prolonged residence of the cells in the basal cell layer. These structural changes may help explain the leathery texture and the blotchy discoloration of sun-damaged skin.

UV-A is important in the pathogenesis of photoaging in human skin, and ROS probably are involved. The dermis and its connective tissue matrix are the major site for sun-associated chronic damage, manifest as solar elastosis, a massive increase in thickened irregular masses of abnormal-appearing elastic fibers. Collagen fibers are also abnormally clumped in the deeper dermis of sun-damaged skin. The chromophore(s), the action spectra, and the specific biochemical events orchestrating these changes are only partially understood, although UV-A seems to be primarily involved. This could be due to the predominance of UV-A in the solar energy reaching the earth's surface as well as the fact that UV-A penetrates more deeply into the dermis. Chronologically aged sun-protected skin and photoaged skin share important molecular features, including connective tissue damage and elevated matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMPs are enzymes involved in the degradation of the extracellular matrix, and UV-A induces expression of MMPs, including MMP-1 and MMP-3, leading to increased collagen breakdown. In addition, UV-A reduces type I procollagen mRNA expression. Thus, chronic UVR reduces functional collagen content in the dermis. Based on these observations, it is not surprising that high-dose UV-A phototherapy may have beneficial effects in some patients with localized fibrotic diseases of the skin, such as localized scleroderma.

Chronic Effects of Sun Exposure: Malignant

One of the major known consequences of chronic skin exposure to sunlight is nonmelanoma skin cancer. The two most common types of nonmelanoma skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC; Chap. 87). A model for skin cancer induction involves three major steps: initiation, promotion, and progression. Exposure of human skin to sunlight results in initiation, a step by which structural (mutagenic) changes in DNA evoke an irreversible alteration in the target cell (keratinocyte) that begins the tumorigenic process. Exposure to a tumor initiator such as UV-B is believed to be a necessary but not sufficient step in the malignant process, since initiated skin cells not exposed to tumor promoters generally do not develop tumors. The second stage in tumor development is promotion, a multistep process by which chronic exposure to sunlight evokes further changes that culminate in the clonal expansion of initiated cells and cause the development, over many years, of premalignant growths known as actinic keratoses, a minority of which may progress to form SCCs. Based on extensive studies, it seems clear that UV-B is a complete carcinogen, meaning that it can act as both a tumor initiator and a promoter.

The third and final step in the malignant process is malignant conversion of benign precursors into malignant lesions, a process thought to require additional genetic alterations.

On a molecular level skin carcinogenesis is thought to be caused by the accumulation of gene mutations that result in inactivation of tumor suppressors, activation of oncogenes, or reactivation of cellular signaling pathways that normally are expressed only during embryologic development of the epidermis.

Accumulation of mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene p53 as a result of UV-induced DNA damage has been found in both SCCs and BCCs and is probably important in promoting skin carcinogenesis. Indeed, both human and murine UV-induced skin cancers have characteristic p53 mutations (C  T and CC  TT transitions) that are present in the majority of these lesions. Studies in mice have shown that sunscreens can substantially reduce the frequency of these signature mutations in p53 and dramatically inhibit the induction of tumors.

BCCs also manifest inactivating mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene known as patched, which results in activation of hedgehog signaling, and enhanced activity of smoothened, which in turn causes downstream activation of transcription factors that augment cell proliferation. Thus, these tumors can manifest mutations in both p53 and patched or smothered. New evidence links alterations in the Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway known to be critical for hair follicle development, to skin cancer as well. Thus interactions between this pathway and the hedgehog signaling pathway appear to be involved in both skin carcinogenesis and the embryologic development of the skin and hair follicles.

Studies in mouse models have strengthened the hypothesis that SCCs and BCCs are derived from cells in the epidermis with properties of stem cells, and the cells of origin for these skin cancers may be derived from the hair bulge region. The transcription factor Myc is important for stem cell maintenance in the skin, and oncogenic activation of Myc has been implicated in the development of BCCs and SCCs. Thus, nonmelanoma skin cancer involves mutations and alterations in multiple genes and pathways that occur as a result of the chronic accumulation of such changes promoted by exposure to environmental factors such as solar radiation.

Sun exposure causes nonmelanoma cancers and melanoma of the skin, although the evidence is far more direct for its role in nonmelanoma skin cancer (BCC and SCC) than its role in melanoma. Approximately 80% of nonmelanoma skin cancers develop on sun-exposed body areas, including the face, neck, and hands. Major risk factors include male sex, childhood sun exposures, older age, fair skin, and residence at latitudes closer to the equator. Whites of darker complexions (e.g., Hispanics) have one-tenth the risk of developing such cancers compared with fair-skinned individuals. Blacks are at substantially reduced risk for skin cancer. More than 1.3 million individuals in the United States develop nonmelanoma skin cancer annually, and the lifetime risk for a fair-skinned individual to develop such a neoplasm is estimated at ~15%. A consensus exists that the incidence of nonmelanoma skin cancer in the population is increasing at a rate of 2每3% per year for unknown reasons. One potential explanation is the widespread use of indoor tanning. It is estimated that 30 million people tan indoors in the United States annually, including >2 million adolescents.

The relationship of sun exposure to melanoma development is less clear-cut, but suggestive evidence supports an association. The strongest risk factors for melanoma include positive family history for melanoma, multiple dysplastic nevi, and prior melanoma. Melanomas occasionally develop by the teenage years, indicating that the latent period for tumor growth is less than that for nonmelanoma skin cancer. Melanomas are among the most rapidly increasing among all human malignancies (Chap. 87). Epidemiologic studies of immigrant populations of similar ethnic background indicate that individuals who are born in one area or who migrate to the same locale before age 10 have higher age-specific melanoma rates than do individuals arriving later. It is thus reasonable to conclude that life in a sunny climate from birth or early childhood increases the risk of melanoma. In general, risk does not correlate with cumulative sun exposure but may be related to the duration and extent of exposure in childhood. Epidemiologic studies have shown that indoor tanning is a risk factor for melanoma.

Meta-analysis of 17 case-control studies in patients with melanoma concluded that the protective effect of sunscreens against this type of tumor could not be substantiated, but this probably is due to failure to control for confounding factors such as sunscreen stability and frequency of application. Since no prospective studies are available to address this issue, it seems reasonable to recommend that patients at risk for melanoma utilize photoprotection such as sun avoidance, high sun protective factor (SPF) sunscreens, and protective clothing.

Immunologic Effects

Exposure to solar radiation causes local (inhibition of immune responses to antigens applied at the irradiated site) and systemic (inhibition of immune responses to antigens applied at remote unirradiated sites) immunosuppression. For example, administration of modest doses of UV-B to human skin reduces the degree of allergic sensitization to the potent contact allergen dinitrochlorobenzene. This is associated with depletion of epidermal LCs.

An example of the systemic immunosuppressive effects of higher doses of UVR is the diminished immunologic response to antigens introduced either epicutaneously or intracutaneously at sites distant from the irradiated site.

The major chromophores in the upper epidermis that initiate UV-mediated immunosuppression include DNA, trans-urocanic acid, and membrane components. The action spectrum for UV-induced immunosuppression closely mimics the absorption spectrum of DNA. Pyrimidine dimers in LCs may inhibit antigen presentation. The absorption spectrum of epidermal urocanic acid closely mimics the action spectrum for UV-B-induced immunosuppression as well. Urocanic acid is a metabolic product of the essential amino acidhistidine and accumulates in the upper epidermis through breakdown of the histidine-rich protein filaggrin due to the absence of its catabolizing enzyme in keratinocytes. It is synthesized as a trans-isomer, and UV-induced trans-cis isomerization of urocanic acid in the stratum corneum leads to its immunosuppressive effects. Cis-urocanic acid has been proposed to exert its immunosuppressive effects through a variety of mechanisms, including inhibition of antigen presentation by LCs.

One important consequence of chronic sun exposure and the concomitant immunosuppression is enhanced risk of skin cancer. The molecular mechanisms of photocarcinogenesis are complex and only partially understood. In part, UV-B activates regulatory T cells that suppress antitumor immune responses via IL-10 expression, whereas in the absence of high UV-B exposure, epidermal antigen-presenting cells present tumor-associated antigens and induce protective immunity, thereby inhibiting skin tumorigenesis. UV-induced DNA damage is a major molecular trigger of this immunosuppressive effect.

Perhaps the most graphic demonstration of the role of immunosuppression in enhancing the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer has come from studies of patients who are organ transplant recipients who are chronically treated with immunosuppressive antirejection drug regimens. More than 50% of transplant patients develop BCCs and SCCs, and these cancers are the most common malignancies arising in immunosuppressed solid-organ transplant recipients. Rates of BCCs and SCCs increase with the duration and the degree of immunosuppression. These patients require close periodic monitoring and rigorous photoprotection through the use of sunscreens, protective clothing, and sun avoidance.

Photosensitivity Diseases

The diagnosis of photosensitivity requires a careful history to define the duration of the signs and symptoms, the length of time between exposure to sunlight and the development of subjective complaints, and visible changes in the skin. The age of onset can also be a helpful clue; for example, the acute photosensitivity of erythropoietic protoporphyria almost always begins in childhood, whereas the chronic photosensitivity of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) typically begins in the fourth and fifth decades. A history of exposure to topical and systemic drugs and chemicals may provide important clues. Many classes of drugs can cause photosensitivity on the basis of either phototoxicity or photoallergy. Fragrances such as musk ambrette that were previously present in numerous cosmetic products are also potent photosensitizers.

Examination of the skin also may offer important clues. Anatomic areas that are naturally protected from direct sunlight, such as the hairy scalp, the upper eyelids, the retroauricular areas, and the infranasal and submental regions, may be spared, whereas exposed areas show characteristic features of the pathologic process. These anatomic localization patterns are often helpful but not infallible in making the diagnosis. For example, airborne contact sensitizers that are blown onto the skin may produce a dermatitis that can be difficult to distinguish from photosensitivity despite the fact that such material may trigger skin reactivity in areas shielded from direct sunlight.

Many dermatologic conditions may be caused or aggravated by sunlight (Table 56-2). The role of light in evoking these responses may be dependent on genetic abnormalities ranging from well-described defects in DNA repair that occur in XP to the inherited abnormalities in heme synthesis that characterize the porphyrias. In certain photosensitivity diseases the chromophore has been identified, whereas in the majority, the energy-absorbing agent is unknown.

Table 56-2 Classification of Photosensitivity Diseases

 
 
Type Disease 
Genetic Erythropoietic porphyria

Erythropoietic protoporphyria

Porphyria cutanea tarda〞familial

Variegate porphyria

Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria

Albinism

Xeroderma pigmentosum

Rothmund-Thomson syndrome

Bloom syndrome

Cockayne's disease

Kindler syndrome

Phenylketonuria
 
Metabolic Porphyria cutanea tarda〞sporadic

Hartnup disease

Kwashiorkor

Pellagra

Carcinoid syndrome
 
Phototoxic   
Internal

External
 Drugs

Drugs, plants, food
 
Photoallergic   
Immediate

Delayed
 Solar urticaria

Drug photoallergy

Persistent light reaction/chronic actinic dermatitis
 
Neoplastic and degenerative Photoaging

Actinic keratosis

Melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer
 
Idiopathic Polymorphous light eruption

Hydroa aestivale

Actinic prurigo
 
Photoaggravated Lupus erythematosus

   Systemic

   Subacutecutaneous

   Discoid

Dermatomyositis

Herpes simplex

Lichen planus actinicus

Acnevulgaris (aestivale)
 
 

 

Polymorphous Light Eruption

After sunburn, the most common type of photosensitivity disease is polymorphous light eruption (PLE). Many affected individuals never seek medical attention because the condition is often transient, becoming manifest each spring with initial sun exposure but then subsiding spontaneously with continuing exposure, a phenomenon known as "hardening." The major manifestations of PLE include pruritic (often intensely so) erythematous papules that may coalesce into plaques in a patchy distribution on exposed areas of the trunk and forearms. The face is usually less seriously involved. Whereas the morphologic skin findings remain similar for each patient with subsequent recurrences, significant interindividual variations in skin findings are characteristic (hence the term "polymorphous").

The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin biopsy and by performing phototest procedures in which skin is exposed to multiple erythema doses of UV-A and UV-B. The action spectrum for PLE is usually within these portions of the solar spectrum.

Whereas the treatment of an acute flare of PLE may require topical or systemic glucocorticoids, approaches to prevent PLE are important and include the use of broad-spectrum sunscreens and the induction of hardening by the cautious administration of artificial UV-B (broad-band or narrow-band) and/or UV-A radiation or the use of psoralen plus UV-A (PUVA) photochemotherapy for 2每4 weeks before initial sun exposure. Such prophylactic phototherapy or photochemotherapy at the beginning of spring may prevent the occurrence of PLE throughout the summer.

Phototoxicity and Photoallergy

These photosensitivity disorders are related to the topical or systemic administration of drugs and other chemicals. Both reactions require the absorption of energy by a drug or chemical resulting in the production of an excited-state photosensitizer that can transfer its absorbed energy to a bystander molecule or to molecular oxygen, thereby generating tissue-destructive chemical species, including ROS.

Phototoxicity is a nonimmunologic reaction caused by drugs and chemicals, a few of which are listed in Table 56-3. The usual clinical manifestations include erythema resembling a sunburn reaction that quickly desquamates, or "peels," within several days. In addition, edema, vesicles, and bullae may occur.

Table 56-3 Phototoxic Drugs

 
 
  Topical Systemic 
Amiodarone   + 
Dacarbazine   + 
Fluoroquinolones   + 
5-Fluorouracil + + 
Furosemide   + 
Nalidixic acid   + 
Phenothiazines   + 
Psoralens + + 
Retinoids +/ + 
Sulfonamides   + 
Sulfonylureas   + 
Tetracyclines   + 
Thiazides   + 
Vinblastine   + 
 

 

Photoallergy is much less common and is distinct in that it is an immunopathologic process. The excited-state photosensitizer may create highly unstable haptenic free radicals that bind covalently to macromolecules to form a functional antigen capable of evoking a delayed hypersensitivity response. Some of the drugs and chemicals that produce photoallergy are listed in Table 56-4. The clinical manifestations typically differ from those of phototoxicity in that an intensely pruritic eczematous dermatitis tends to predominate and evolves into lichenified, thickened, "leathery" changes in sun-exposed areas. A small subset (perhaps 5每10%) of patients with photoallergy may develop a persistent exquisite hypersensitivity to light even when the offending drug or chemical is identified and eliminated, a condition known as persistent light reaction.

Table 56-4 Photoallergic Drugs

 
 
  Topical Systemic 
6-Methylcoumarin +   
Aminobenzoic acid and esters +   
Bithionol +   
Chlorpromazine   + 
Diclofenac   + 
Fluoroquinolones   + 
Halogenated salicylanilides +   
Hypericin (St John's wort) + + 
Musk ambrette +   
Piroxicam   + 
Promethazine   + 
Sulfonamides   + 
Sulfonylureas   + 
 

 

A very uncommon type of persistent photosensitivity is known as chronic actinic dermatitis. These patients are typically elderly men with a long history of preexisting allergic contact dermatitis or photosensitivity. They are usually exquisitely sensitive to UV-B, UV-A, and visible wavelengths.

Diagnostic confirmation of phototoxicity and photoallergy often can be obtained by using phototest procedures. In patients with suspected phototoxicity, determining the minimal erythema dose (MED) while the patient is exposed to a suspected agent and then repeating the MED after discontinuation of the agent may provide a clue to the causative drug or chemical. Photopatch testing can be performed to confirm the diagnosis of photoallergy. This is a simple variant of ordinary patch testing in which a series of known photoallergens is applied to the skin in duplicate and one set is irradiated with a suberythema dose of UV-A. Development of eczematous changes at sites exposed to sensitizer and light is a positive result. The characteristic abnormality in patients with persistent light reaction is a diminished threshold to erythema evoked by UV-B. Patients with chronic actinic dermatitis usually manifest a broad spectrum of UV hyperresponsiveness and require meticulous photoprotection, including avoiding sun exposure, high (>30) SPF sunscreens, and in severe cases systemic immunosuppression, preferably with azathioprine (1每2 mg/kg per day).

The management of drug photosensitivity involves first and foremost the elimination of exposure to the chemical agents responsible for the reaction and minimization of sun exposure. The acute symptoms of phototoxicity may be ameliorated by cool moist compresses, topical glucocorticoids, and systemically administered NSAIDs. In severely affected individuals, a rapidly tapered course of systemic glucocorticoids may be useful. Judicious use of analgesics may be necessary.

Photoallergic reactions require a similar management approach. Furthermore, patients with persistent light reaction and chronic actinic dermatitis must be meticulously protected against light exposure. In selected patients in whom chronic systemic high-dose glucocorticoids pose unacceptable risks, it may be necessary to employ an immunosuppressive drug such as azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, or mycophenolate mofetil.

Porphyria

The porphyrias (Chap. 358) are a group of diseases that have in common inherited or acquired derangements in the synthesis of heme. Heme is an iron-chelated tetrapyrrole or porphyrin, and the nonmetal chelated porphyrins are potent photosensitizers that absorb light intensely in both the short (400每410 nm) and the long (580每650 nm) portions of the visible spectrum.

Heme cannot be reutilized and must be synthesized continuously, and the two body compartments with the largest capacity for its production are the bone marrow and the liver. Accordingly, the porphyrias originate in one or the other of these organs, with the end result of excessive endogenous production of potent photosensitizing porphyrins. The porphyrins circulate in the bloodstream and diffuse into the skin, where they absorb solar energy, become photoexcited, generate ROS, and evoke cutaneous photosensitivity. The mechanism of porphyrin photosensitization is known to be photodynamic, or oxygen-dependent, and is mediated by ROS such as singlet oxygen and superoxide anions.

Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most common type of human porphyria and is associated with decreased activity of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. There are two basic types of PCT: (1) the sporadic or acquired type, generally seen in individuals ingesting ethanol or receiving estrogens, and (2) the inherited type, in which there is autosomal dominant transmission of deficient enzyme activity. Both forms are associated with increased hepatic iron stores.

In both types of PCT, the predominant feature is a chronic photosensitivity characterized by increased fragility of sun-exposed skin, particularly areas subject to repeated trauma, such as the dorsa of the hands, the forearms, the face, and the ears. The predominant skin lesions are vesicles and bullae that rupture, producing moist erosions, often with a hemorrhagic base, that heal slowly with crusting and purplish discoloration of the affected skin. Hypertrichosis, mottled pigmentary change, and scleroderma-like induration are associated features. Biochemical confirmation of the diagnosis can be obtained by measurement of urinary porphyrin excretion, plasma porphyrin assay, and assay of erythrocyte and/or hepatic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. Multiple mutations of the uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase gene have been identified in human populations. Some patients with PCT have associated mutations in the HFE gene, which is linked to hemochromatosis. This could contribute to the iron overload seen in PCT, although iron status as measured by serum ferritin, iron levels, and transferrin saturation is no different from that in PCT patients without HFE mutations. Prior hepatitis C virus infection appears to be an independent risk factor for PCT.

Treatment of PCT consists of repeated phlebotomies to diminish the excessive hepatic iron stores and/or intermittent low doses of the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. Long-term remission of the disease can be achieved if the patient eliminates exposure to porphyrinogenic agents.

Erythropoietic protoporphyria originates in the bone marrow and is due to a decrease in the mitochondrial enzyme ferrochelatase secondary to numerous gene mutations. The major clinical features include an acute photosensitivity characterized by subjective burning and stinging of exposed skin that often develops during or just after sun exposure. There may be associated skin swelling and, after repeated episodes, a waxlike scarring.

The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstration of elevated levels of free erythrocyte protoporphyrin. Detection of increased plasma protoporphyrin helps differentiate lead poisoning and iron-deficiency anemia, in both of which elevated erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels occur in the absence of cutaneous photosensitivity and elevated plasma protoporphyrin levels.

Treatment consists of reducing sun exposure and the oral administration of the carotenoid -carotene, which is an effective scavenger of free radicals. This drug increases tolerance to sun exposure in many affected individuals, although it has no effect on deficient ferrochelatase.

An algorithm for managing patients with photosensitivity is illustrated in Fig. 56-1.

Figure 56-1

 
 
 
An algorithm for the diagnosis of a patient with photosensitivity.
 
 
 
Photoprotection

Since photosensitivity of the skin results from exposure to sunlight, it follows that absolute avoidance of the sun will eliminate these disorders. Unfortunately, contemporary lifestyles make this an impractical alternative for most individuals, and this has led to a search for better approaches to photoprotection.

Natural photoprotection is provided by structural proteins in the epidermis, particularly keratins and melanin. The amount of melanin and its distribution in cells are genetically regulated, and individuals of darker complexion (skin types IV每VI) are at decreased risk for the development of acute sunburn and cutaneousmalignancy.

Other forms of photoprotection include clothing and sunscreens. Clothing constructed of tightly woven sun-protective fabrics, irrespective of color, affords substantial protection. Wide-brimmed hats, long sleeves, and trousers all reduce direct exposure. Sunscreens are now considered over-the-counter drugs, and category I ingredients are recognized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as monographed and safe and effective. Those ingredients are listed in Table 56-5. Sunscreens are rated for their photoprotective effect by their sun protection factor. The SPF is simply a ratio of the time required to produce sunburn erythema with and without sunscreen application. Thus, the SPF of sunscreens reflects mainly protection from UV-B and does not reflect protection from UV-A. The monograph stipulates that sunscreens must be rated on a scale ranging from minimal (SPF 2 and <12) to moderate (SPF 12 and <30) to high (SPF 30, labeled as 30+).

Table 56-5 FDA Category 1 Monographed Sunscreen Ingredientsa 

 
 
Ingredients Maximum Concentration, % 
p-Aminobenzoic acid (PABA)  15 
Avobenzone 3 
Cinoxate 3 
Dioxybenzone (benzophenone-8) 3 
Ecamsuleb
  15 
Homosalate 15 
Menthyl anthranilate 5 
Octocrylene 10 
Octyl methoxycinnamate 7.5 
Octyl salicylate 5 
Oxybenzone (benzophenone-3) 6 
Padimate O (octyl dimethyl PABA) 8 
Phenylbenzimidazole sulfonic acid 4 
Sulisobenzone (benzophenone-4) 10 
Titanium dioxide 25 
Trolamine salicylate 12 
Zinc oxide 25 
 


a FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

b Recently approved by the FDA.
 

Broad-spectrum sunscreens contain in addition to UV-B-absorbing chemicals UV-A-absorbing chemicals, such as avobenzone and ecamsule (terephthalylidene dicamphor sulfonic acid). These chemicals absorb UVR and transfer the absorbed energy to surrounding cells either as heat or by emission of fluorescence or phosphorescence. In contrast, physical UV blockers (zinc oxide and titanium dioxide) scatter or reflect UVR.

In addition to light absorption, a critical determinant of the sustained photoprotective effect of sunscreens is their water resistance. The FDA monograph has defined strict testing criteria for sunscreens making this claim.

Some degree of photoprotection can be achieved by limiting the time of exposure during the day. Since a large part of an individual's total lifetime sun exposure may occur by age 18, it is important to educate parents and young children about the hazards of sunlight. Simply eliminating exposure at midday will substantially reduce lifetime UV-B exposure.
 
Phototherapy and Photochemotherapy

UVR also can be used therapeutically. The administration of UV-B alone or in combination with topically applied agents can induce remissions of many dermatologic diseases, including psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. In particular, narrow-band UV-B treatments (with fluorescent bulbs emitting radiation at ~311 nm) have enhanced efficacy compared with broad-band UV-B in the treatment of psoriasis.

Photochemotherapy in which topically applied or systemically administered psoralens are combined with UV-A (PUVA) is also effective in treating psoriasis and the early stages of cutaneous T cell lymphoma and vitiligo. Psoralens are tricyclic furocoumarins that, when intercalated into DNA and exposed to UV-A, form adducts with pyrimidine bases and eventually form DNA cross-links. These structural changes are thought to decrease DNA synthesis and relate to the improvement that occurs in psoriasis. The reason why PUVA photochemotherapy is effective in cutaneous T cell lymphoma is not clear, but it has been shown to induce apoptosis of atypical T-lymphocyte populations in the skin. Consequently, direct treatment of circulating atypical lymphocytes by extracorporeal photochemotherapy (photopheresis) has been used in S谷zary syndrome as well as in other severe systemic diseases with circulating atypical lymphocytes, such as graft-versus-host disease.

In addition to its effects on DNA, PUVA photochemotherapy stimulates epidermal thickening and melanin synthesis; the latter provides the rationale for its use in the depigmenting disease vitiligo, together with its anti-inflammatory effects. Oral 8-methoxypsoralen and UV-A appear to be most effective in this regard, but as many as 100 treatments extending over 12每18 months may be required to promote satisfactory repigmentation.

Not surprisingly the major side effects of long-term UV-B phototherapy and PUVA photochemotherapy mimic those seen in individuals with chronic sun exposure and include skin dryness, actinic keratoses, and an increased risk of skin cancer. Despite these risks, the therapeutic index of these modalities continues to be excellent. It is important to choose the most appropriate phototherapy treatment approach for a specific dermatologic disease. For example, narrow-band UV-B has been reported in several studies to be as effective as PUVA photochemotherapy in the treatment of psoriasis but to have a lower risk of skin cancer development than PUVA.
 
Further Reading

Benjamin CL, Ananthaswamy HN: p53 and the pathogenesis of skin cancer. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 224:221, 2007 

 
Cui R et al: Central role of p53 in the suntan response and pathologic hyperpigmentation. Cell 128:853, 2007 [PMID: 17350573] 

 
Deeb KK et al: Vitamin D signaling pathways in cancer: Potential for anticancer therapeutics. Nat Rev Cancer 7:684, 2007 [PMID: 17721433] 

 
Epstein EH: Basal cell carcinomas: Attack of the hedgehog. Nat Rev Cancer 8(10):1275, 2008 

 
Laga AC, Murphy GF: The translational basis of human cutaneous photoaging. Am J Pathol 174:357, 2009 [PMID: 19147830] 

 
Malanchi I et al: Cutaneous cancer stem cell maintenance is dependent on beta-catenin signalling. Nature 452:650, 2008 [PMID: 18385740] 

 
Miller AJ, Mihm MC Jr: Melanoma. N Engl J Med 355:51, 2006 [PMID: 16822996] 

 
Morison WL: Photosensitivity. N Engl J Med 350:111, 2004 

 
Sage RJ, Lim HW: Therapeutic Hotline: Recommendations on photoprotection and vitamin D. Dermatol Ther 23:82, 2010? 

 
Schade N et al: Ultraviolet B radiation每induced immunosuppression: Molecular mechanisms and cellular alterations. Photochem Photobiol Sci 3:699, 2005 

 
Wong TH, Rees JL: The relation between melanocortin I receptor variation and generation of phenotypic diversity in the cutaneous response to ultraviolet radiation. Peptides 26:1965, 2005 [PMID: 15963603] 

 
Yaar M, Gilchrest BA: Photoageing: Mechanism, prevention and therapy. Br J Dermatol 157: 874, 2007 [PMID: 17711532] 

 
Yang SH et al: Pathological responses to oncogenic Hedgehog signaling in skin are dependent on canonical Wnt/-catenin signaling. Nat Genet 40: 1130, 2008 [PMID: 19165927] 

 
 

^^
Hematopoiesis and the Physiologic Basis of Red Cell Production

Hematopoiesis is the process by which the formed elements of blood are produced. The process is regulated through a series of steps beginning with the hematopoietic stem cell. Stem cells are capable of producing red cells, all classes of granulocytes, monocytes, platelets, and the cells of the immune system. The precise molecular mechanism〞either intrinsic to the stem cell itself or through the action of extrinsic factors〞by which the stem cell becomes committed to a given lineage is not fully defined. However, experiments in mice suggest that erythroid cells come from a common erythroid/megakaryocyte progenitor that does not develop in the absence of expression of the GATA-1 and FOG-1 (friend of GATA-1) transcription factors (Chap. 66). Following lineage commitment, hematopoietic progenitor and precursor cells come increasingly under the regulatory influence of growth factors and hormones. For red cell production, erythropoietin (EPO) is the regulatory hormone. EPO is required for the maintenance of committed erythroid progenitor cells that, in the absence of the hormone, undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). The regulated process of red cell production is erythropoiesis, and its key elements are illustrated in Fig. 57-1.

Figure 57-1

 
 
 
The physiologic regulation of red cell production by tissue oxygen tension. Hb, hemoglobin.
 
 


In the bone marrow, the first morphologically recognizable erythroid precursor is the pronormoblast. This cell can undergo four to five cell divisions, which result in the production of 16每32 mature red cells. With increased EPO production, or the administration of EPO as a drug, early progenitor cell numbers are amplified and, in turn, give rise to increased numbers of erythrocytes. The regulation of EPO production itself is linked to tissue oxygenation.

In mammals, O2 is transported to tissues bound to the hemoglobin contained within circulating red cells. The mature red cell is 8 m in diameter, anucleate, discoid in shape, and extremely pliable in order to traverse the microcirculation successfully; its membrane integrity is maintained by the intracellular generation of ATP. Normal red cell production results in the daily replacement of 0.8每1% of all circulating red cells in the body, since the average red cell lives 100每120 days. The organ responsible for red cell production is called the erythron. The erythron is a dynamic organ made up of a rapidly proliferating pool of marrow erythroid precursor cells and a large mass of mature circulating red blood cells. The size of the red cell mass reflects the balance of red cell production and destruction. The physiologic basis of red cell production and destruction provides an understanding of the mechanisms that can lead to anemia.

The physiologic regulator of red cell production, the glycoprotein hormone EPO, is produced and released by peritubular capillary lining cells within the kidney. These cells are highly specialized epithelial-like cells. A small amount of EPO is produced by hepatocytes. The fundamental stimulus for EPO production is the availability of O2 for tissue metabolic needs. Key to EPO gene regulation is hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1. In the presence of O2, HIF-1 is hydroxylated at a key proline, allowing HIF-1 to be ubiquitinylated and degraded via the proteasome pathway. If O2 becomes limiting, this critical hydroxylation step does not occur, allowing HIF-1 to partner with other proteins, translocate to the nucleus, and upregulate the EPO gene, among others.

Impaired O2 delivery to the kidney can result from a decreased red cell mass (anemia), impaired O2 loading of the hemoglobin molecule or a high O2 affinity mutant hemoglobin (hypoxemia), or, rarely, impaired blood flow to the kidney (renal artery stenosis). EPO governs the day-to-day production of red cells, and ambient levels of the hormone can be measured in the plasma by sensitive immunoassays〞the normal level being 10每25 U/L. When the hemoglobin concentration falls below 100每120 g/L (10每12 g/dL), plasma EPO levels increase in proportion to the severity of the anemia (Fig. 57-2). In circulation, EPO has a half-clearance time of 6每9 h. EPO acts by binding to specific receptors on the surface of marrow erythroid precursors, inducing them to proliferate and to mature. With EPO stimulation, red cell production can increase four- to fivefold within a 1- to 2-week period, but only in the presence of adequate nutrients, especially iron. The functional capacity of the erythron, therefore, requires normal renal production of EPO, a functioning erythroid marrow, and an adequate supply of substrates for hemoglobin synthesis. A defect in any of these key components can lead to anemia. Generally, anemia is recognized in the laboratory when a patient's hemoglobin level or hematocrit is reduced below an expected value (the normal range). The likelihood and severity of anemia are defined based on the deviation of the patient's hemoglobin/hematocrit from values expected for age- and sex-matched normal subjects. The hemoglobin concentration in adults has a Gaussian distribution. The mean hematocrit value for adult males is 47% (㊣ SD 7) and that for adult females is 42% (㊣ 5). Any single hematocrit or hemoglobin value carries with it a likelihood of associated anemia. Thus, a hematocrit of 39% in an adult male or <35% in an adult female has only about a 25% chance of being normal. Suspected low hemoglobin or hematocrit values are more easily interpreted if previous values for the same patient are known for comparison. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines anemia as a hemoglobin level <130 g/L (13 g/dL) in men and <120 g/L (12 g/dL) in women.

Figure 57-2

 
 
 
Erythropoietin (EPO) levels in response to anemia. When the hemoglobin level falls to 120 g/L (12 g/dL), plasma EPO levels increase logarithmically. In the presence of chronic kidney disease or chronic inflammation, EPO levels are typically lower than expected for the degree of anemia. As individuals age, the level of EPO needed to sustain normal hemoglobin levels appears to increase. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

The critical elements of erythropoiesis〞EPO production, iron availability, the proliferative capacity of the bone marrow, and effective maturation of red cell precursors〞are used for the initial classification of anemia (see below).
 
Anemia

Clinical Presentation of Anemia

Signs and Symptoms

Anemia is most often recognized by abnormal screening laboratory tests. Patients less commonly present with advanced anemia and its attendant signs and symptoms. Acute anemia is due to blood loss or hemolysis. If blood loss is mild, enhanced O2 delivery is achieved through changes in the O2每hemoglobin dissociation curve mediated by a decreased pH or increased CO2 (Bohr effect). With acute blood loss, hypovolemia dominates the clinical picture and the hematocrit and hemoglobin levels do not reflect the volume of blood lost. Signs of vascular instability appear with acute losses of 10每15% of the total blood volume. In such patients, the issue is not anemia but hypotension and decreased organ perfusion. When >30% of the blood volume is lost suddenly, patients are unable to compensate with the usual mechanisms of vascular contraction and changes in regional blood flow. The patient prefers to remain supine and will show postural hypotension and tachycardia. If the volume of blood lost is >40% (i.e., >2 L in the average-sized adult), signs of hypovolemic shock including confusion, dyspnea, diaphoresis, hypotension, and tachycardia appear (Chap. 106). Such patients have significant deficits in vital organ perfusion and require immediate volume replacement.

With acute hemolysis, the signs and symptoms depend on the mechanism that leads to red cell destruction. Intravascular hemolysis with release of free hemoglobin may be associated with acute back pain, free hemoglobin in the plasma and urine, and renal failure. Symptoms associated with more chronic or progressive anemia depend on the age of the patient and the adequacy of blood supply to critical organs. Symptoms associated with moderate anemia include fatigue, loss of stamina, breathlessness, and tachycardia (particularly with physical exertion). However, because of the intrinsic compensatory mechanisms that govern the O2每hemoglobin dissociation curve, the gradual onset of anemia〞particularly in young patients〞may not be associated with signs or symptoms until the anemia is severe [hemoglobin <70每80 g/L (7每8 g/dL)]. When anemia develops over a period of days or weeks, the total blood volume is normal to slightly increased, and changes in cardiac output and regional blood flow help compensate for the overall loss in O2-carrying capacity. Changes in the position of the O2每hemoglobin dissociation curve account for some of the compensatory response to anemia. With chronic anemia, intracellular levels of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate rise, shifting the dissociation curve to the right and facilitating O2 unloading. This compensatory mechanism can only maintain normal tissue O2 delivery in the face of a 20每30 g/L (2每3 g/dL) deficit in hemoglobin concentration. Finally, further protection of O2 delivery to vital organs is achieved by the shunting of blood away from organs that are relatively rich in blood supply, particularly the kidney, gut, and skin.

Certain disorders are commonly associated with anemia. Chronic inflammatory states (e.g., infection, rheumatoid arthritis, cancer) are associated with mild to moderate anemia, whereas lymphoproliferative disorders, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia and certain other B cell neoplasms, may be associated with autoimmune hemolysis.

Approach to the Patient: Anemia

The evaluation of the patient with anemia requires a careful history and physical examination. Nutritional history related to drugs or alcohol intake and family history of anemia should always be assessed. Certain geographic backgrounds and ethnic origins are associated with an increased likelihood of an inherited disorder of the hemoglobin molecule or intermediary metabolism. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and certain hemoglobinopathies are seen more commonly in those of Middle Eastern or African origin, including African Americans who have a high frequency of G6PD deficiency. Other information that may be useful includes exposure to certain toxic agents or drugs and symptoms related to other disorders commonly associated with anemia. These include symptoms and signs such as bleeding, fatigue, malaise, fever, weight loss, night sweats, and other systemic symptoms. Clues to the mechanisms of anemia may be provided on physical examination by findings of infection, blood in the stool, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, or petechiae. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy suggest an underlying lymphoproliferative disease, while petechiae suggest platelet dysfunction. Past laboratory measurements are helpful to determine a time of onset.

In the anemic patient, physical examination may demonstrate a forceful heartbeat, strong peripheral pulses, and a systolic "flow" murmur. The skin and mucous membranes may be pale if the hemoglobin is <80每100 g/L (8每10 g/dL). This part of the physical examination should focus on areas where vessels are close to the surface such as the mucous membranes, nail beds, and palmar creases. If the palmar creases are lighter in color than the surrounding skin when the hand is hyperextended, the hemoglobin level is usually <80 g/L (8 g/dL).

Laboratory Evaluation

Table 57每1 lists the tests used in the initial workup of anemia. A routine complete blood count (CBC) is required as part of the evaluation and includes the hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell indices: the mean cell volume (MCV) in femtoliters, mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) in picograms per cell, and mean concentration of hemoglobin per volume of red cells (MCHC) in grams per liter (non-SI: grams per deciliter). The red cell indices are calculated as shown in Table 57每2, and the normal variations in the hemoglobin and hematocrit with age are shown in Table 57每3. A number of physiologic factors affect the CBC, including age, sex, pregnancy, smoking, and altitude. High-normal hemoglobin values may be seen in men and women who live at altitude or smoke heavily. Hemoglobin elevations due to smoking reflect normal compensation due to the displacement of O2 by CO in hemoglobin binding. Other important information is provided by the reticulocyte count and measurements of iron supply including serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC; an indirect measure of the transferrin level), and serum ferritin. Marked alterations in the red cell indices usually reflect disorders of maturation or iron deficiency. A careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear is important, and clinical laboratories often provide a description of both the red and white cells, a white cell differential count, and the platelet count. In patients with severe anemia and abnormalities in red blood cell morphology and/or low reticulocyte counts, a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy can assist in the diagnosis. Other tests of value in the diagnosis of specific anemias are discussed in chapters on specific disease states.

Table 57每1 Laboratory Tests in Anemia Diagnosis

 
 
I. Complete blood count (CBC) 
  A. Red blood cell count 
    1. Hemoglobin 
    2. Hematocrit 
    3. Reticulocyte count 
  B. Red blood cell indices 
    1. Mean cell volume (MCV) 
    2. Mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) 
    3. Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 
    4. Red cell distribution width (RDW) 
  C. White blood cell count 
    1. Cell differential 
    2. Nuclear segmentation of neutrophils 
  D. Platelet count 
  E. Cell morphology 
    1. Cell size 
    2. Hemoglobin content 
    3. Anisocytosis 
    4. Poikilocytosis 
    5. Polychromasia 
II. Iron supply studies 
  A. Serum iron 
  B. Total iron-binding capacity 
  C. Serum ferritin 
III. Marrow examination 
  A. Aspirate 
    1. M/E ratioa
  
    2. Cell morphology 
    3. Iron stain 
  B. Biopsy 
    1. Cellularity 
    2. Morphology 
 


a M/E ratio, ratio of myeloid to erythroid precursors.
 
Table 57每2 Red Blood Cell Indices

 
 
Index Normal Value 
Mean cell volume (MCV) = (hematocrit x 10)/(red cell count x 106)
  90 ㊣ 8 fL 
Mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) = (hemoglobin x 10)/(red cell count x 106)
  30 ㊣ 3 pg 
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration = (hemoglobin x 10)/hematocrit, or MCH/MCV 33 ㊣ 2% 
 

 
Table 57每3 Changes in Normal Hemoglobin/Hematocrit Values with Age and Pregnancy

 
 
Age/Sex Hemoglobin g/dL Hematocrit % 
At birth 17 52 
Childhood 12 36 
Adolescence 13 40 
Adult man 16 (㊣2) 47 (㊣6) 
Adult woman (menstruating) 13 (㊣2) 40 (㊣6) 
Adult woman (postmenopausal) 14 (㊣2) 42 (㊣6) 
During pregnancy 12 (㊣2) 37 (㊣6) 
 


Source: From Hillman et al. 
 

The components of the CBC also help in the classification of anemia. Microcytosis is reflected by a lower than normal MCV (<80), whereas high values (>100) reflect macrocytosis. The MCH and MCHC reflect defects in hemoglobin synthesis (hypochromia). Automated cell counters describe the red cell volume distribution width (RDW). The MCV (representing the peak of the distribution curve) is insensitive to the appearance of small populations of macrocytes or microcytes. An experienced laboratory technician will be able to identify minor populations of large or small cells or hypochromic cells before the red cell indices change.

Peripheral Blood Smear

The peripheral blood smear provides important information about defects in red cell production (Chap. e17). As a complement to the red cell indices, the blood smear also reveals variations in cell size (anisocytosis) and shape (poikilocytosis). The degree of anisocytosis usually correlates with increases in the RDW or the range of cell sizes. Poikilocytosis suggests a defect in the maturation of red cell precursors in the bone marrow or fragmentation of circulating red cells. The blood smear may also reveal polychromasia〞red cells that are slightly larger than normal and grayish blue in color on the Wright-Giemsa stain. These cells are reticulocytes that have been prematurely released from the bone marrow, and their color represents residual amounts of ribosomal RNA. These cells appear in circulation in response to EPO stimulation or to architectural damage of the bone marrow (fibrosis, infiltration of the marrow by malignant cells, etc.) that results in their disordered release from the marrow. The appearance of nucleated red cells, Howell-Jolly bodies, target cells, sickle cells, and others may provide clues to specific disorders (Figs. 57-3 to 57-11).

Figure 57-3

 
 
 
Normal blood smear (Wright stain). High-power field showing normal red cells, a neutrophil, and a few platelets. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-4

 
 
 
Severe iron-deficiency anemia. Microcytic and hypochromic red cells smaller than the nucleus of a lymphocyte associated with marked variation in size (anisocytosis) and shape (poikilocytosis). (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-5

 
 
 
Macrocytosis. Red cells are larger than a small lymphocyte and well hemoglobinized. Often macrocytes are oval shaped (macro-ovalocytes).
 
 

Figure 57-6

 
 
 
Howell-Jolly bodies. In the absence of a functional spleen, nuclear remnants are not culled from the red cells and remain as small homogeneously staining blue inclusions on Wright stain. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-7

 
 
 
Red cell changes in myelofibrosis. The left panel shows a teardrop-shaped cell. The right panel shows a nucleated red cell. These forms are seen in myelofibrosis.
 
 

Figure 57-8

 
 
 
Target cells. Target cells have a bull's-eye appearance and are seen in thalassemia and in liver disease. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-9

 
 
 
Red cell fragmentation. Red cells may become fragmented in the presence of foreign bodies in the circulation, such as mechanical heart valves, or in the setting of thermal injury. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-10

 
 
 
Uremia. The red cells in uremia may acquire numerous regularly spaced, small, spiny projections. Such cells, called burr cells or echinocytes, are readily distinguishable from irregularly spiculated acanthocytes shown in Fig. 57-11.
 
 

Figure 57-11

 
 
 
Spur cells. Spur cells are recognized as distorted red cells containing several irregularly distributed thornlike projections. Cells with this morphologic abnormality are also called acanthocytes. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Reticulocyte Count

An accurate reticulocyte count is key to the initial classification of anemia. Normally, reticulocytes are red cells that have been recently released from the bone marrow. They are identified by staining with a supravital dye that precipitates the ribosomal RNA (Fig. 57-12). These precipitates appear as blue or black punctate spots. This residual RNA is metabolized over the first 24每36 h of the reticulocyte's life span in circulation. Normally, the reticulocyte count ranges from 1 to 2% and reflects the daily replacement of 0.8每1.0% of the circulating red cell population. A corrected reticulocyte count provides a reliable measure of red cell production.

Figure 57-12

 
 
 
Reticulocytes. Methylene blue stain demonstrates residual RNA in newly made red cells. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 


In the initial classification of anemia, the patient's reticulocyte count is compared with the expected reticulocyte response. In general, if the EPO and erythroid marrow responses to moderate anemia [hemoglobin < 100 g/L (10 g/dL)] are intact, the red cell production rate increases to two to three times normal within 10 days following the onset of anemia. In the face of established anemia, a reticulocyte response less than two to three times normal indicates an inadequate marrow response.

In order to use the reticulocyte count to estimate marrow response, two corrections are necessary. The first correction adjusts the reticulocyte count based on the reduced number of circulating red cells. With anemia, the percentage of reticulocytes may be increased while the absolute number is unchanged. To correct for this effect, the reticulocyte percentage is multiplied by the ratio of the patient's hemoglobin or hematocrit to the expected hemoglobin/hematocrit for the age and gender of the patient (Table 57每4). This provides an estimate of the reticulocyte count corrected for anemia. In order to convert the corrected reticulocyte count to an index of marrow production, a further correction is required, depending on whether some of the reticulocytes in circulation have been released from the marrow prematurely. For this second correction, the peripheral blood smear is examined to see if there are polychromatophilic macrocytes present.

Table 57每4 Calculation of Reticulocyte Production Index

 
 
Correction #1 for Anemia:  
This correction produces the corrected reticulocyte count In a person whose reticulocyte count is 9%, hemoglobin 7.5 g/dL, hematocrit 23%, the absolute reticulocyte count = 9 x (7.5/15) [or x (23/45)]= 4.5% 
Correction #2 for Longer Life of Prematurely Released Reticulocytes in the Blood:  
This correction produces the reticulocyte production index In a person whose reticulocyte count is 9%, hemoglobin 7.5 gm/dL, hematocrit 23%, the reticulocyte production index  
 

 

These cells, representing prematurely released reticulocytes, are referred to as "shift" cells, and the relationship between the degree of shift and the necessary shift correction factor is shown in Fig. 57-13. The correction is necessary because these prematurely released cells survive as reticulocytes in circulation for >1 day, thereby providing a falsely high estimate of daily red cell production. If polychromasia is increased, the reticulocyte count, already corrected for anemia, should be divided again by 2 to account for the prolonged reticulocyte maturation time. The second correction factor varies from 1 to 3 depending on the severity of anemia. In general, a correction of 2 is commonly used. An appropriate correction is shown in Table 57每4. If polychromatophilic cells are not seen on the blood smear, the second correction is not required. The now doubly corrected reticulocyte count is the reticulocyte production index, and it provides an estimate of marrow production relative to normal.

Figure 57-13

 
 
 
Correction of the reticulocyte count. In order to use the reticulocyte count as an indicator of effective red cell production, the reticulocyte percentage must be corrected based on the level of anemia and the circulating life span of the reticulocytes. Erythroid cells take ~4.5 days to mature. At a normal hemoglobin, reticulocytes are released to the circulation with ~1 day left as reticulocytes. However, with different levels of anemia, reticulocytes (and even earlier erythroid cells) may be released from the marrow prematurely. Most patients come to clinical attention with hematocrits in the mid-20s, and thus a correction factor of 2 is commonly used because the observed reticulocytes will live for 2 days in the circulation before losing their RNA.
 
 

Premature release of reticulocytes is normally due to increased EPO stimulation. However, if the integrity of the bone marrow release process is lost through tumor infiltration, fibrosis, or other disorders, the appearance of nucleated red cells or polychromatophilic macrocytes should still invoke the second reticulocyte correction. The shift correction should always be applied to a patient with anemia and a very high reticulocyte count to provide a true index of effective red cell production. Patients with severe chronic hemolytic anemia may increase red cell production as much as six- to sevenfold. This measure alone, therefore, confirms the fact that the patient has an appropriate EPO response, a normally functioning bone marrow, and sufficient iron available to meet the demands for new red cell formation. Table 57每5 demonstrates the normal marrow response to anemia. If the reticulocyte production index is <2 in the face of established anemia, a defect in erythroid marrow proliferation or maturation must be present.

Table 57每5 Normal Marrow Response to Anemia

 
 
Hematocrit Production Index Reticulocytes (incl corrections) Marrow M/E Ratio 
45 1 1 3:1 
35 2.0每3.0 4.8%/3.8/2.5 2:1每1:1 
25 3.0每5.0 14%/8/4.0 1:1每1:2 
15 3.0每5.0 30%/10/4.0 1:1每1:2 
 

 

Tests of Iron Supply and Storage

The laboratory measurements that reflect the availability of iron for hemoglobin synthesis include the serum iron, the TIBC, and the percent transferrin saturation. The percent transferrin saturation is derived by dividing the serum iron level (x 100) by the TIBC. The normal serum iron ranges from 9 to 27 mol/L (50每150 g/dL), while the normal TIBC is 54每64 mol/L (300每360 g/dL); the normal transferrin saturation ranges from 25 to 50%. A diurnal variation in the serum iron leads to a variation in the percent transferrin saturation. The serum ferritin is used to evaluate total body iron stores. Adult males have serum ferritin levels that average ~100 g/L, corresponding to iron stores of ~1 g. Adult females have lower serum ferritin levels averaging 30 g/L, reflecting lower iron stores (~300 mg). A serum ferritin level of 10每15 g/L represents depletion of body iron stores. However, ferritin is also an acute-phase reactant and, in the presence of acute or chronic inflammation, may rise several-fold above baseline levels. As a rule, a serum ferritin >200 g/L means there is at least some iron in tissue stores.

Bone Marrow Examination

A bone marrow aspirate and smear or a needle biopsy can be useful in the evaluation of some patients with anemia. In patients with hypoproliferative anemia and normal iron status, a bone marrow is indicated. Marrow examination can diagnose primary marrow disorders such as myelofibrosis, a red cell maturation defect, or an infiltrative disease (Figs. 57-14 to 57-16). The increase or decrease of one cell lineage (myeloid vs. erythroid) compared to another is obtained by a differential count of nucleated cells in a bone marrow smear [the myeloid/erythroid (M/E) ratio]. A patient with a hypoproliferative anemia (see below) and a reticulocyte production index <2 will demonstrate an M/E ratio of 2 or 3:1. In contrast, patients with hemolytic disease and a production index >3 will have an M/E ratio of at least 1:1. Maturation disorders are identified from the discrepancy between the M/E ratio and the reticulocyte production index (see below). Either the marrow smear or biopsy can be stained for the presence of iron stores or iron in developing red cells. The storage iron is in the form of ferritin or hemosiderin. On carefully prepared bone marrow smears, small ferritin granules can normally be seen under oil immersion in 20每40% of developing erythroblasts. Such cells are called sideroblasts.

Figure 57-14

 
 
 
Normal bone marrow. This is a low-power view of a section of a normal bone marrow biopsy stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Note that the nucleated cellular elements account for ~40每50% and the fat (clear areas) accounts for ~50每60% of the area. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-15

 
 
 
Erythroid hyperplasia. This marrow shows an increase in the fraction of cells in the erythroid lineage as might be seen when a normal marrow compensates for acute blood loss or hemolysis. The M/E ratio is about 1:1. M/E, myeloid/erythroid. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Figure 57-16

 
 
 
Myeloid hyperplasia. This marrow shows an increase in the fraction of cells in the myeloid or granulocytic lineage as might be seen in a normal marrow responding to infection. The M/E ratio is >3:1. M/E, myeloid/erythroid. (From Hillman et al.)
 
 

Other Laboratory Measurements

Additional laboratory tests may be of value in confirming specific diagnoses. For details of these tests and how they are applied in individual disorders, see Chaps. 103, 104, 105, 106, and 107.

Definition and Classification of Anemia

Initial Classification of Anemia

The functional classification of anemia has three major categories. These are (1) marrow production defects (hypoproliferation), (2) red cell maturation defects (ineffective erythropoiesis), and (3) decreased red cell survival (blood loss/hemolysis). The classification is shown in Fig. 57-17. A hypoproliferative anemia is typically seen with a low reticulocyte production index together with little or no change in red cell morphology (a normocytic, normochromic anemia) (Chap. 103). Maturation disorders typically have a slight to moderately elevated reticulocyte production index that is accompanied by either macrocytic (Chap. 105) or microcytic (Chaps. 103, 104) red cell indices. Increased red blood cell destruction secondary to hemolysis results in an increase in the reticulocyte production index to at least three times normal (Chap. 106), provided sufficient iron is available. Hemorrhagic anemia does not typically result in production indices of more than 2.0每2.5 times normal because of the limitations placed on expansion of the erythroid marrow by iron availability.

Figure 57-17

 
 
 
The physiologic classification of anemia. CBC, complete blood count.
 
 

In the first branch point of the classification of anemia, a reticulocyte production index >2.5 indicates that hemolysis is most likely. A reticulocyte production index <2 indicates either a hypoproliferative anemia or maturation disorder. The latter two possibilities can often be distinguished by the red cell indices, by examination of the peripheral blood smear, or by a marrow examination. If the red cell indices are normal, the anemia is almost certainly hypoproliferative in nature. Maturation disorders are characterized by ineffective red cell production and a low reticulocyte production index. Bizarre red cell shapes〞macrocytes or hypochromic microcytes〞are seen on the peripheral blood smear. With a hypoproliferative anemia, no erythroid hyperplasia is noted in the marrow, whereas patients with ineffective red cell production have erythroid hyperplasia and an M/E ratio <1:1.

Hypoproliferative Anemias

At least 75% of all cases of anemia are hypoproliferative in nature. A hypoproliferative anemia reflects absolute or relative marrow failure in which the erythroid marrow has not proliferated appropriately for the degree of anemia. The majority of hypoproliferative anemias are due to mild to moderate iron deficiency or inflammation. A hypoproliferative anemia can result from marrow damage, iron deficiency, or inadequate EPO stimulation. The last may reflect impaired renal function, suppression of EPO production by inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1, or reduced tissue needs for O2 from metabolic disease such as hypothyroidism. Only occasionally is the marrow unable to produce red cells at a normal rate, and this is most prevalent in patients with renal failure. With diabetes mellitus or myeloma, the EPO deficiency may be more marked than would be predicted by the degree of renal insufficiency. In general, hypoproliferative anemias are characterized by normocytic, normochromic red cells, although microcytic, hypochromic cells may be observed with mild iron deficiency or long-standing chronic inflammatory disease. The key laboratory tests in distinguishing between the various forms of hypoproliferative anemia include the serum iron and iron-binding capacity, evaluation of renal and thyroid function, a marrow biopsy or aspirate to detect marrow damage or infiltrative disease, and serum ferritin to assess iron stores. An iron stain of the marrow will determine the pattern of iron distribution. Patients with the anemia of acute or chronic inflammation show a distinctive pattern of serum iron (low), TIBC (normal or low), percent transferrin saturation (low), and serum ferritin (normal or high). These changes in iron values are brought about by hepcidin, the iron regulatory hormone that is increased in inflammation (Chap. 103). A distinct pattern of results is noted in mild to moderate iron deficiency (low serum iron, high TIBC, low percent transferrin saturation, low serum ferritin) (Chap. 103). Marrow damage by drugs, infiltrative disease such as leukemia or lymphoma, or marrow aplasia are diagnosed from the peripheral blood and bone marrow morphology. With infiltrative disease or fibrosis, a marrow biopsy is required.

Maturation Disorders

The presence of anemia with an inappropriately low reticulocyte production index, macro- or microcytosis on smear, and abnormal red cell indices suggests a maturation disorder. Maturation disorders are divided into two categories: nuclear maturation defects, associated with macrocytosis, and cytoplasmic maturation defects, associated with microcytosis and hypochromia usually from defects in hemoglobin synthesis. The inappropriately low reticulocyte production index is a reflection of the ineffective erythropoiesis that results from the destruction within the marrow of developing erythroblasts. Bone marrow examination shows erythroid hyperplasia.

Nuclear maturation defects result from vitamin B12 or folic acid deficiency, drug damage, or myelodysplasia. Drugs that interfere with cellular DNA synthesis, such as methotrexate or alkylating agents, can produce a nuclear maturation defect. Alcohol, alone, is also capable of producing macrocytosis and a variable degree of anemia, but this is usually associated with folic acid deficiency. Measurements of folic acid and vitamin B12 are critical not only in identifying the specific vitamin deficiency but also because they reflect different pathogenetic mechanisms (Chap. 105).

Cytoplasmic maturation defects result from severe iron deficiency or abnormalities in globin or heme synthesis. Iron deficiency occupies an unusual position in the classification of anemia. If the iron-deficiency anemia is mild to moderate, erythroid marrow proliferation is blunted and the anemia is classified as hypoproliferative. However, if the anemia is severe and prolonged, the erythroid marrow will become hyperplastic despite the inadequate iron supply, and the anemia will be classified as ineffective erythropoiesis with a cytoplasmic maturation defect. In either case, an inappropriately low reticulocyte production index, microcytosis, and a classic pattern of iron values make the diagnosis clear and easily distinguish iron deficiency from other cytoplasmic maturation defects such as the thalassemias. Defects in heme synthesis, in contrast to globin synthesis, are less common and may be acquired or inherited (Chap. 358). Acquired abnormalities are usually associated with myelodysplasia, may lead to either a macro- or microcytic anemia, and are frequently associated with mitochondrial iron loading. In these cases, iron is taken up by the mitochondria of the developing erythroid cell but not incorporated into heme. The iron-encrusted mitochondria surround the nucleus of the erythroid cell, forming a ring. Based on the distinctive finding of so-called ringed sideroblasts on the marrow iron stain, patients are diagnosed as having a sideroblastic anemia〞almost always reflecting myelodysplasia. Again, studies of iron parameters are helpful in the differential diagnosis of these patients.

Blood Loss/Hemolytic Anemia

In contrast to anemias associated with an inappropriately low reticulocyte production index, hemolysis is associated with red cell production indices 2.5 times normal. The stimulated erythropoiesis is reflected in the blood smear by the appearance of increased numbers of polychromatophilic macrocytes. A marrow examination is rarely indicated if the reticulocyte production index is increased appropriately. The red cell indices are typically normocytic or slightly macrocytic, reflecting the increased number of reticulocytes. Acute blood loss is not associated with an increased reticulocyte production index because of the time required to increase EPO production and, subsequently, marrow proliferation. Subacute blood loss may be associated with modest reticulocytosis. Anemia from chronic blood loss presents more often as iron deficiency than with the picture of increased red cell production.

The evaluation of blood loss anemia is usually not difficult. Most problems arise when a patient presents with an increased red cell production index from an episode of acute blood loss that went unrecognized. The cause of the anemia and increased red cell production may not be obvious. The confirmation of a recovering state may require observations over a period of 2每3 weeks, during which the hemoglobin concentration will be seen to rise and the reticulocyte production index fall (Chap. 106).

Hemolytic disease, while dramatic, is among the least common forms of anemia. The ability to sustain a high reticulocyte production index reflects the ability of the erythroid marrow to compensate for hemolysis and, in the case of extravascular hemolysis, the efficient recycling of iron from the destroyed red cells to support red cell production. With intravascular hemolysis, such as paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, the loss of iron may limit the marrow response. The level of response depends on the severity of the anemia and the nature of the underlying disease process.

Hemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease and the thalassemias, present a mixed picture. The reticulocyte index may be high but is inappropriately low for the degree of marrow erythroid hyperplasia (Chap. 104).

Hemolytic anemias present in different ways. Some appear suddenly as an acute, self-limited episode of intravascular or extravascular hemolysis, a presentation pattern often seen in patients with autoimmune hemolysis or with inherited defects of the Embden-Meyerhof pathway or the glutathione reductase pathway. Patients with inherited disorders of the hemoglobin molecule or red cell membrane generally have a lifelong clinical history typical of the disease process. Those with chronic hemolytic disease, such as hereditary spherocytosis, may actually present not with anemia but with a complication stemming from the prolonged increase in red cell destruction such as symptomatic bilirubin gallstones or splenomegaly. Patients with chronic hemolysis are also susceptible to aplastic crises if an infectious process interrupts red cell production.

The differential diagnosis of an acute or chronic hemolytic event requires the careful integration of family history, the pattern of clinical presentation and〞whether the disease is congenital or acquired〞by a careful examination of the peripheral blood smear. Precise diagnosis may require more specialized laboratory tests, such as hemoglobin electrophoresis or a screen for red cell enzymes. Acquired defects in red cell survival are often immunologically mediated and require a direct or indirect antiglobulin test or a cold agglutinin titer to detect the presence of hemolytic antibodies or complement-mediated red cell destruction (Chap. 106).

Treatment: Anemia

An overriding principle is to initiate treatment of mild to moderate anemia only when a specific diagnosis is made. Rarely, in the acute setting, anemia may be so severe that red cell transfusions are required before a specific diagnosis is made. Whether the anemia is of acute or gradual onset, the selection of the appropriate treatment is determined by the documented cause(s) of the anemia. Often, the cause of the anemia is multifactorial. For example, a patient with severe rheumatoid arthritis who has been taking anti-inflammatory drugs may have a hypoproliferative anemia associated with chronic inflammation as well as chronic blood loss associated with intermittent gastrointestinal bleeding. In every circumstance, it is important to evaluate the patient's iron status fully before and during the treatment of any anemia. Transfusion is discussed in Chap. 113; iron therapy is discussed in Chap. 103; treatment of megaloblastic anemia is discussed in Chap. 105; treatment of other entities is discussed in their respective chapters (sickle cell anemia, Chap. 104; hemolytic anemias, Chap. 106; aplastic anemia and myelodysplasia, Chap. 107).

Therapeutic options for the treatment of anemias have expanded dramatically during the past 25 years. Blood component therapy is available and safe. Recombinant EPO as an adjunct to anemia management has transformed the lives of patients with chronic renal failure on dialysis and reduced transfusion needs of anemic cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Eventually, patients with inherited disorders of globin synthesis or mutations in the globin gene, such as sickle cell disease, may benefit from the successful introduction of targeted genetic therapy (Chap. 68).
 
Polycythemia

Polycythemia is defined as an increase in the hemoglobin above normal. This increase may be real or only apparent because of a decrease in plasma volume (spurious or relative polycythemia). The term erythrocytosis may be used interchangeably with polycythemia, but some draw a distinction between them: erythrocytosis implies documentation of increased red cell mass, whereas polycythemia refers to any increase in red cells. Often patients with polycythemia are detected through an incidental finding of elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit levels. Concern that the hemoglobin level may be abnormally high is usually triggered at 170 g/L (17 g/dL) for men and 150 g/L (15 g/dL) for women. Hematocrit levels >50% in men or >45% in women may be abnormal. Hematocrits >60% in men and >55% in women are almost invariably associated with an increased red cell mass. Given that the machine that quantitates red cell parameters actually measures hemoglobin concentrations and calculates hematocrits, hemoglobin levels may be a better index.

Features of the clinical history that are useful in the differential diagnosis include smoking history; current living at high altitude; or a history of congenital heart disease, sleep apnea, or chronic lung disease.

Patients with polycythemia may be asymptomatic or experience symptoms related to the increased red cell mass or the underlying disease process that leads to the increased red cell mass. The dominant symptoms from an increased red cell mass are related to hyperviscosity and thrombosis (both venous and arterial), because the blood viscosity increases logarithmically at hematocrits >55%. Manifestations range from digital ischemia to Budd-Chiari syndrome with hepatic vein thrombosis. Abdominal vessel thromboses are particularly common. Neurologic symptoms such as vertigo, tinnitus, headache, and visual disturbances may occur. Hypertension is often present. Patients with polycythemia vera may have aquagenic pruritus and symptoms related to hepatosplenomegaly. Patients may have easy bruising, epistaxis, or bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract. Peptic ulcer disease is common. Patients with hypoxemia may develop cyanosis on minimal exertion or have headache, impaired mental acuity, and fatigue.

The physical examination usually reveals a ruddy complexion. Splenomegaly favors polycythemia vera as the diagnosis (Chap. 108). The presence of cyanosis or evidence of a right-to-left shunt suggests congenital heart disease presenting in the adult, particularly tetralogy of Fallot's or Eisenmenger's syndrome (Chap. 236). Increased blood viscosity raises pulmonary artery pressure; hypoxemia can lead to increased pulmonary vascular resistance. Together, these factors can produce cor pulmonale.

Polycythemia can be spurious (related to a decrease in plasma volume; Gaisbock's syndrome), primary, or secondary in origin. The secondary causes are all associated with increases in EPO levels: either a physiologically adapted appropriate elevation based on tissue hypoxia (lung disease, high altitude, CO poisoning, high-affinity hemoglobinopathy) or an abnormal overproduction (renal cysts, renal artery stenosis, tumors with ectopic EPO production). A rare familial form of polycythemia is associated with normal EPO levels but hyperresponsive EPO receptors due to mutations.

Approach to the Patient: Polycythemia

As shown in Fig. 57-18, the first step is to document the presence of an increased red cell mass using the principle of isotope dilution by administering 51Cr-labeled autologous red blood cells to the patient and sampling blood radioactivity over a 2-h period. If the red cell mass is normal (<36 mL/kg in men, <32 mL/kg in women), the patient has spurious or relative polycythemia. If the red cell mass is increased (>36 mL/kg in men, >32 mL/kg in women), serum EPO levels should be measured. If EPO levels are low or unmeasurable, the patient most likely has polycythemia vera. Tests that support this diagnosis include elevated white blood cell count, increased absolute basophil count, and thrombocytosis. A mutation in JAK-2 (Val617Phe), a key member of the cytokine intracellular signaling pathway, can be found in 70每95% of patients with polycythemia vera.

Figure 57-18

 
 
 
An approach to the differential diagnosis of patients with an elevated hemoglobin (possible polycythemia). AV, atrioventricular; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; EPO, erythropoietin; hct, hematocrit; IVP, intravenous pyelogram; RBC, red blood cell.
 
 

If serum EPO levels are elevated, one needs to distinguish whether the elevation is a physiologic response to hypoxia or is related to autonomous EPO production. Patients with low arterial O2 saturation (<92%) should be further evaluated for the presence of heart or lung disease, if they are not living at high altitude. Patients with normal O2 saturation who are smokers may have elevated EPO levels because of CO displacement of O2. If carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) levels are high, the diagnosis is "smoker's polycythemia." Such patients should be urged to stop smoking. Those who cannot stop smoking require phlebotomy to control their polycythemia. Patients with normal O2 saturation who do not smoke either have an abnormal hemoglobin that does not deliver O2 to the tissues (evaluated by finding elevated O2每hemoglobin affinity) or have a source of EPO production that is not responding to the normal feedback inhibition. Further workup is dictated by the differential diagnosis of EPO-producing neoplasms. Hepatoma, uterine leiomyoma, and renal cancer or cysts are all detectable with abdominopelvic CT scans. Cerebellar hemangiomas may produce EPO, but they present with localizing neurologic signs and symptoms rather than polycythemia-related symptoms.
 
Further Readings

Hillman RS et al: Hematology in Clinical Practice, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010 

 
McMullin MF: The classification and diagnosis of erythrocytosis. Int J Lab Hematol 30:447, 2008[PMID: 18823397] 

 
Rizzo JD et al: American Society of Hematology/American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update on the use of epoetin and darbepoetin in adult patients with cancer. Blood 116:4045, 2010[PMID: 20974674] 
 
 

^^
Bleeding and Thrombosis: Introduction

The human hemostatic system provides a natural balance between procoagulant and anticoagulant forces. The procoagulant forces include platelet adhesion and aggregation and fibrin clot formation; anticoagulant forces include the natural inhibitors of coagulation and fibrinolysis. Under normal circumstances, hemostasis is regulated to promote blood flow; however, it is also prepared to clot blood rapidly to arrest blood flow and prevent exsanguination. After bleeding is successfully halted, the system remodels the damaged vessel to restore normal blood flow. The major components of the hemostatic system, which function in concert, are (1) platelets and other formed elements of blood, such as monocytes and red cells; (2) plasma proteins (the coagulation and fibrinolytic factors and inhibitors); and (3) the vessel wall.
 
Steps of Normal Hemostasis

Platelet Plug Formation

On vascular injury, platelets adhere to the site of injury, usually the denuded vascular intimal surface. Platelet adhesion is mediated primarily by von Willebrand factor (VWF), a large multimeric protein present in both plasma and the extracellular matrix of the subendothelial vessel wall, which serves as the primary "molecular glue," providing sufficient strength to withstand the high levels of shear stress that would tend to detach them with the flow of blood. Platelet adhesion is also facilitated by direct binding to subendothelial collagen through specific platelet membrane collagen receptors.

Platelet adhesion results in subsequent platelet activation and aggregation. This process is enhanced and amplified by humoral mediators in plasma (e.g., epinephrine, thrombin); mediators released from activated platelets (e.g., adenosine diphosphate, serotonin); and vessel wall extracellular matrix constituents that come in contact with adherent platelets (e.g., collagen, VWF). Activated platelets undergo the release reaction, during which they secrete contents that further promote aggregation and inhibit the naturally anticoagulant endothelial cell factors. During platelet aggregation (platelet-platelet interaction), additional platelets are recruited from the circulation to the site of vascular injury, leading to the formation of an occlusive platelet thrombus. The platelet plug is anchored and stabilized by the developing fibrin mesh.

The platelet glycoprotein (Gp) IIb/IIIa (IIb3) complex is the most abundant receptor on the platelet surface. Platelet activation converts the normally inactive Gp IIb/IIIa receptor into an active receptor, enabling binding to fibrinogen and VWF. Because the surface of each platelet has about 50,000 Gp IIb/IIIa-binding sites, numerous activated platelets recruited to the site of vascular injury can rapidly form an occlusive aggregate by means of a dense network of intercellular fibrinogen bridges. Since this receptor is the key mediator of platelet aggregation, it has become an effective target for antiplatelet therapy.

Fibrin Clot Formation

Plasma coagulation proteins (clotting factors) normally circulate in plasma in their inactive forms. The sequence of coagulation protein reactions that culminate in the formation of fibrin was originally described as a waterfall or a cascade. Two pathways of blood coagulation have been described in the past: the so-called extrinsic, or tissue factor, pathway and the so-called intrinsic, or contact activation, pathway. We now know that coagulation is normally initiated through tissue factor (TF) exposure and activation through the classic extrinsic pathway but with critically important amplification through elements of the classic intrinsic pathway, as illustrated in Fig. 58-1. These reactions take place on phospholipid surfaces, usually the activated platelet surface. Coagulation testing in the laboratory can reflect other influences due to the artificial nature of the in vitro systems used (see below).

Figure 58-1

 
 
 
Coagulation is initiated by tissue factor (TF) exposure, which, with factor (F)VIIa, activates FIX and FX, which in turn, with FVIII and FV as cofactors, respectively, results in thrombin formation and subsequent conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. Thrombin activates FXI, FVIII, and FV, amplifying the coagulation signal. Once the TF/FVIIa/FXa complex is formed, tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) inhibits the TF/FVIIa pathway, making coagulation dependent on the amplification loop through FIX/FVIII. Coagulation requires calcium (not shown) and takes place on phospholipid surfaces, usually the activated platelet membrane.
 
 


The immediate trigger for coagulation is vascular damage that exposes blood to TF that is constitutively expressed on the surfaces of subendothelial cellular components of the vessel wall, such as smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts. TF is also present in circulating microparticles, presumably shed from cells including monocytes and platelets. TF binds the serine protease factor VIIa; the complex activates factor X to factor Xa. Alternatively, the complex can indirectly activate factor X by initially converting factor IX to factor IXa, which then activates factor X. The participation of factor XI in hemostasis is not dependent on its activation by factor XIIa but rather on its positive feedback activation by thrombin. Thus, factor XIa functions in the propagation and amplification, rather than in the initiation, of the coagulation cascade.

Factor Xa can be formed through the actions of either the tissue factor/factor VIIa complex or factor IXa (with factor VIIIa as a cofactor) and converts prothrombin to thrombin, the pivotal protease of the coagulation system. The essential cofactor for this reaction is factor Va. Like the homologous factor VIIIa, factor Va is produced by thrombin-induced limited proteolysis of factor V. Thrombin is a multifunctional enzyme that converts soluble plasma fibrinogen to an insoluble fibrin matrix. Fibrin polymerization involves an orderly process of intermolecular associations (Fig. 58-2). Thrombin also activates factor XIII (fibrin-stabilizing factor) to factor XIIIa, which covalently cross-links and thereby stabilizes the fibrin clot.

Figure 58-2

 
 
 
Fibrin formation and dissolution. (A). Fibrinogen is a trinodular structure consisting of 2 D domains and 1 E domain. Thrombin activation results in an ordered lateral assembly of protofibrils (B) with noncovalent associations. FXIIIa cross-links the D domains on adjacent molecules (C). Fibrin and fibrinogen (not shown) lysis by plasmin occurs at discrete sites and results in intermediary fibrin(ogen) degradation products (not shown). D-Dimers are the product of complete lysis of fibrin (D), maintaining the cross-linked D domains.
 
 

The assembly of the clotting factors on activated cell membrane surfaces greatly accelerates their reaction rates and also serves to localize blood clotting to sites of vascular injury. The critical cell membrane components, acidic phospholipids, are not normally exposed on resting cell membrane surfaces. However, when platelets, monocytes, and endothelial cells are activated by vascular injury or inflammatory stimuli, the procoagulant head groups of the membrane anionic phospholipids become translocated to the surfaces of these cells or released as part of microparticles, making them available to support and promote the plasma coagulation reactions.
 
Antithrombotic Mechanisms

Several physiologic antithrombotic mechanisms act in concert to prevent clotting under normal circumstances. These mechanisms operate to preserve blood fluidity and to limit blood clotting to specific focal sites of vascular injury. Endothelial cells have many antithrombotic effects. They produce prostacyclin, nitric oxide, and ectoADPase/CD39, which act to inhibit platelet binding, secretion, and aggregation. Endothelial cells produce anticoagulant factors including heparan proteoglycans, antithrombin, TF pathway inhibitor, and thrombomodulin. They also activate fibrinolytic mechanisms through the production of tissue plasminogen activator 1, urokinase, plasminogen activator inhibitor, and annexin-2. The sites of action of the major physiologic antithrombotic pathways are shown in Fig. 58-3.

Figure 58-3

 
 
 
Sites of action of the four major physiologic antithrombotic pathways: antithrombin (AT); protein C/S (PC/PS); tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI); and the fibrinolytic system, consisting of plasminogen, plasminogen activator (PA), and plasmin. PT, prothrombin; Th, thrombin; FDP, fibrin(ogen) degradation products. [Modified from BA Konkle, AI Schafer, in DP Zipes et al (eds): Braunwald's Heart Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2005.]
 
 

Antithrombin (or antithrombin III) is the major plasma protease inhibitor of thrombin and the other clotting factors in coagulation. Antithrombin neutralizes thrombin and other activated coagulation factors by forming a complex between the active site of the enzyme and the reactive center of antithrombin. The rate of formation of these inactivating complexes increases by a factor of several thousand in the presence of heparin. Antithrombin inactivation of thrombin and other activated clotting factors occurs physiologically on vascular surfaces, where glycosoaminoglycans, including heparan sulfates, are present to catalyze these reactions. Inherited quantitative or qualitative deficiencies of antithrombin lead to a lifelong predisposition to venous thromboembolism.

Protein C is a plasma glycoprotein that becomes an anticoagulant when it is activated by thrombin. The thrombin-induced activation of protein C occurs physiologically on thrombomodulin, a transmembrane proteoglycan-binding site for thrombin on endothelial cell surfaces. The binding of protein C to its receptor on endothelial cells places it in proximity to the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex, thereby enhancing its activation efficiency. Activated protein C acts as an anticoagulant by cleaving and inactivating activated factors V and VIII. This reaction is accelerated by a cofactor, protein S, which, like protein C, is a glycoprotein that undergoes vitamin K每dependent posttranslational modification. Quantitative or qualitative deficiencies of protein C or protein S, or resistance to the action of activated protein C by a specific mutation at its target cleavage site in factor Va (factor V Leiden), lead to hypercoagulable states.

Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is a plasma protease inhibitor that regulates the TF每induced extrinsic pathway of coagulation. TFPI inhibits the TF/FVIIa/FXa complex, essentially turning off the TF/FVIIa initiation of coagulation, which then becomes dependent on the "amplification loop" via FXI and FVIII activation by thrombin. TFPI is bound to lipoprotein and can also be released by heparin from endothelial cells, where it is bound to glycosoaminoglycans, and from platelets. The heparin-mediated release of TFPI may play a role in the anticoagulant effects of unfractionated and low-molecular-weight heparins.

The Fibrinolytic System

Any thrombin that escapes the inhibitory effects of the physiologic anticoagulant systems is available to convert fibrinogen to fibrin. In response, the endogenous fibrinolytic system is then activated to dispose of intravascular fibrin and thereby maintain or reestablish the patency of the circulation. Just as thrombin is the key proteaseenzyme of the coagulation system, plasmin is the major protease enzyme of the fibrinolytic system, acting to digest fibrin to fibrin degradation products. The general scheme of fibrinolysis and its control is shown in Fig. 58-4.

Figure 58-4

 
 
 
A schematic diagram of the fibrinolytic system. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is released from endothelial cells, binds the fibrin clot, and activates plasminogen to plasmin. Excess fibrin is degraded by plasmin to distinct degradation products (FDPs). Any free plasmin is complexed with 2-antiplasmin (2Pl).
 
 

The plasminogen activators, tissue type plasminogen activator (tPA) and the urokinase type plasminogen activator cleave (uPA), cleave the Arg560-Val561 bond of plasminogen to generate the active enzyme plasmin. The lysine-binding sites of plasmin (and plasminogen) permit it to bind to fibrin, so that physiologic fibrinolysis is "fibrin specific." Both plasminogen (through its lysine-binding sites) and tPA possess specific affinity for fibrin and thereby bind selectively to clots. The assembly of a ternary complex, consisting of fibrin, plasminogen, and tPA, promotes the localized interaction between plasminogen and tPA and greatly accelerates the rate of plasminogen activation to plasmin. Moreover, partial degradation of fibrin by plasmin exposes new plasminogen and tPA-binding sites in carboxy-terminus lysine residues of fibrin fragments to enhance these reactions further. This creates a highly efficient mechanism to generate plasmin focally on the fibrin clot, which then becomes plasmin's substrate for digestion to fibrin degradation products. Plasmin cleaves fibrin at distinct sites of the fibrin molecule leading to the generation of characteristic fibrin fragments during the process of fibrinolysis (Fig. 58-2). The sites of plasmin cleavage of fibrin are the same as those in fibrinogen. However, when plasmin acts on covalently cross-linked fibrin, D-dimers are released; hence, D-dimers can be measured in plasma as a relatively specific test of fibrin (rather than fibrinogen) degradation. D-dimer assays can be used as sensitive markers of blood clot formation, and some have been validated for clinical use to exclude the diagnosis of deep-venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism in selected populations.

Physiologic regulation of fibrinolysis occurs primarily at three levels: (1) plasminogen activator inhibitors (PAIs), specifically PAI-1 and PAI-2, inhibit the physiologic plasminogen activators; (2) the thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) limits fibrinolysis; and (3) 2-antiplasmin inhibits plasmin. PAI1 is the primary inhibitor of tPA and uPA in plasma. TAFI cleaves the N-terminal lysine residues of fibrin, which aid in localization of plasmin activity. 2-Antiplasmin is the main inhibitor of plasmin in human plasma, inactivating any non-fibrin clot-associated plasmin.
 
Clinical Presentation

Disorders of hemostasis may be either inherited or acquired. A detailed personal and family history is key in determining the chronicity of symptoms and the likelihood of the disorder being inherited, and it provides clues to underlying conditions that have contributed to the bleeding or thrombotic state. In addition, the history can give clues as to the etiology by determining (1) the bleeding (mucosal and/or joint) or thrombosis (arterial and/or venous) site and (2) whether an underlying bleeding or clotting tendency was enhanced by another medical condition or the introduction of medications or dietary supplements.

History of Bleeding

A history of bleeding is the most important predictor of bleeding risk. In evaluating a patient for a bleeding disorder, a history of at-risk situations, including the response to past surgeries, should be assessed. Does the patient have a history of spontaneous or trauma/surgery-induced bleeding? Spontaneous hemarthroses are a hallmark of moderate and severe factor VIII and IX deficiency and, in rare circumstances, of other clotting factor deficiencies. Mucosal bleeding symptoms are more suggestive of underlying platelet disorders or von Willebrand disease (VWD), termed disorders of primary hemostasis or platelet plug formation. Disorders affecting primary hemostasis are shown in Table 58每1.

Table 58每1 Primary Hemostatic (Platelet Plug) Disorders

 
 
Defects of Platelet Adhesion  
  Von Willebrand disease 
  Bernard-Soulier syndrome (absence of dysfunction of GpIb-IX-V) 
Defects of Platelet Aggregation  
  Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (absence or dysfunction of GpIIbIIIa) 
  Afibrinogenemia 
Defects of Platelet Secretion  
  Decreased cyclooxygenase activity 
    Drug-induced (aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, thienopyridines) 
    Inherited 
  Granule storage pool defects 
    Inherited 
    Acquired 
  Non-specific inherited secretory defects 
  Non-specific drug effects 
  Uremia 
  Platelet coating (e.g., paraprotein, penicillin) 
Defect of Platelet Coagulant Activity  
  Scott's syndrome 
 

 

A bleeding score has been validated as a tool to predict patients more likely to have Type 1 VWD. Studies are under way to validate additional formats, including ones that are easier to administer and improving performance in pediatric populations. Bleeding symptoms that appear to be more common in patients with bleeding disorders include prolonged bleeding with surgery, dental procedures and extractions, and/or trauma, menorrhagia or postpartum hemorrhage, and large bruises (often described with lumps).

Easy bruising and menorrhagia are common complaints in patients with and without bleeding disorders. Easy bruising can also be a sign of medical conditions in which there is no identifiable coagulopathy; instead, the conditions are caused by an abnormality of blood vessels or their supporting tissues. In Ehlers-Danlos syndrome there may be posttraumatic bleeding and a history of joint hyperextensibility. Cushing's syndrome, chronic steroid use, and aging result in changes in skin and subcutaneous tissue, and subcutaneous bleeding occurs in response to minor trauma. The latter has been termed senile purpura.

Epistaxis is a common symptom, particularly in children and in dry climates, and may not reflect an underlying bleeding disorder. However it is the most common symptom in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia and in boys with VWD. Clues that epistaxis is a symptom of an underlying bleeding disorder include lack of seasonal variation and bleeding that requires medical evaluation or treatment, including cauterization. Bleeding with eruption of primary teeth is seen in children with more severe bleeding disorders, such as moderate and severe hemophilia. It is uncommon in children with mild bleeding disorders. Patients with disorders of primary hemostasis (platelet adhesion) may have increased bleeding after dental cleanings and other procedures that involve gum manipulation.

Menorrhagia is defined quantitatively as a loss of >80 mL of blood per cycle, based on blood loss required to produce iron-deficiency anemia. A complaint of heavy menses is subjective and has a poor correlation with excessive blood loss. Predictors of menorrhagia include bleeding resulting in iron-deficiency anemia or a need for blood transfusion, passage of clots >1 inch in diameter and changing a pad or tampon more than hourly. Menorrhagia is a common symptom in women with underlying bleeding disorders and is reported in the majority of women with VWD and factor XI deficiency and in symptomatic carriers of hemophilia A. Women with underlying bleeding disorders are more likely to have other bleeding symptoms, including bleeding after dental extractions, postoperative bleeding, and postpartum bleeding, and are much more likely to have menorrhagia beginning at menarche than women with menorrhagia due to other causes.

Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) is a common symptom in women with underlying bleeding disorders. In women with Type 1 VWD and symptomatic carriers of hemophilia in whom levels of VWF and FVIII usually normalize during pregnancy, PPH may be delayed. Women with a history of postpartum hemorrhage have a high risk of recurrence with subsequent pregnancies. Rupture of ovarian cysts with intraabdominal hemorrhage has also been reported in women with underlying bleeding disorders.

Tonsillectomy is a major hemostatic challenge, as intact hemostatic mechanisms are essential to prevent excessive bleeding from the tonsillar bed. Bleeding may occur early after surgery or after approximately 7 days postoperatively, with loss of the eschar at the operative site. Similar delayed bleeding is seen after colonic polyp resection. Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and hematuria are usually due to underlying pathology, and procedures to identify and treat the bleeding site should be undertaken, even in patients with known bleeding disorders. VWD, particularly types 2 and 3, has been associated with angiodysplasia of the bowel and GI bleeding.

Hemarthroses and spontaneous muscle hematomas are characteristic of moderate or severe congenital factor VIII or IX deficiency. They can also be seen in moderate and severe deficiencies of fibrinogen, prothrombin, and of factors V, VII, and X. Spontaneous hemarthroses occur rarely in other bleeding disorders except for severe VWD, with associated FVIII levels <5%. Muscle and soft tissue bleeds are also common in acquired FVIII deficiency. Bleeding into a joint results in severe pain and swelling, as well as loss of function, but is rarely associated with discoloration from bruising around the joint. Life-threatening sites of bleeding include bleeding into the oropharynx, where bleeding can obstruct the airway, into the central nervous system, and into the retroperitoneum. Central nervous system bleeding is the major cause of bleeding-related deaths in patients with severe congenital factor deficiencies.

Prohemorrhagic Effects of Medications and Dietary Supplements

Aspirin and other nonsteroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that inhibit cyclooxygenase 1 impair primary hemostasis and may exacerbate bleeding from another cause or even unmask a previously occult mild bleeding disorder such as VWD. All NSAIDs, however, can precipitate gastrointestinal bleeding, which may be more severe in patients with underlying bleeding disorders. The aspirin effect on platelet function as assessed by aggregometry can persist for up to 7 days, although it has frequently returned to normal by 3 days after the last dose. The effect of other NSAIDs is shorter, as the inhibitor effect is reversed when the drug is removed. Thienopyridines (clopidogrel and prasugrel) inhibit ADP-mediated platelet aggregation and like NSAIDs can precipitate or exacerbate bleeding symptoms.

Many herbal supplements can impair hemostatic function (Table 58每2). Some are more convincingly associated with a bleeding risk than others. Fish oil or concentrated omega 3 fatty acid supplements impair platelet function. They alter platelet biochemistry to produce more PGI3, a more potent platelet inhibitor than prostacyclin (PGI2), and more thromboxane A3, a less potent platelet activator than thromboxane A2. In fact, diets naturally rich in omega 3 fatty acids can result in a prolonged bleeding time and abnormal platelet aggregation studies, but the actual associated bleeding risk is unclear. Vitamin E appears to inhibit protein kinase C每mediated platelet aggregation and nitric oxide production. In patients with unexplained bruising or bleeding, it is prudent to review any new medications or supplements and discontinue those that may be associated with bleeding.

Table 58每2 Herbal Supplements Associated with Increased Bleeding

 
 
Herbs With Potential Anti-Platelet Activity  
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba L.)  
Garlic (Allium sativum)  
Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus)  
Ginger (Gingiber officinale)  
Dong quai (Angelica sinensis)  
Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)  
Asian ginseng (Panax ginseng)  
American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)  
Siberian ginseng/eleuthero (Eleutherococcus senticosus)  
Turmeric (Circuma longa)  
Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria)  
Willow (Salix spp.)  
Coumarin-Containing Herbs  
Motherworth (Leonurus cardiaca)  
Chamomile (Matricaria recutita, Chamaemelum mobile)  
Horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum)  
Red clover (Trifolium pratense)  
Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum)  
 

 

Underlying Systemic Diseases that Cause or Exacerbate a Bleeding Tendency

Acquired bleeding disorders are commonly secondary to, or associated with, systemic disease. The clinical evaluation of a patient with a bleeding tendency must therefore include a thorough assessment for evidence of underlying disease. Bruising or mucosal bleeding may be the presenting complaint in liver disease, severe renal impairment, hypothyroidism, paraproteinemias or amyloidosis, and conditions causing bone marrow failure. All coagulation factors are synthesized in the liver, and hepatic failure results in combined factor deficiencies. This is often compounded by thrombocytopenia from splenomegaly due to portal hypertension. Coagulation factors II, VII, IX, X and proteins C, S, and Z are dependent on vitamin K for posttranslational modification. Although vitamin K is required in both procoagulant and anticoagulant processes, the phenotype of vitamin K deficiency or the warfarin effect on coagulation is bleeding.

The normal blood platelet count is 150,000每450,000/L. Thrombocytopenia results from decreased production, increased destruction, and/or sequestration. Although the bleeding risk varies somewhat by the reason for the thrombocytopenia, bleeding rarely occurs in isolated thrombocytopenia at counts <50,000/L and usually not until <10,000每20,000/L. Coexisting coagulopathies, as is seen in liver failure or disseminated coagulation; infection, platelet-inhibitory drugs; and underlying medical conditions can all increase the risk of bleeding in the thrombocytopenic patient. Most procedures can be performed in patients with a platelet count of 50,000/L. The level needed for major surgery will depend on the type of surgery and the patients' underlying medical state, although a count of approximately 80,000/L is likely sufficient.
 
History of Thrombosis

The risk of thrombosis, like that of bleeding, is influenced by both genetic and environmental influences. The major risk factor for arterial thrombosis is atherosclerosis, while for venous thrombosis the risk factors are immobility, surgery, underlying medical conditions such as malignancy, medications such as hormonal therapy, obesity, and genetic predispositions. Factors that increase risks for venous and for both venous and arterial thromboses are shown in Table 58每3.

Table 58每3 Risk Factors for Thrombosis

 
 
Venous
 Venous and Arterial
 
Inherited

Factor V Leiden

Prothrombin G20210A

Antithrombin deficiency

Protein C deficiency

Protein S deficiency

Elevated FVIII

Acquired

Age

Previous thrombosis

Immobilization

Major surgery

Pregnancy and puerperium

Hospitalization

Obesity

Infection

APC resistance, nongenetic

Smoking

Unknown*

Elevated factor II, IX, XI

Elevated TAFI levels

Low levels of TFPI
 Inherited

Homocystinuria

Dysfibrinogenemia

Mixed (inherited and acquired)

Hyperhomocysteinemia

Acquired

Malignancy

Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome

Hormonal therapy

Polycythemia vera

Essential thrombocythemia

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia

Disseminated intravascular coagulation
 
 


* Unknown whether risk is inherited or acquired.

Abbreviations: APC, activated protein C; TAFI, thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor; TFPI, tissue factor pathway inhibitor.
 

The most important point in a history related to venous thrombosis is determining whether the thrombotic event was idiopathic (meaning there was no clear precipitating factor) or was a precipitated event. In patients without underlying malignancy, having an idiopathic event is the strongest predictor of recurrence of venous thromboembolism. In patients who have a vague history of thrombosis, a history of being treated with warfarin suggests a past DVT. Age is an important risk factor for venous thrombosis〞the risk of DVT increasing per decade, with an approximate incidence of 1/100,000 per year in early childhood to 200 per year among octogenarians. Family history is helpful in determining if there is a genetic predisposition and how strong that predisposition appears to be. A genetic thrombophilia that confers a relatively small increased risk, such as being a heterozygote for the prothrombin G20210A or factor V Leiden mutation, may be a minor determinant of risk in an elderly individual undergoing a high-risk surgical procedure. As illustrated in Fig. 58-5, a thrombotic event usually has more than one contributing factor. Predisposing factors must be carefully assessed to determine the risk of recurrent thrombosis and, with consideration of the patient's bleeding risk, determine the length of anticoagulation. Similar consideration should be given in determining the need to test the patient and family members for thrombophilias.

Figure 58-5

 
 
 
Thrombotic risk over time. Shown schematically is an individual's thrombotic risk over time. An underlying factor V Leiden mutation provides a "theoretically" constant increased risk. The thrombotic risk increases with age and, intermittently, with oral contraceptive (OCP) or hormone replacement (HRT) use; other events may increase the risk further. At some point the cumulative risk may increase to the threshold for thrombosis and result in deep-venous thrombosis (DVT). Note: The magnitude and duration of risk portrayed in the figure is meant for example only and may not precisely reflect the relative risk determined by clinical study. [From BA Konkle, A Schafer, in DP Zipes et al (eds): Braunwald's Heart Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2005; modified with permission from FR Rosendaal: Venous thrombosis: A multicausal disease. Lancet 353:1167, 1999.]
 
 
 
Laboratory Evaluation

Careful history taking and clinical examination are essential components in the assessment of bleeding and thrombotic risk. The use of laboratory tests of coagulation complement, but cannot substitute for, clinical assessment. No test exists that provides a global assessment of hemostasis. The bleeding time has been used to assess bleeding risk; however, it does not predict bleeding risk with surgery and it is not recommended for this indication. The PFA-100, an instrument that measures platelet-dependent coagulation under flow conditions, is more sensitive and specific for platelet disorders and VWD than the bleeding time; however it is not sensitive enough to rule out underlying mild bleeding disorders. Also, its utility in predicting bleeding risk has not been determined.

For routine preoperative and preprocedure testing, an abnormal prothrombin time (PT) may detect liver disease or vitamin K deficiency that had not been previously appreciated. Studies have not confirmed the usefulness of an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) in preoperative evaluations in patients with a negative bleeding history. The primary use of coagulation testing should be to confirm the presence and type of bleeding disorder in a patient with a suspicious clinical history.

Because of the nature of coagulation assays, proper sample acquisition and handling is critical to obtaining valid results. In patients with abnormal coagulation assays who have no bleeding history, repeat studies with attention to these factors frequently results in normal values. Most coagulation assays are performed in sodium citrate anticoagulated plasma that is recalcified for the assay. Because the anticoagulant is in liquid solution and needs to be added to blood in proportion to the plasma volume, incorrectly filled or inadequately mixed blood collection tubes will give erroneous results. Vacutainer tubes should be filled to >90% of the recommended fill, which is usually denoted by a line on the tube. An elevated hematocrit (>55%) can result in a false value due to a decreased plasma to anticoagulant ratio.

Screening Assays

The most commonly used screening tests are the PT, aPTT, and platelet count. The PT assesses the factors I (fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V, VII, and X (Fig. 58-6). The PT measures the time for clot formation of the citrated plasma after recalcification and addition of thromboplastin, a mixture of TF and phospholipids. The sensitivity of the assay varies by the source of thromboplastin. The relationship between defects in secondary hemostasis (fibrin formation) and coagulation test abnormalities is shown in Table 58每4. To adjust for this variability, the overall sensitivity of different thromboplastins to reduction of the vitamin K每dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X in anticoagulation patients is now expressed as the International Sensitivity Index (ISI). An inverse relationship exists between ISI and thromboplastin sensitivity. The international normalized ratio (INR) is then determined based on the formula: INR = (PTpatient/PTnormal mean)ISI.

Figure 58-6

 
 
 
Coagulation factor activity tested in the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) in red and prothrombin time (PT) in green, or both. F, factor; HMWK, high-molecular-weight kininogen; PK, prekallikrein.
 
 
Table 58每4 Hemostatic Disorders and Coagulation Test Abnormalities

 
 
Prolonged Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT)  
No clinical bleeding〞 factors XII, high-molecular-weight kininogen, 
prekallikrein 
Variable, but usually mild, bleeding〞 factor XI, mild FVIII and FIX 
Frequent, severe bleeding〞severe deficiencies of FVIII and FIX 
Heparin 
Prolonged Prothrombin Time (PT)  
Factor VII deficiency 
Vitamin K deficiency〞early 
Warfarin anticoagulation 
Prolonged aPTT and PT  
Factor II, V, X, or fibrinogen deficiency 
Vitamin K deficiency〞late 
Direct thrombin inhibitors 
Prolonged Thrombin Time  
Heparin or heparin-like inhibitors 
Mild or no bleeding〞dysfibrinogenemia 
Frequent, severe bleeding〞afibrinogenemia 
Prolonged PT and/or aPTT Not Correct with Mixing with  
Normal Plasma 
Bleeding〞specific factor inhibitor 
No symptoms, or clotting and/or pregnancy loss〞lupus anticoagulant 
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
Heparin or direct thrombin inhibitor 
Abnormal Clot Solubility  
Factor XIII deficiency 
Inhibitors or defective cross-linking 
Rapid Clot Lysis  
Deficiency of 2-antiplasmin or plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
  
Treatment with fibrinolytic therapy 
 

 

The INR was developed to assess anticoagulation due to reduction of vitamin K每dependent coagulation factors; it is commonly used in the evaluation of patients with liver disease. While it does allow comparison between laboratories, reagent sensitivity as used to determine the ISI is not the same in liver disease as with warfarin anticoagulation. In addition, progressive liver failure is associated with variable changes in coagulation factors; the degree of prolongation of either the PT or the INR only roughly predicts the bleeding risk. Thrombin generation has been shown to be normal in many patients with mild to moderate liver dysfunction. As the PT only measures one aspect of hemostasis affected by liver dysfunction, we likely overestimate the bleeding risk of a mildly elevated INR in this setting.

The aPTT assesses the intrinsic and common coagulation pathways, factors XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II, fibrinogen, and also prekallikrein, high-molecular-weight kininogen and factor XII (Fig. 58-6). The aPTT reagent contains phospholipids derived from either animal or vegetable sources that function as a platelet substitute in the coagulation pathways and includes an activator of the intrinsic coagulation system, such as nonparticulate ellagic acid or the particulate activators kaolin, celite, or micronized silica.

The phospholipid composition of aPTT reagents varies, which influences the sensitivity of individual reagents to clotting factor deficiencies and to inhibitors such as heparin and lupus anticoagulants. Thus, aPTT results will vary from one laboratory to another and the normal range in the laboratory where the testing occurs should be used in the interpretation. Local laboratories cam relate their aPTT values to the therapeutic heparin anticoagulation by correlating aPTT values with direct measurements of heparin activity (anti-Xa or protamine titration assays) in samples from heparinized patients, although correlation between these assays is often poor. The aPTT reagent will vary in sensitivity to individual factor deficiencies and usually becomes prolonged with individual factor deficiencies of 30每50%.

Mixing Studies

Mixing studies are used to evaluate a prolonged aPTT or, less commonly PT, to distinguish between a factor deficiency and an inhibitor. In this assay, normal plasma and patient plasma are mixed in a 1:1 ratio, and the aPTT or PT determined immediately and after incubation at 37∼C for varying times, typically 30, 60, and/or 120 min. With isolated factor deficiencies, the aPTT will correct with mixing and stay corrected with incubation. With aPTT prolongation due to a lupus anticoagulant, the mixing and incubation will show no correction. In acquired neutralizing factor antibodies, such as an acquired factor VIII inhibitor, the initial assay may or may not correct immediately after mixing but will prolong or remain prolonged with incubation at 37∼C. Failure to correct with mixing can also be due to the presence of other inhibitors or interfering substances such as heparin, fibrin split products, and paraproteins.

Specific Factor Assays

Decisions to proceed with specific clotting factor assays will be influenced by the clinical situation and the results of coagulation screening tests. Precise diagnosis and effective management of inherited and acquired coagulation deficiencies necessitate quantitation of the relevant factors. When bleeding is severe, specific assays are often urgently required to guide appropriate therapy. Individual factor assays are usually performed as modifications of the mixing study, where the patient's plasma is mixed with plasma deficient in the factor being studied. This will correct all factor deficiencies to >50%, thus making prolongation of clot formation due to a factor deficiency dependent on the factor missing from the added plasma.

Testing for Antiphospholipid Antibodies

Antibodies to phospholipids (cardiolipin) or phospholipid-binding proteins (2-microglobulin and others) are detected by ELISA. When these antibodies interfere with phospholipid-dependent coagulation tests, they are termed lupus anticoagulants. The aPTT has variability sensitivity to lupus anticoagulants, depending in part on the aPTT reagents used. An assay utilizing a sensitive reagent has been termed an LA-PTT. The dilute Russell viper venom test (dRVVT) and the tissue thromboplastin inhibition (TTI) test are modifications of standard tests with the phospholipid reagent decreased, thus increasing the sensitivity to antibodies that interfere with the phospholipid component. The tests, however, are not specific for lupus anticoagulants, as factor deficiencies or other inhibitors will also result in prolongation. Documentation of a lupus anticoagulant requires not only prolongation of a phospholipid-dependent coagulation test but also lack of correction when mixed with normal plasma and correction with the addition of activated platelet membranes or certain phospholipids, e.g. hexagonal phase.

Other Coagulation Tests

The thrombin time and the reptilase time measure fibrinogen conversion to fibrin and are prolonged when the fibrinogen level is low (usually <80每100 mg/dL), qualitatively abnormal, as seen in inherited or acquired dysfibrinogenemias, or when fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products interfere. The thrombin time, but not the reptilase time, is prolonged in the presence of heparin. Measurement of anti每factor Xa plasma inhibitory activity is a test frequently used to assess low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) levels or as a direct measurement of unfractionated heparin (UFH) activity. Heparin in the patient sample inhibits the enzymatic conversion of a Xa-specific chromogenic substrate to colored product by factor Xa. Standard curves are created using multiple concentrations of UFH and LMWH and are used to calculate the concentration of anti-Xa activity in the patient plasma.

Laboratory Testing for Thrombophilia.

Laboratory assays to detect thrombophilic states include molecular diagnostics and immunologic and functional assays. These assays vary in their sensitivity and specificity for the condition being tested. Furthermore, acute thrombosis, acute illnesses, inflammatory conditions, pregnancy, and medications affect levels of many coagulation factors and their inhibitors. Antithrombin is decreased by heparin and in the setting of acute thrombosis. Protein C and S levels may be increased in the setting of acute thrombosis and are decreased by warfarin. Antiphospholipid antibodies are frequently transiently positive in acute illness. Testing for genetic thrombophilias should, in general, only be performed when there is a strong family history of thrombosis and results would affect clinical decision making.

As thrombophilia evaluations are usually performed to assess the need to extend anticoagulation, testing should be performed in a steady state, remote from the acute event. In most instances, warfarin anticoagulation can be stopped after the initial 3每6 months of treatment, and testing performed at least 3 weeks later. Sensitive markers of coagulation activation, notably the D-dimer assay and the thrombin generation test, hold promise as predictors, when elevated, of recurrent thrombosis when measured at least 1 month from discontinuation of warfarin.

Measures of Platelet Function.

The bleeding time has been used to assess bleeding risk; however, it has not been found to predict bleeding risk with surgery, and it is not recommended for use for this indication. The PFA-100 and similar instruments that measure platelet-dependent coagulation under flow conditions are generally more sensitive and specific for platelet disorders and VWD than the bleeding time; however, data are insufficient to support their use to predict bleeding risk or monitor response to therapy. When they are used in the evaluation of a patient with bleeding symptoms, abnormal results, as with the bleeding time, require specific testing, such as VWF assays and/or platelet aggregation studies. Since all of these "screening" assays may miss patients with mild bleeding disorders, further studies are needed to define their role in hemostasis testing.

For classic platelet aggregometry, various agonists are added to the patient's platelet-rich plasma and platelet aggregation is observed. Tests of platelet secretion in response to agonists can also be measured. These tests are affected by many factors, including numerous medications, and the association between minor defects in aggregation or secretion in these assays and bleeding risk is not clearly established.
 
Acknowledgment

Robert I. Handin, MD, contributed this chapter in the 16th edition and some material from that chapter has been retained here.
 
Further Readings

Baglin T et al: Clinical guidelines for testing for heritable thrombophilia. Br J Haematol 149:209, 2010[PMID: 20128794] 

 
Cosmi B et al: Usefulness of repeated D-dimer testing after stopping anticoagulation for a first episode of unprovoked venous thromboembolism: The PROLONG II prospective study. Blood 115:481, 2010[PMID: 19965693] 

 
Galli M: The antiphospholipid triangle. J Thromb Haemost 8:234, 2010[PMID: 19912514] 

 
Lijfering WM et al: Risk factors for venous thrombosis〞current understanding from an epidemiological point of view. Br J Haematol 149:824, 2010[PMID: 20456358] 

 
Pengo V et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome: Critical analysis of the diagnostic path. Lupus 19:428, 2010[PMID: 20353982] 

 
Wagenman BL et al: The laboratory approach to inherited and acquired coagulation factor deficiencies. Clin Lab Med 29:229, 2009[PMID: 19665676] 

 
Wheeler AP, Rice TW: Coagulopathy in critically ill patients: Soluble clotting factors and hemostatic testing. Chest 137:185, 2010[PMID: 20051403] 
 
 

^^
Enlargement of Lymph Nodes and Spleen: Introduction

This chapter is intended to serve as a guide to the evaluation of patients who present with enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) or the spleen (splenomegaly). Lymphadenopathy is a rather common clinical finding in primary care settings, whereas palpable splenomegaly is less so.
 
Lymphadenopathy

Lymphadenopathy may be an incidental finding in patients being examined for various reasons, or it may be a presenting sign or symptom of the patient's illness. The physician must eventually decide whether the lymphadenopathy is a normal finding or one that requires further study, up to and including biopsy. Soft, flat, submandibular nodes (<1 cm) are often palpable in healthy children and young adults; healthy adults may have palpable inguinal nodes of up to 2 cm, which are considered normal. Further evaluation of these normal nodes is not warranted. In contrast, if the physician believes the node(s) to be abnormal, then pursuit of a more precise diagnosis is needed.

Approach to the Patient: Lymphadenopathy

Lymphadenopathy may be a primary or secondary manifestation of numerous disorders, as shown in Table 59每1. Many of these disorders are infrequent causes of lymphadenopathy. In primary care practice, more than two-thirds of patients with lymphadenopathy have nonspecific causes or upper respiratory illnesses (viral or bacterial) and <1% have a malignancy. In one study, 84% of patients referred for evaluation of lymphadenopathy had a "benign" diagnosis. The remaining 16% had a malignancy (lymphoma or metastatic adenocarcinoma). Of the patients with benign lymphadenopathy, 63% had a nonspecific or reactive etiology (no causative agent found), and the remainder had a specific cause demonstrated, most commonly infectious mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, or tuberculosis. Thus, the vast majority of patients with lymphadenopathy will have a nonspecific etiology requiring few diagnostic tests.

Table 59每1 Diseases Associated with Lymphadenopathy

 
 
1. Infectious diseases 
  a. Viral〞infectious mononucleosis syndromes (EBV, CMV), infectious hepatitis, herpes simplex, herpesvirus-6, varicella-zoster virus, rubella, measles, adenovirus, HIV, epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, vaccinia, herpesvirus-8 
  b. Bacterial〞streptococci, staphylococci, cat-scratch disease, brucellosis, tularemia, plague, chancroid, melioidosis, glanders, tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterial infection, primary and secondary syphilis, diphtheria, leprosy 
  c. Fungal〞histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, paracoccidioidomycosis 
  d. Chlamydial〞lymphogranuloma venereum, trachoma 
  e. Parasitic〞toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis, trypanosomiasis, filariasis 
  f. Rickettsial〞scrub typhus, rickettsialpox, Q fever 2. Immunologic diseases 
  a. Rheumatoid arthritis 
  b. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis 
  c. Mixed connective tissue disease 
  d. Systemic lupus erythematosus 
  e. Dermatomyositis 
  f. Sj?gren's syndrome 
  g. Serum sickness 
  h. Drug hypersensitivity〞diphenylhydantoin, hydralazine, allopurinol, primidone, gold, carbamazepine, etc. 
  i. Angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy 
  j. Primary biliary cirrhosis 
  k. Graft-vs.-host disease 
  l. Silicone-associated 
  m. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
3.Malignant diseases 
  a. Hematologic〞Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, acute or chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, malignant histiocytosis, amyloidosis 
  b. Metastatic〞from numerous primary sites 
4.Lipid storage diseases〞Gaucher's, Niemann-Pick, Fabry, Tangier 
5. Endocrine diseases〞hyperthyroidism 
6. Other disorders 
  a. Castleman's disease (giant lymph node hyperplasia) 
  b. Sarcoidosis 
  c. Dermatopathic lymphadenitis 
  d. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis 
  e. Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi's disease) 
  f. Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman disease) 
  g. Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (Kawasaki's disease) 
  h. Histiocytosis X 
  i. Familial Mediterranean fever 
  j. Severe hypertriglyceridemia 
  k. Vascular transformation of sinuses 
  l. Inflammatory pseudotumor of lymph node 
  m. Congestive heart failureAbbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus. 
 

 

Clinical Assessment

The physician will be aided in the pursuit of an explanation for the lymphadenopathy by a careful medical history, physical examination, selected laboratory tests, and perhaps an excisional lymph node biopsy.

The medical history should reveal the setting in which lymphadenopathy is occurring. Symptoms such as sore throat, cough, fever, night sweats, fatigue, weight loss, or pain in the nodes should be sought. The patient's age, sex, occupation, exposure to pets, sexual behavior, and use of drugs such as diphenylhydantoin are other important historic points. For example, children and young adults usually have benign (i.e., nonmalignant) disorders that account for the observed lymphadenopathy such as viral or bacterial upper respiratory infections; infectious mononucleosis; toxoplasmosis; and, in some countries, tuberculosis. In contrast, after age 50, the incidence of malignant disorders increases and that of benign disorders decreases.

The physical examination can provide useful clues such as the extent of lymphadenopathy (localized or generalized), size of nodes, texture, presence or absence of nodal tenderness, signs of inflammation over the node, skin lesions, and splenomegaly. A thorough ear, nose, and throat (ENT) examination is indicated in adult patients with cervical adenopathy and a history of tobacco use. Localized or regional adenopathy implies involvement of a single anatomic area. Generalized adenopathy has been defined as involvement of three or more noncontiguous lymph node areas. Many of the causes of lymphadenopathy (Table 59每1) can produce localized or generalized adenopathy, so this distinction is of limited utility in the differential diagnosis. Nevertheless, generalized lymphadenopathy is frequently associated with nonmalignant disorders such as infectious mononucleosis [Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or cytomegalovirus (CMV)], toxoplasmosis, AIDS, other viral infections, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and mixed connective tissue disease. Acute and chronic lymphocytic leukemias and malignant lymphomas also produce generalized adenopathy in adults.

The site of localized or regional adenopathy may provide a useful clue about the cause. Occipital adenopathy often reflects an infection of the scalp, and preauricular adenopathy accompanies conjunctival infections and cat-scratch disease. The most frequent site of regional adenopathy is the neck, and most of the causes are benign〞upper respiratory infections, oral and dental lesions, infectious mononucleosis, or other viral illnesses. The chief malignant causes include metastatic cancer from head and neck, breast, lung, and thyroid primaries. Enlargement of supraclavicular and scalene nodes is always abnormal. Because these nodes drain regions of the lung and retroperitoneal space, they can reflect lymphomas, other cancers, or infectious processes arising in these areas. Virchow's node is an enlarged left supraclavicular node infiltrated with metastatic cancer from a gastrointestinal primary. Metastases to supraclavicular nodes also occur from lung, breast, testis, or ovarian cancers. Tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, and toxoplasmosis are nonneoplastic causes of supraclavicular adenopathy. Axillary adenopathy is usually due to injuries or localized infections of the ipsilateral upper extremity. Malignant causes include melanoma or lymphoma and, in women, breast cancer. Inguinal lymphadenopathy is usually secondary to infections or trauma of the lower extremities and may accompany sexually transmitted diseases such as lymphogranuloma venereum, primary syphilis, genital herpes, or chancroid. These nodes may also be involved by lymphomas and metastatic cancer from primary lesions of the rectum, genitalia, or lower extremities (melanoma).

The size and texture of the lymph node(s) and the presence of pain are useful parameters in evaluating a patient with lymphadenopathy. Nodes <1.0 cm2 in area (1.0 cm x 1.0 cm or less) are almost always secondary to benign, nonspecific reactive causes. In one retrospective analysis of younger patients (9每25 years) who had a lymph node biopsy, a maximum diameter of >2 cm served as one discriminant for predicting that the biopsy would reveal malignant or granulomatous disease. Another study showed that a lymph node size of 2.25 cm2 (1.5 cm x 1.5 cm) was the best size limit for distinguishing malignant or granulomatous lymphadenopathy from other causes of lymphadenopathy. Patients with node(s) 1.0 cm2 should be observed after excluding infectious mononucleosis and/or toxoplasmosis unless there are symptoms and signs of an underlying systemic illness.

The texture of lymph nodes may be described as soft, firm, rubbery, hard, discrete, matted, tender, movable, or fixed. Tenderness is found when the capsule is stretched during rapid enlargement, usually secondary to an inflammatory process. Some malignant diseases such as acute leukemia may produce rapid enlargement and pain in the nodes. Nodes involved by lymphoma tend to be large, discrete, symmetric, rubbery, firm, mobile, and nontender. Nodes containing metastatic cancer are often hard, nontender, and nonmovable because of fixation to surrounding tissues. The coexistence of splenomegaly in the patient with lymphadenopathy implies a systemic illness such as infectious mononucleosis, lymphoma, acute or chronic leukemia, SLE, sarcoidosis, toxoplasmosis, cat-scratch disease, or other less common hematologic disorders. The patient's story should provide helpful clues about the underlying systemic illness.

Nonsuperficial presentations (thoracic or abdominal) of adenopathy are usually detected as the result of a symptom-directed diagnostic workup. Thoracic adenopathy may be detected by routine chest radiography or during the workup for superficial adenopathy. It may also be found because the patient complains of a cough or wheezing from airway compression; hoarseness from recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement; dysphagia from esophageal compression; or swelling of the neck, face, or arms secondary to compression of the superior vena cava or subclavian vein. The differential diagnosis of mediastinal and hilar adenopathy includes primary lung disorders and systemic illnesses that characteristically involve mediastinal or hilar nodes. In the young, mediastinal adenopathy is associated with infectious mononucleosis and sarcoidosis. In endemic regions, histoplasmosis can cause unilateral paratracheal lymph node involvement that mimics lymphoma. Tuberculosis can also cause unilateral adenopathy. In older patients, the differential diagnosis includes primary lung cancer (especially among smokers), lymphomas, metastatic carcinoma (usually lung), tuberculosis, fungal infection, and sarcoidosis.

Enlarged intraabdominal or retroperitoneal nodes are usually malignant. Although tuberculosis may present as mesenteric lymphadenitis, these masses usually contain lymphomas or, in young men, germ cell tumors.

Laboratory Investigation

The laboratory investigation of patients with lymphadenopathy must be tailored to elucidate the etiology suspected from the patient's history and physical findings. One study from a family practice clinic evaluated 249 younger patients with "enlarged lymph nodes, not infected" or "lymphadenitis." No laboratory studies were obtained in 51%. When studies were performed, the most common were a complete blood count (CBC) (33%), throat culture (16%), chest x-ray (12%), or monospot test (10%). Only eight patients (3%) had a node biopsy, and half of those were normal or reactive. The CBC can provide useful data for the diagnosis of acute or chronic leukemias, EBV or CMV mononucleosis, lymphoma with a leukemic component, pyogenic infections, or immune cytopenias in illnesses such as SLE. Serologic studies may demonstrate antibodies specific to components of EBV, CMV, HIV, and other viruses; Toxoplasma gondii; Brucella; etc. If SLE is suspected, antinuclear and anti-DNA antibody studies are warranted.

The chest x-ray is usually negative, but the presence of a pulmonary infiltrate or mediastinal lymphadenopathy would suggest tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, sarcoidosis, lymphoma, primary lung cancer, or metastatic cancer and demands further investigation.

A variety of imaging techniques (CT, MRI, ultrasound, color Doppler ultrasonography) have been employed to differentiate benign from malignant lymph nodes, especially in patients with head and neck cancer. CT and MRI are comparably accurate (65每90%) in the diagnosis of metastases to cervical lymph nodes. Ultrasonography has been used to determine the long (L) axis, short (S) axis, and a ratio of long to short axis in cervical nodes. An L/S ratio of <2.0 has a sensitivity and a specificity of 95% for distinguishing benign and malignant nodes in patients with head and neck cancer. This ratio has greater specificity and sensitivity than palpation or measurement of either the long or the short axis alone.

The indications for lymph node biopsy are imprecise, yet it is a valuable diagnostic tool. The decision to biopsy may be made early in a patient's evaluation or delayed for up to two weeks. Prompt biopsy should occur if the patient's history and physical findings suggest a malignancy; examples include a solitary, hard, nontender cervical node in an older patient who is a chronic user of tobacco; supraclavicular adenopathy; and solitary or generalized adenopathy that is firm, movable, and suggestive of lymphoma. If a primary head and neck cancer is suspected as the basis of a solitary, hard cervical node, then a careful ENT examination should be performed. Any mucosal lesion that is suspicious for a primary neoplastic process should be biopsied first. If no mucosal lesion is detected, an excisional biopsy of the largest node should be performed. Fine-needle aspiration should not be performed as the first diagnostic procedure. Most diagnoses require more tissue than such aspiration can provide, and it often delays a definitive diagnosis. Fine-needle aspiration should be reserved for thyroid nodules and for confirmation of relapse in patients whose primary diagnosis is known. If the primary physician is uncertain about whether to proceed to biopsy, consultation with a hematologist or medical oncologist should be helpful. In primary care practices, <5% of lymphadenopathy patients will require a biopsy. That percentage will be considerably larger in referral practices, i.e., hematology, oncology, or ENT.

Two groups have reported algorithms that they claim will identify more precisely those lymphadenopathy patients who should have a biopsy. Both reports were retrospective analyses in referral practices. The first study involved patients 9每25 years of age who had a node biopsy performed. Three variables were identified that predicted those young patients with peripheral lymphadenopathy who should undergo biopsy; lymph node size >2 cm in diameter and abnormal chest x-ray had positive predictive values, whereas recent ENT symptoms had negative predictive values. The second study evaluated 220 lymphadenopathy patients in a hematology unit and identified five variables [lymph node size, location (supraclavicular or nonsupraclavicular), age (>40 years or <40 years), texture (nonhard or hard), and tenderness] that were used in a mathematical model to identify those patients requiring a biopsy. Positive predictive value was found for age >40 years, supraclavicular location, node size >2.25 cm2, hard texture, and lack of pain or tenderness. Negative predictive value was evident for age <40 years, node size <1.0 cm2, nonhard texture, and tender or painful nodes. Ninety-one percent of those who required biopsy were correctly classified by this model. Because both of these studies were retrospective analyses and one was limited to young patients, it is not known how useful these models would be if applied prospectively in a primary care setting.

Most lymphadenopathy patients do not require a biopsy, and at least half require no laboratory studies. If the patient's history and physical findings point to a benign cause for lymphadenopathy, careful follow-up at a 2- to 4-week interval can be employed. The patient should be instructed to return for reevaluation if there is an increase in the size of the nodels). Antibiotics are not indicated for lymphadenopathy unless strong evidence of a bacterial infection is present. Glucocorticoids should not be used to treat lymphadenopathy because their lympholytic effect obscures some diagnoses (lymphoma, leukemia, Castleman's disease) and they contribute to delayed healing or activation of underlying infections. An exception to this statement is the life-threatening pharyngeal obstruction by enlarged lymphoid tissue in Waldeyer's ring that is occasionally seen in infectious mononucleosis.
 
Splenomegaly

Structure and Function of the Spleen

The spleen is a reticuloendothelial organ that has its embryologic origin in the dorsal mesogastrium at about five weeks' gestation. It arises in a series of hillocks, migrates to its normal adult location in the left upper quadrant (LUQ), and is attached to the stomach via the gastrolienal ligament and to the kidney via the lienorenal ligament. When the hillocks fail to unify into a single tissue mass, accessory spleens may develop in around 20% of persons. The function of the spleen has been elusive. Galen believed it was the source of "black bile" or melancholia, and the word hypochondria (literally, beneath the ribs) and the idiom "to vent one's spleen" attest to the beliefs that the spleen had an important influence on the psyche and emotions. In humans, its normal physiologic roles seem to be the following:

Maintenance of quality control over erythrocytes in the red pulp by removal of senescent and defective red blood cells. The spleen accomplishes this function through a unique organization of its parenchyma and vasculature (Fig. 59-1).

Synthesis of antibodies in the white pulp.

The removal of antibody-coated bacteria and antibody-coated blood cells from the circulation.

Figure 59-1

 
 
 
Schematic spleen structure. The spleen comprises many units of red and white pulp centered around small branches of the splenic artery, called central arteries. White pulp is lymphoid in nature and contains B cell follicles, a marginal zone around the follicles, and T cell每rich areas sheathing arterioles. The red pulp areas include pulp sinuses and pulp cords. The cords are dead ends. In order to regain access to the circulation, red blood cells must traverse tiny openings in the sinusoidal lining. Stiff, damaged, or old red cells cannot enter the sinuses. RE, reticuloendthelial. (Bottom portion of figure from RS Hillman, KA Ault: Hematology in Clinical Practice, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.)
 
 

An increase in these normal functions may result in splenomegaly.

The spleen is composed of red pulp and white pulp, which are Malpighi's terms for the red blood每filled sinuses and reticuloendothelial cell每lined cords and the white lymphoid follicles arrayed within the red pulp matrix. The spleen is in the portal circulation. The reason for this is unknown but may relate to the fact that lower blood pressure allows less rapid flow and minimizes damage to normal erythrocytes. Blood flows into the spleen at a rate of about 150 mL/min through the splenic artery, which ultimately ramifies into central arterioles. Some blood goes from the arterioles to capillaries and then to splenic veins and out of the spleen, but the majority of blood from central arterioles flows into the macrophage-lined sinuses and cords. The blood entering the sinuses reenters the circulation through the splenic venules, but the blood entering the cords is subjected to an inspection of sorts. To return to the circulation, the blood cells in the cords must squeeze through slits in the cord lining to enter the sinuses that lead to the venules. Old and damaged erythrocytes are less deformable and are retained in the cords, where they are destroyed and their components recycled. Red cell每inclusion bodies such as parasites (Chaps. 210 and e27), nuclear residua (Howell-Jolly bodies, see Fig. 57-6), or denatured hemoglobin (Heinz bodies) are pinched off in the process of passing through the slits, a process called pitting. The culling of dead and damaged cells and the pitting of cells with inclusions appear to occur without significant delay because the blood transit time through the spleen is only slightly slower than in other organs.

The spleen is also capable of assisting the host in adapting to its hostile environment. It has at least three adaptive functions: (1) clearance of bacteria and particulates from the blood, (2) the generation of immune responses to certain pathogens, and (3) the generation of cellular components of the blood under circumstances in which the marrow is unable to meet the needs (i.e., extramedullary hematopoiesis). The latter adaptation is a recapitulation of the blood-forming function the spleen plays during gestation. In some animals, the spleen also serves a role in the vascular adaptation to stress because it stores red blood cells (often hemoconcentrated to higher hematocrits than normal) under normal circumstances and contracts under the influence of -adrenergic stimulation to provide the animal with an autotransfusion and improved oxygen-carrying capacity. However, the normal human spleen does not sequester or store red blood cells and does not contract in response to sympathetic stimuli. The normal human spleen contains approximately one-third of the total body platelets and a significant number of marginated neutrophils. These sequestered cells are available when needed to respond to bleeding or infection.

Approach to the Patient: Splenomegaly

Clinical Assessment

The most common symptoms produced by diseases involving the spleen are pain and a heavy sensation in the LUQ. Massive splenomegaly may cause early satiety. Pain may result from acute swelling of the spleen with stretching of the capsule, infarction, or inflammation of the capsule. For many years, it was believed that splenic infarction was clinically silent, which, at times, is true. However, Soma Weiss, in his classic 1942 report of the self-observations by a Harvard medical student on the clinical course of subacute bacterial endocarditis, documented that severe LUQ and pleuritic chest pain may accompany thromboembolic occlusion of splenic blood flow. Vascular occlusion, with infarction and pain, is commonly seen in children with sickle cell crises. Rupture of the spleen, from either trauma or infiltrative disease that breaks the capsule, may result in intraperitoneal bleeding, shock, and death. The rupture itself may be painless.

A palpable spleen is the major physical sign produced by diseases affecting the spleen and suggests enlargement of the organ. The normal spleen weighs <250 g, decreases in size with age, normally lies entirely within the rib cage, has a maximum cephalocaudad diameter of 13 cm by ultrasonography or maximum length of 12 cm and/or width of 7 cm by radionuclide scan, and is usually not palpable. However, a palpable spleen was found in 3% of 2200 asymptomatic, male, freshman college students. Follow-up at 3 years revealed that 30% of those students still had a palpable spleen without any increase in disease prevalence. Ten-year follow-up found no evidence for lymphoid malignancies. Furthermore, in some tropical countries (e.g., New Guinea), the incidence of splenomegaly may reach 60%. Thus, the presence of a palpable spleen does not always equate with presence of disease. Even when disease is present, splenomegaly may not reflect the primary disease but rather a reaction to it. For example, in patients with Hodgkin's disease, only two-thirds of the palpable spleens show involvement by the cancer.

Physical examination of the spleen uses primarily the techniques of palpation and percussion. Inspection may reveal fullness in the LUQ that descends on inspiration, a finding associated with a massively enlarged spleen. Auscultation may reveal a venous hum or friction rub.

Palpation can be accomplished by bimanual palpation, ballotment, and palpation from above (Middleton maneuver). For bimanual palpation, which is at least as reliable as the other techniques, the patient is supine with flexed knees. The examiner's left hand is placed on the lower rib cage and pulls the skin toward the costal margin, allowing the fingertips of the right hand to feel the tip of the spleen as it descends while the patient inspires slowly, smoothly, and deeply. Palpation is begun with the right hand in the left lower quadrant with gradual movement toward the left costal margin, thereby identifying the lower edge of a massively enlarged spleen. When the spleen tip is felt, the finding is recorded as centimeters below the left costal margin at some arbitrary point, i.e., 10每15 cm, from the midpoint of the umbilicus or the xiphisternal junction. This allows other examiners to compare findings or the initial examiner to determine changes in size over time. Bimanual palpation in the right lateral decubitus position adds nothing to the supine examination.

Percussion for splenic dullness is accomplished with any of three techniques described by Nixon, Castell, or Barkun:

1. Nixon's method: The patient is placed on the right side so that the spleen lies above the colon and stomach. Percussion begins at the lower level of pulmonary resonance in the posterior axillary line and proceeds diagonally along a perpendicular line toward the lower midanterior costal margin. The upper border of dullness is normally 6每8 cm above the costal margin. Dullness >8 cm in an adult is presumed to indicate splenic enlargement.

2. Castell's method: With the patient supine, percussion in the lowest intercostal space in the anterior axillary line (8th or 9th) produces a resonant note if the spleen is normal in size. This is true during expiration or full inspiration. A dull percussion note on full inspiration suggests splenomegaly.

3. Percussion of Traube's semilunar space: The borders of Traube's space are the sixth rib superiorly, the left midaxillary line laterally, and the left costal margin inferiorly. The patient is supine with the left arm slightly abducted. During normal breathing, this space is percussed from medial to lateral margins, yielding a normal resonant sound. A dull percussion note suggests splenomegaly.

Studies comparing methods of percussion and palpation with a standard of ultrasonography or scintigraphy have revealed sensitivity of 56每71% for palpation and 59每82% for percussion. Reproducibility among examiners is better for palpation than percussion. Both techniques are less reliable in obese patients or patients who have just eaten. Thus, the physical examination techniques of palpation and percussion are imprecise at best. It has been suggested that the examiner perform percussion first and, if positive, proceed to palpation; if the spleen is palpable, then one can be reasonably confident that splenomegaly exists. However, not all LUQ masses are enlarged spleens; gastric or colon tumors and pancreatic or renal cysts or tumors can mimic splenomegaly.

The presence of an enlarged spleen can be more precisely determined, if necessary, by liver-spleen radionuclide scan, CT, MRI, or ultrasonography. The latter technique is the current procedure of choice for routine assessment of spleen size (normal = a maximum cephalocaudad diameter of 13 cm) because it has high sensitivity and specificity and is safe, noninvasive, quick, mobile, and less costly. Nuclear medicine scans are accurate, sensitive, and reliable but are costly, require greater time to generate data, and use immobile equipment. They have the advantage of demonstrating accessory splenic tissue. CT and MRI provide accurate determination of spleen size, but the equipment is immobile and the procedures are expensive. MRI appears to offer no advantage over CT. Changes in spleen structure such as mass lesions, infarcts, inhomogeneous infiltrates, and cysts are more readily assessed by CT, MRI, or ultrasonography. None of these techniques is very reliable in the detection of patchy infiltration (e.g., Hodgkin's disease).

Differential Diagnosis

Many of the diseases associated with splenomegaly are listed in Table 59每2. They are grouped according to the presumed basic mechanisms responsible for organ enlargement:

Table 59每2 Diseases Associated with Splenomegaly Grouped by Pathogenic Mechanism

 
 
Enlargement Due to Increased Demand for Splenic Function  
Reticuloendothelial system hyperplasia (for removal of defective erythrocytes) 
  Spherocytosis 
  Early sickle cell anemia 
  Ovalocytosis 
  Thalassemia major 
  Hemoglobinopathies 
  Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 
  Pernicious anemia 
Immune hyperplasia 
  Response to infection (viral, bacterial, fungal, parasitic) 
    Infectious mononucleosis 
    AIDS 
    Viral hepatitis 
    Cytomegalovirus 
    Subacute bacterial endocarditis 
    Bacterial septicemia 
    Congenital syphilis 
    Splenic abscess 
    Tuberculosis 
    Histoplasmosis 
    Malaria 
    Leishmaniasis 
    Trypanosomiasis 
    Ehrlichiosis 
  Disordered immunoregulation 
    Rheumatoid arthritis (Felty's syndrome) 
    Systemic lupus erythematosus 
    Collagen vascular diseases 
    Serum sickness 
    Immune hemolytic anemias 
    Immune thrombocytopenias 
    Immune neutropenias 
    Drug reactions 
    Angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy 
    Sarcoidosis 
    Thyrotoxicosis (benign lymphoid hypertrophy) 
    Interleukin 2 therapy 
Extramedullary hematopoiesis 
  Myelofibrosis 
  Marrow damage by toxins, radiation, strontium 
  Marrow infiltration by tumors, leukemias, Gaucher's disease 
Enlargement Due to Abnormal Splenic or Portal Blood Flow  
Cirrhosis 
Hepatic vein obstruction 
Portal vein obstruction, intrahepatic or extrahepatic 
Cavernous transformation of the portal vein 
Splenic vein obstructionSplenic artery aneurysm 
Hepatic schistosomiasis 
Congestive heart failure 
Hepatic echinococcosis 
Portal hypertension (any cause including the above): "Banti's disease"  
Infiltration of the Spleen  
Intracellular or extracellular depositions 
  Amyloidosis 
  Gaucher's disease 
  Niemann-Pick disease 
  Tangier disease 
  Hurler's syndrome and other mucopolysaccharidoses 
  Hyperlipidemias 
Benign and malignant cellular infiltrations 
  Leukemias (acute, chronic, lymphoid, myeloid, monocytic) 
  Lymphomas 
  Hodgkin's disease 
  Myeloproliferative syndromes (e.g., polycythemia vera, essential thrombocytosis) 
  Angiosarcomas 
  Metastatic tumors (melanoma is most common) 
  Eosinophilic granuloma 
  Histiocytosis X 
  Hamartomas 
  Hemangiomas, fibromas, lymphangiomas 
  Splenic cysts 
Unknown Etiology  
Idiopathic splenomegaly 
Berylliosis 
Iron-deficiency anemia 
 

 

Hyperplasia or hypertrophy related to a particular splenic function such as reticuloendothelial hyperplasia (work hypertrophy) in diseases such as hereditary spherocytosis or thalassemia syndromes that require removal of large numbers of defective red blood cells; immune hyperplasia in response to systemic infection (infectious mononucleosis, subacute bacterial endocarditis) or to immunologic diseases (immune thrombocytopenia, SLE, Felty's syndrome).

Passive congestion due to decreased blood flow from the spleen in conditions that produce portal hypertension (cirrhosis, Budd-Chiari syndrome, congestive heart failure).

Infiltrative diseases of the spleen (lymphomas, metastatic cancer, amyloidosis, Gaucher's disease, myeloproliferative disorders with extramedullary hematopoiesis).

The differential diagnostic possibilities are much fewer when the spleen is "massively enlarged," palpable more than 8 cm below the left costal margin or its drained weight is 1000 g (Table 59每3). The vast majority of such patients will have non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hairy cell leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia, or polycythemia vera.

Table 59每3 Diseases Associated with Massive Splenomegaly*

 
 
Chronic myeloid leukemia 
Lymphomas 
Hairy cell leukemia 
Myelofibrosis with myeloid 
metaplasia 
Polycythemia vera 
Gaucher's disease 
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia 
Sarcoidosis 
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
Diffuse splenic hemangiomatosis 
 


* The spleen extends greater than 8 cm below left costal margin and/or weighs more than 1000 g.
 

LABORATORY ASSESSMENT

The major laboratory abnormalities accompanying splenomegaly are determined by the underlying systemic illness. Erythrocyte counts may be normal, decreased (thalassemia major syndromes, SLE, cirrhosis with portal hypertension), or increased (polycythemia vera). Granulocyte counts may be normal, decreased (Felty's syndrome, congestive splenomegaly, leukemias), or increased (infections or inflammatory disease, myeloproliferative disorders). Similarly, the platelet count may be normal, decreased when there is enhanced sequestration or destruction of platelets in an enlarged spleen (congestive splenomegaly, Gaucher's disease, immune thrombocytopenia), or increased in the myeloproliferative disorders such as polycythemia vera.

The CBC may reveal cytopenia of one or more blood cell types, which should suggest hypersplenism. This condition is characterized by splenomegaly, cytopenia(s), normal or hyperplastic bone marrow, and a response to splenectomy. The latter characteristic is less precise because reversal of cytopenia, particularly granulocytopenia, is sometimes not sustained after splenectomy. The cytopenias result from increased destruction of the cellular elements secondary to reduced flow of blood through enlarged and congested cords (congestive splenomegaly) or to immune-mediated mechanisms. In hypersplenism, various cell types usually have normal morphology on the peripheral blood smear, although the red cells may be spherocytic due to loss of surface area during their longer transit through the enlarged spleen. The increased marrow production of red cells should be reflected as an increased reticulocyte production index, although the value may be less than expected due to increased sequestration of reticulocytes in the spleen.

The need for additional laboratory studies is dictated by the differential diagnosis of the underlying illness of which splenomegaly is a manifestation.

Splenectomy

Splenectomy is infrequently performed for diagnostic purposes, especially in the absence of clinical illness or other diagnostic tests that suggest underlying disease. More often, splenectomy is performed for symptom control in patients with massive splenomegaly, for disease control in patients with traumatic splenic rupture, or for correction of cytopenias in patients with hypersplenism or immune-mediated destruction of one or more cellular blood elements. Splenectomy is necessary for staging of patients with Hodgkin's disease only in those with clinical stage I or II disease in whom radiation therapy alone is contemplated as the treatment. Noninvasive staging of the spleen in Hodgkin's disease is not a sufficiently reliable basis for treatment decisions because one-third of normal-sized spleens will be involved with Hodgkin's disease and one-third of enlarged spleens will be tumor-free. The widespread use of systemic therapy to test all stages of Hodgkin's disease has made staging laparotomy with splenectomy unnecessary. Although splenectomy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CMC) does not affect the natural history of disease, removal of the massive spleen usually makes patients significantly more comfortable and simplifies their management by significantly reducing transfusion requirements. The improvements in therapy of CML have reduced the need for splenectomy for symptom control. Splenectomy is an effective secondary or tertiary treatment for two chronic B cell leukemias, hairy cell leukemia and prolymphocytic leukemia, and for the very rare splenic mantle cell or marginal zone lymphoma. Splenectomy in these diseases may be associated with significant tumor regression in bone marrow and other sites of disease. Similar regressions of systemic disease have been noted after splenic irradiation in some types of lymphoid tumors, especially chronic lymphocytic leukemia and prolymphocytic leukemia. This has been termed the abscopal effect. Such systemic tumor responses to local therapy directed at the spleen suggest that some hormone or growth factor produced by the spleen may affect tumor cell proliferation, but this conjecture is not yet substantiated. A common therapeutic indication for splenectomy is traumatic or iatrogenic splenic rupture. In a fraction of patients with splenic rupture, peritoneal seeding of splenic fragments can lead to splenosis〞the presence of multiple rests of spleen tissue not connected to the portal circulation. This ectopic spleen tissue may cause pain or gastrointestinal obstruction, as in endometriosis. A large number of hematologic, immunologic, and congestive causes of splenomegaly can lead to destruction of one or more cellular blood elements. In the majority of such cases, splenectomy can correct the cytopenias, particularly anemia and thrombocytopenia. In a large series of patients seen in two tertiary care centers, the indication for splenectomy was diagnostic in 10% of patients, therapeutic in 44%, staging for Hodgkin's disease in 20%, and incidental to another procedure in 26%. Perhaps the only contraindication to splenectomy is the presence of marrow failure, in which the enlarged spleen is the only source of hematopoietic tissue.

The absence of the spleen has minimal long-term effects on the hematologic profile. In the immediate postsplenectomy period, leukocytosis (up to 25,000/L) and thrombocytosis (up to 1 x 106/L) may develop, but within 2每3 weeks, blood cell counts and survival of each cell lineage are usually normal. The chronic manifestations of splenectomy are marked variation in size and shape of erythrocytes (anisocytosis, poikilocytosis) and the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies (nuclear remnants), Heinz bodies (denatured hemoglobin), basophilic stippling, and an occasional nucleated erythrocyte in the peripheral blood. When such erythrocyte abnormalities appear in a patient whose spleen has not been removed, one should suspect splenic infiltration by tumor that has interfered with its normal culling and pitting function.

The most serious consequence of splenectomy is increased susceptibility to bacterial infections, particularly those with capsules such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and some gram-negative enteric organisms. Patients under age 20 years are particularly susceptible to overwhelming sepsis with S. pneumoniae, and the overall actuarial risk of sepsis in patients who have had their spleens removed is about 7% in 10 years. The case-fatality rate for pneumococcal sepsis in splenectomized patients is 50每80%. About 25% of patients without spleens will develop a serious infection at some time in their life. The frequency is highest within the first three years after splenectomy. About 15% of the infections are polymicrobial, and lung, skin, and blood are the most common sites. No increased risk of viral infection has been noted in patients who have no spleen. The susceptibility to bacterial infections relates to the inability to remove opsonized bacteria from the bloodstream and a defect in making antibodies to T cell每independent antigens such as the polysaccharide components of bacterial capsules. Pneumococcal vaccine should be administered to all patients two weeks before elective splenectomy. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that these patients receive repeat vaccination five years post-splenectomy. Efficacy has not been proven for this group, and the recommendation discounts the possibility that administration of the vaccine may actually lower the titer of specific pneumococcal antibodies. A more effective pneumococcal conjugate vaccine that involves T cells in the response is now available (Prevenar, 7-valent). The vaccine to Neisseria meningitidis should also be given to patients in whom elective splenectomy is planned. Although efficacy data for Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine are not available for older children or adults, it may be given to patients who have had a splenectomy.

Splenectomized patients should be educated to consider any unexplained fever as a medical emergency. Prompt medical attention with evaluation and treatment of suspected bacteremia may be life-saving. Routine chemoprophylaxis with oral penicillin can result in the emergence of drug-resistant strains and is not recommended.

In addition to an increased susceptibility to bacterial infections, splenectomized patients are also more susceptible to the parasitic disease babesiosis. The splenectomized patient should avoid areas where the parasite Babesia is endemic (e.g., Cape Cod, MA).

Surgical removal of the spleen is an obvious cause of hyposplenism. Patients with sickle cell disease often suffer from autosplenectomy as a result of splenic destruction by the numerous infarcts associated with sickle cell crises during childhood. Indeed, the presence of a palpable spleen in a patient with sickle cell disease after age five suggests a coexisting hemoglobinopathy, e.g., thalassemia or hemoglobin C. In addition, patients who receive splenic irradiation for a neoplastic or autoimmune disease are also functionally hyposplenic. The term hyposplenism is preferred to asplenism in referring to the physiologic consequences of splenectomy because asplenia is a rare, specific, and fatal congenital abnormality in which there is a failure of the left side of the coelomic cavity (which includes the splenic anlagen) to develop normally. Infants with asplenia have no spleens, but that is the least of their problems. The right side of the developing embryo is duplicated on the left so there is liver where the spleen should be, there are two right lungs, and the heart comprises two right atria and two right ventricles.
 
Further Readings

Barkun AN et al: The bedside assessment of splenic enlargement. Am J Med 91:512, 1991[PMID: 1951414] 

 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended adult immunization schedule〞United States, 2009. MMWR 57:Q-1, 2009 

 
Facchetti F: Tumors of the spleen. Int J Surg Pathol 18:136S, 2010 

 
Graves SA et al: Does this patient have splenomegaly? JAMA 270:2218, 1993 

 
Kraus MD et al: The spleen as a diagnostic specimen: A review of ten years' experience at two tertiary care institutions. Cancer 91:2001, 2001[PMID: 11391578] 

 
McIntyre OR, Ebaugh FG Jr: Palpable spleens: Ten year follow-up. Ann Intern Med 90:130, 1979[PMID: 420452] 

 
Mikocka-Walus A et al: Management of spleen injuries: The current profile. ANZ J Surg 80:157, 2010[PMID: 20575917] 

 
Pangalis GA et al: Clinical approach to lymphadenopathy. Semin Oncol 20:570, 1993[PMID: 8296196] 

 
Williamson HA Jr: Lymphadenopathy in a family practice: A descriptive study of 240 cases. J Fam Pract 20:449, 1985[PMID: 3989485] 
 
 

^^
Disorders of Granulocytes and Monocytes: Introduction

Leukocytes, the major cells comprising inflammatory and immune responses, include neutrophils, T and B lymphocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. These cells have specific functions, such as antibody production by B lymphocytes or destruction of bacteria by neutrophils, but in no single infectious disease is the exact role of the cell types completely established. Thus, whereas neutrophils are classically thought to be critical to host defense against bacteria, they may also play important roles in defense against viral infections.

The blood delivers leukocytes to the various tissues from the bone marrow, where they are produced. Normal blood leukocyte counts are 4.3每10.8 x 109/L, with neutrophils representing 45每74% of the cells, bands 0每4%, lymphocytes 16每45%, monocytes 4每10%, eosinophils 0每7%, and basophils 0每2%. Variation among individuals and among different ethnic groups can be substantial, with lower leukocyte numbers for certain African-American ethnic groups. The various leukocytes are derived from a common stem cell in the bone marrow. Three-fourths of the nucleated cells of bone marrow are committed to the production of leukocytes. Leukocyte maturation in the marrow is under the regulatory control of a number of different factors, known as colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) and interleukins (ILs). Because an alteration in the number and type of leukocytes is often associated with disease processes, total white blood cell (WBC) count (cells per L) and differential counts are informative. This chapter focuses on neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils. Lymphocytes and basophils are discussed in Chaps. 314 and 317, respectively.
 
Neutrophils

Maturation

Important events in neutrophil life are summarized in Fig. 60-1. In normal humans, neutrophils are produced only in the bone marrow. The minimum number of stem cells necessary to support hematopoiesis is estimated to be 400每500 at any one time. Human blood monocytes, tissue macrophages, and stromal cells produce CSFs, hormones required for the growth of monocytes and neutrophils in the bone marrow. The hematopoietic system not only produces enough neutrophils (~1.3 x 1011 cells per 80-kg person per day) to carry out physiologic functions but also has a large reserve stored in the marrow, which can be mobilized in response to inflammation or infection. An increase in the number of blood neutrophils is called neutrophilia, and the presence of immature cells is termed a shift to the left. A decrease in the number of blood neutrophils is called neutropenia.

Figure 60-1

 
 
 
Schematic events in neutrophil production, recruitment, and inflammation. The four cardinal signs of inflammation (rubor, tumor, calor, dolor) are indicated, as are the interactions of neutrophils with other cells and cytokines. PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocyte; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; TNF-, tumor necrosis factor .
 
 


Neutrophils and monocytes evolve from pluripotent stem cells under the influence of cytokines and CSFs (Fig. 60-2). The proliferation phase through the metamyelocyte takes about 1 week, while the maturation phase from metamyelocyte to mature neutrophil takes another week. The myeloblast is the first recognizable precursor cell and is followed by the promyelocyte. The promyelocyte evolves when the classic lysosomal granules, called the primary, or azurophil, granules are produced. The primary granules contain hydrolases, elastase, myeloperoxidase, cathepsin G, cationic proteins, and bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein, which is important for killing gram-negative bacteria. Azurophil granules also contain defensins, a family of cysteine-rich polypeptides with broad antimicrobial activity against bacteria, fungi, and certain enveloped viruses. The promyelocyte divides to produce the myelocyte, a cell responsible for the synthesis of the specific, or secondary, granules, which contain unique (specific) constituents such as lactoferrin, vitamin B12每binding protein, membrane components of the reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase required for hydrogen peroxide production, histaminase, and receptors for certain chemoattractants and adherence-promoting factors (CR3) as well as receptors for the basement membrane component, laminin. The secondary granules do not contain acid hydrolases and therefore are not classic lysosomes. Packaging of secondary granule contents during myelopoiesis is controlled by CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-. Secondary granule contents are readily released extracellularly, and their mobilization is important in modulating inflammation. During the final stages of maturation, no cell division occurs, and the cell passes through the metamyelocyte stage and then to the band neutrophil with a sausage-shaped nucleus (Fig. 60-3). As the band cell matures, the nucleus assumes a lobulated configuration. The nucleus of neutrophils normally contains up to four segments (Fig. 60-4). Excessive segmentation (more than five nuclear lobes) may be a manifestation of folate or vitamin B12 deficiency or the congenital neutropenia syndrome of warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, and myelokathexis (WHIM) described below. The Pelger-H邦et anomaly (Fig. 60-5), an infrequent dominant benign inherited trait, results in neutrophils with distinctive bilobed nuclei that must be distinguished from band forms. Acquired bilobed nuclei, pseudo Pelger-H邦et anomaly, can occur with acute infections or in myelodysplastic syndromes. The physiologic role of the normal multilobed nucleus of neutrophils is unknown, but it may allow great deformation of neutrophils during migration into tissues at sites of inflammation.

Figure 60-2

 
 
 
Stages of neutrophil development shown schematically. G-CSF (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) and GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor) are critical to this process. Identifying cellular characteristics and specific cell-surface markers are listed for each maturational stage.
 
 

Figure 60-4

 
 
 
Normal granulocyte. The normal granulocyte has a segmented nucleus with heavy, clumped chromatin; fine neutrophilic granules are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm.
 
 


In severe acute bacterial infection, prominent neutrophil cytoplasmic granules, called toxic granulations, are occasionally seen. Toxic granulations are immature or abnormally staining azurophil granules. Cytoplasmic inclusions, also called D?hle bodies (Fig. 60-3), can be seen during infection and are fragments of ribosome-rich endoplasmic reticulum. Large neutrophil vacuoles are often present in acute bacterial infection and probably represent pinocytosed (internalized) membrane.

Figure 60-3

 
 
 
Neutrophil band with D?hle body. The neutrophil with a sausage-shaped nucleus in the center of the field is a band form. D?hle bodies are discrete, blue-staining nongranular areas found in the periphery of the cytoplasm of the neutrophil in infections and other toxic states. They represent aggregates of rough endoplasmic reticulum.
 
 


Neutrophils are heterogeneous in function. Monoclonal antibodies have been developed that recognize only a subset of mature neutrophils. The meaning of neutrophil heterogeneity is not known.

The morphology of eosinophils and basophils is shown in Fig. 60-6.

Figure 60-5

 
 
 
Pelger-H邦et anomaly. In this benign disorder, the majority of granulocytes are bilobed. The nucleus frequently has a spectacle-like, or "pince-nez," configuration.
 
 

Marrow Release and Circulating Compartments

Specific signals, including IL-1, tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), the CSFs, complement fragments, and chemokines, mobilize leukocytes from the bone marrow and deliver them to the blood in an unstimulated state. Under normal conditions, ~90% of the neutrophil pool is in the bone marrow, 2每3% in the circulation, and the remainder in the tissues (Fig. 60-7).

Figure 60-6

 
 
 
Normal eosinophil and basophil. The eosinophil contains large, bright orange granules and usually a bilobed nucleus. The basophil contains large purple-black granules that fill the cell and obscure the nucleus.
 
 

Figure 60-7

 
 
 
Schematic neutrophil distribution and kinetics between the different anatomic and functional pools.
 
 


The circulating pool exists in two dynamic compartments: one freely flowing and one marginated. The freely flowing pool is about one-half the neutrophils in the basal state and is composed of those cells that are in the blood and not in contact with the endothelium. Marginated leukocytes are those that are in close physical contact with the endothelium (Fig. 60-8). In the pulmonary circulation, where an extensive capillary bed (~1000 capillaries per alveolus) exists, margination occurs because the capillaries are about the same size as a mature neutrophil. Therefore, neutrophil fluidity and deformability are necessary to make the transit through the pulmonary bed. Increased neutrophil rigidity and decreased deformability lead to augmented neutrophil trapping and margination in the lung. In contrast, in the systemic postcapillary venules, margination is mediated by the interaction of specific cell-surface molecules called selectins. Selectins are glycoproteins expressed on neutrophils and endothelial cells, among others, that cause a low-affinity interaction, resulting in "rolling" of the neutrophil along the endothelial surface. On neutrophils, the molecule L-selectin [cluster determinant (CD) 62L] binds to glycosylated proteins on endothelial cells [e.g., glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule (GlyCAM1) and CD34]. Glycoproteins on neutrophils, most importantly sialyl-Lewisx (SLex, CD15s), are targets for binding of selectins expressed on endothelial cells [E-selectin (CD62E) and P-selectin (CD62P)] and other leukocytes. In response to chemotactic stimuli from injured tissues (e.g., complement product C5a, leukotriene B4, IL-8) or bacterial products [e.g., N-formylmethionylleucylphenylalanine (f-metleuphe)], neutrophil adhesiveness increases, and the cells "stick" to the endothelium through integrins. The integrins are leukocyte glycoproteins that exist as complexes of a common CD18  chain with CD11a (LFA-1), CD11b (called Mac-1, CR3, or the C3bi receptor), and CD11c (called p150,95 or CR4). CD11a/CD18 and CD11b/CD18 bind to specific endothelial receptors [intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM) 1 and 2].

Figure 60-8

 
 
 
Neutrophil travel through the pulmonary capillaries is dependent on neutrophil deformability. Neutrophil rigidity (e.g., caused by C5a) enhances pulmonary trapping and response to pulmonary pathogens in a way that is not so dependent on cell-surface receptors. Intraalveolar chemotactic factors, such as those caused by certain bacteria (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae), lead to diapedesis of neutrophils from the pulmonary capillaries into the alveolar space. Neutrophil interaction with the endothelium of the systemic postcapillary venules is dependent on molecules of attachment. The neutrophil "rolls" along the endothelium using selectins: neutrophil CD15s (sialyl-Lewisx) binds to CD62E (E-selectin) and CD62P (P-selectin) on endothelial cells; CD62L (l-selectin) on neutrophils binds to CD34 and other molecules (e.g., GlyCAM-1) expressed on endothelium. Chemokines or other activation factors stimulate integrin-mediated "tight adhesion": CD11a/CD18 (LFA-1) and CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1, CR3) bind to CD54 (ICAM-1) and CD102 (ICAM-2) on the endothelium. Diapedesis occurs between endothelial cells: CD31 (PECAM-1) expressed by the emigrating neutrophil interacts with CD31 expressed at the endothelial cell-cell junction. CD, cluster determinant; GlyCAM, glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; PECAM, platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule.
 
 

On cell stimulation, L-selectin is shed from neutrophils, and E-selectin increases in the blood, presumably because it is shed from endothelial cells; receptors for chemoattractants and opsonins are mobilized; and the phagocytes orient toward the chemoattractant source in the extravascular space, increase their motile activity (chemokinesis), and migrate directionally (chemotaxis) into tissues. The process of migration into tissues is called diapedesis and involves the crawling of neutrophils between postcapillary endothelial cells that open junctions between adjacent cells to permit leukocyte passage. Diapedesis involves platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM) 1 (CD31), which is expressed on both the emigrating leukocyte and the endothelial cells. The endothelial responses (increased blood flow from increased vasodilation and permeability) are mediated by anaphylatoxins (e.g., C3a and C5a) as well as vasodilators such as histamine, bradykinin, serotonin, nitric oxide, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and prostaglandins E and I. Cytokines regulate some of these processes [e.g., TNF- induction of VEGF, interferon (IFN)  inhibition of prostaglandin E].

In the healthy adult, most neutrophils leave the body by migration through the mucous membrane of the gastrointestinal tract. Normally, neutrophils spend a short time in the circulation (half-life, 6每7 h). Senescent neutrophils are cleared from the circulation by macrophages in the lung and spleen. Once in the tissues, neutrophils release enzymes, such as collagenase and elastase, which may help establish abscess cavities. Neutrophils ingest pathogenic materials that have been opsonized by IgG and C3b. Fibronectin and the tetrapeptide tuftsin also facilitate phagocytosis.

With phagocytosis comes a burst of oxygen consumption and activation of the hexose-monophosphate shunt. A membrane-associated NADPH oxidase, consisting of membrane and cytosolic components, is assembled and catalyzes the reduction of oxygen to superoxide anion, which is then converted to hydrogen peroxide and other toxic oxygen products (e.g., hydroxyl radical). Hydrogen peroxide + chloride + neutrophil myeloperoxidase generate hypochlorous acid (bleach), hypochlorite, and chlorine. These products oxidize and halogenate microorganisms and tumor cells and, when uncontrolled, can damage host tissue. Strongly cationic proteins, defensins, elastase, cathepsins, and probably nitric oxide also participate in microbial killing. Lactoferrin chelates iron, an important growth factor for microorganisms, especially fungi. Other enzymes, such as lysozyme and acid proteases, help digest microbial debris. After 1每4 days in tissues, neutrophils die. The apoptosis of neutrophils is also cytokine-regulated; granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and IFN- prolong their life span. Under certain conditions, such as in delayed-type hypersensitivity, monocyte accumulation occurs within 6每12 h of initiation of inflammation. Neutrophils, monocytes, microorganisms in various states of digestion, and altered local tissue cells make up the inflammatory exudate, pus. Myeloperoxidase confers the characteristic green color to pus and may participate in turning off the inflammatory process by inactivating chemoattractants and immobilizing phagocytic cells.

Neutrophils respond to certain cytokines [IFN-, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-8] and produce cytokines and chemotactic signals [TNF-, IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) 1] that modulate the inflammatory response. In the presence of fibrinogen, f-metleuphe or leukotriene B4 induces IL-8 production by neutrophils, providing autocrine amplification of inflammation. Chemokines (chemoattractant cytokines) are small proteins produced by many different cell types, including endothelial cells, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, neutrophils, and monocytes, that regulate neutrophil, monocyte, eosinophil, and lymphocyte recruitment and activation. Chemokines transduce their signals through heterotrimeric G protein每linked receptors that have seven cell membrane每spanning domains, the same type of cell-surface receptor that mediates the response to the classic chemoattractants f-metleuphe and C5a. Four major groups of chemokines are recognized based on the cysteine structure near the N terminus: C, CC, CXC, and CXXXC. The CXC cytokines such as IL-8 mainly attract neutrophils; CC chemokines such as MIP-1 attract lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils; the C chemokine lymphotactin is T cell tropic; the CXXXC chemokine fractalkine attracts neutrophils, monocytes, and T cells. These molecules and their receptors not only regulate the trafficking and activation of inflammatory cells, but specific chemokine receptors serve as co-receptors for HIV infection (Chap. 189) and have a role in other viral infections such as West Nile infection and atherogenesis.

Neutrophil Abnormalities

Defects in the neutrophil life cycle can lead to dysfunction and compromised host defenses. Inflammation is often depressed, and the clinical result is often recurrent, with severe bacterial and fungal infections. Aphthous ulcers of mucous membranes (gray ulcers without pus) and gingivitis and periodontal disease suggest a phagocytic cell disorder. Patients with congenital phagocyte defects can have infections within the first few days of life. Skin, ear, upper and lower respiratory tract, and bone infections are common. Sepsis and meningitis are rare. In some disorders, the frequency of infection is variable, and patients can go for months or even years without major infection. Aggressive management of these congenital diseases has extended the life span of patients well beyond 30 years.

Neutropenia

The consequences of absent neutrophils are dramatic. Susceptibility to infectious diseases increases sharply when neutrophil counts fall below 1000 cells/L. When the absolute neutrophil count (ANC; band forms and mature neutrophils combined) falls to <500 cells/L, control of endogenous microbial flora (e.g., mouth, gut) is impaired; when the ANC is <200/L, the local inflammatory process is absent. Neutropenia can be due to depressed production, increased peripheral destruction, or excessive peripheral pooling. A falling neutrophil count or a significant decrease in the number of neutrophils below steady-state levels, together with a failure to increase neutrophil counts in the setting of infection or other challenge, requires investigation. Acute neutropenia, such as that caused by cancer chemotherapy, is more likely to be associated with increased risk of infection than neutropenia of long duration (months to years) that reverses in response to infection or carefully controlled administration of endotoxin (see "Laboratory Diagnosis and Management," below).

Some causes of inherited and acquired neutropenia are listed in Table 60每1. The most common neutropenias are iatrogenic, resulting from the use of cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapies for malignancy or control of autoimmune disorders. These drugs cause neutropenia because they result in decreased production of rapidly growing progenitor (stem) cells of the marrow. Certain antibiotics such as chloramphenicol, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, flucytosine, vidarabine, and the antiretroviral drug zidovudine may cause neutropenia by inhibiting proliferation of myeloid precursors. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine are metabolized by the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TMPT), hypofunctional polymorphisms in which can lead to accumulation of 6-thioguanine and profound marrow toxicity. The marrow suppression is generally dose-related and dependent on continued administration of the drug. Cessation of the offending agent and recombinant human G-CSF usually reverse these forms of neutropenia.

Table 60每1 Causes of Neutropenia

 
 
Decreased Production  
Drug-induced〞alkylating agents (nitrogen mustard, busulfan, chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide); antimetabolites (methotrexate, 6-mercaptopurine, 5-flucytosine); noncytotoxic agents [antibiotics (chloramphenicol, penicillins, sulfonamides), phenothiazines, tranquilizers (meprobamate), anticonvulsants (carbamazepine), antipsychotics (clozapine), certain diuretics, anti-inflammatory agents, antithyroid drugs, many others] 
Hematologic diseases〞idiopathic, cyclic neutropenia, Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome, aplastic anemia, infantile genetic disorders (see text) 
Tumor invasion, myelofibrosis 
Nutritional deficiency〞vitamin B12, folate (especially alcoholics)
  
Infection〞tuberculosis, typhoid fever, brucellosis, tularemia, measles, infectious mononucleosis, malaria, viral hepatitis, leishmaniasis, AIDS 
Peripheral Destruction  
Antineutrophil antibodies and/or splenic or lung trapping 
Autoimmune disorders〞Felty's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus erythematosus 
Drugs as haptens〞aminopyrine, -methyldopa, phenylbutazone, mercurial diuretics, some phenothiazines 
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) 
Peripheral Pooling (Transient Neutropenia)  
Overwhelming bacterial infection (acute endotoxemia) 
Hemodialysis 
Cardiopulmonary bypass 
 

 

Another important mechanism for iatrogenic neutropenia is the effect of drugs that serve as immune haptens and sensitize neutrophils or neutrophil precursors to immune-mediated peripheral destruction. This form of drug-induced neutropenia can be seen within 7 days of exposure to the drug; with previous drug exposure, resulting in preexisting antibodies, neutropenia may occur a few hours after administration of the drug. Although any drug can cause this form of neutropenia, the most frequent causes are commonly used antibiotics, such as sulfa-containing compounds, penicillins, and cephalosporins. Fever and eosinophilia may also be associated with drug reactions, but often these signs are not present. Drug-induced neutropenia can be severe, but discontinuation of the sensitizing drug is sufficient for recovery, which is usually seen within 5每7 days and is complete by 10 days. Readministration of the sensitizing drug should be avoided, since abrupt neutropenia will often result. For this reason, diagnostic challenge should be avoided.

Autoimmune neutropenias caused by circulating antineutrophil antibodies are another form of acquired neutropenia that results in increased destruction of neutrophils. Acquired neutropenia may also be seen with viral infections, including infection with HIV. Acquired neutropenia may be cyclic in nature, occurring at intervals of several weeks. Acquired cyclic or stable neutropenia may be associated with an expansion of large granular lymphocytes (LGLs), which may be T cells, NK cells, or NK-like cells. Patients with large granular lymphocytosis may have moderate blood and bone marrow lymphocytosis, neutropenia, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, splenomegaly, rheumatoid arthritis, and absence of lymphadenopathy. Such patients may have a chronic and relatively stable course. Recurrent bacterial infections are frequent. Benign and malignant forms of this syndrome occur. In some patients, a spontaneous regression has occurred even after 11 years, suggesting an immunoregulatory defect as the basis for at least one form of the disorder. Glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, and methotrexate are commonly used to manage these cytopenias.

Hereditary Neutropenias

Hereditary neutropenias are rare and may manifest in early childhood as a profound constant neutropenia or agranulocytosis. Congenital forms of neutropenia include Kostmann's syndrome (neutrophil count <100/L), which is often fatal and due to mutations in the anti-apoptosis gene HAX-1; severe chronic neutropenia (neutrophil count of 300每1500/L) due to mutations in neutrophil elastase (ELA-2); hereditary cyclic neutropenia, or, more appropriately, cyclic hematopoiesis, also due to mutations in neutrophil elastase (ELA-2); the cartilage-hair hypoplasia syndrome due to mutations in the mitochondrial RNA-processing endoribonuclease RMRP; Shwachman-Diamond syndrome associated with pancreatic insufficiency due to mutations in the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome gene SBDS; the WHIM [warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, myelokathexis (retention of WBCs in the marrow)] syndrome, characterized by neutrophil hypersegmentation and bone marrow myeloid arrest due to mutations in the chemokine receptor CXCR4; and neutropenias associated with other immune defects, such as X-linked agammaglobulinemia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and CD40 ligand deficiency. Mutations in the G-CSF receptor can develop in severe congenital neutropenia and are linked to leukemia. Absence of both myeloid and lymphoid cells is seen in reticular dysgenesis, due to mutations in the nuclear genome-encoded mitochondrial enzyme adenylate kinase-2 (AK2).

Maternal factors can be associated with neutropenia in the newborn. Transplacental transfer of IgG directed against antigens on fetal neutrophils can result in peripheral destruction. Drugs (e.g., thiazides) ingested during pregnancy can cause neutropenia in the newborn by either depressed production or peripheral destruction.

In Felty's syndrome〞the triad of rheumatoid arthritis, splenomegaly, and neutropenia (Chap. 321)〞spleen-produced antibodies can shorten neutrophil life span, while LGLs can attack marrow neutrophil precursors. Splenectomy may increase the neutrophil count in Felty's syndrome and lower serum neutrophil-binding IgG. Some Felty's syndrome patients also have neutropenia associated with an increased number of LGLs. Splenomegaly with peripheral trapping and destruction of neutrophils is also seen in lysosomal storage diseases and in portal hypertension.

Neutrophilia

Neutrophilia results from increased neutrophil production, increased marrow release, or defective margination (Table 60每2). The most important acute cause of neutrophilia is infection. Neutrophilia from acute infection represents both increased production and increased marrow release. Increased production is also associated with chronic inflammation and certain myeloproliferative diseases. Increased marrow release and mobilization of the marginated leukocyte pool are induced by glucocorticoids. Release of epinephrine, as with vigorous exercise, excitement, or stress, will demarginate neutrophils in the spleen and lungs and double the neutrophil count in minutes. Cigarette smoking can elevate neutrophil counts above the normal range. Leukocytosis with cell counts of 10,000每25,000/L occurs in response to infection and other forms of acute inflammation and results from both release of the marginated pool and mobilization of marrow reserves. Persistent neutrophilia with cell counts of 30,000每50,000/L is called a leukemoid reaction, a term often used to distinguish this degree of neutrophilia from leukemia. In a leukemoid reaction, the circulating neutrophils are usually mature and not clonally derived.

Table 60每2 Causes of Neutrophilia

 
 
Increased Production
 
Idiopathic
 
Drug-induced〞glucocorticoids, G-CSF 
Infection〞bacterial, fungal, sometimes viral 
Inflammation〞thermal injury, tissue necrosis, myocardial and 
pulmonary infarction, hypersensitivity states, collagen vascular diseases 
Myeloproliferative diseases〞myelocytic leukemia, myeloid metaplasia, 
polycythemia vera
 
Increased Marrow Release
 
Glucocorticoids Acute infection (endotoxin) nflammation〞thermal injury
 
Decreased or Defective Margination
 
Drugs〞epinephrine, glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents Stress, excitement, vigorous exercise Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 (CD18); leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2 (selectin ligand, CD15s); leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 3 (Kindlin-3)
 
Miscellaneous
 
Metabolic disorders〞ketoacidosis, acute renal failure, eclampsia, acute poisoning
 
Drugs〞lithium
 
Other〞metastatic carcinoma, acute hemorrhage or hemolysis
 
Abbreviation: G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
 
 

 

Abnormal Neutrophil Function

Inherited and acquired abnormalities of phagocyte function are listed in Table 60每3. The resulting diseases are best considered in terms of the functional defects of adherence, chemotaxis, and microbicidal activity. The distinguishing features of the important inherited disorders of phagocyte function are shown in Table 60每4.

Table 60每3 Types of Granulocyte and Monocyte Disorders

 
 
Cause of Indicated Dysfunction
 
Function
 Drug-Induced
 Acquired
 Inherited
 
Adherence-aggregation
 Aspirin, colchicine, alcohol, glucocorticoids, ibuprofen, piroxicam
 Neonatal state, hemodialysis
 Leukocyte adhesion deficiency types 1, 2, and 3
 
Deformability
   Leukemia, neonatal state, diabetes mellitus, immature neutrophils
   
Chemokinesis-chemotaxis
 Glucocorticoids (high dose), auranofin, colchicine (weak effect), phenylbutazone, naproxen, indomethacin, interleukin 2
 Thermal injury, malignancy, malnutrition, periodontal disease, neonatal state, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus, sepsis, influenza virus infection, herpes simplex virus infection, acrodermatitis enteropathica, AIDS
 Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome, neutrophil-specific granule deficiency, hyper IgE每recurrent infection (Job's) syndrome (in some patients), Down syndrome, -mannosidase deficiency, leukocyte adhesion deficiencies, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
 
Microbicidal activity
 Colchicine, cyclophosphamide, glucocorticoids (high dose), TNF- blocking antibodies
 Leukemia, aplastic anemia, certain neutropenias, tuftsin deficiency, thermal injury, sepsis, neonatal state, diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, AIDS
 Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome, neutrophil-specific granule deficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, defects in IFN- /IL-12 axis
 
 


Abbreviations: IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF-, tumor necrosis factor alpha.
 
Table 60每4 Inherited Disorders of Phagocyte Function: Differential Features

 
 
Clinical Manifestations
 Cellular or Molecular Defects
 Diagnosis
 
Chronic Granulomatous Diseases (70% X-linked, 30% Autosomal Recessive)
 
Severe infections of skin, ears, lungs, liver, and bone with catalase-positive microorganisms such as Staphylococcus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Aspergillus spp., Chromobacterium violaceum; often hard to culture organism; excessive inflammation with granulomas, frequent lymph node suppuration; granulomas can obstruct GI or GU tracts; gingivitis, aphthous ulcers, seborrheic dermatitis
 No respiratory burst due to the lack of one of five NADPH oxidase subunits in neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils
 DHR or NBT test; no superoxide and H2O2 production by neutrophils; immunoblot for NADPH oxidase components; genetic detection
 
Ch谷diak-Higashi Syndrome (Autosomal Recessive)
 
Recurrent pyogenic infections, especially with S. aureus; many patients get lymphoma-like illness during adolescence; periodontal disease; partial oculocutaneous albinism, nystagmus, progressive peripheral neuropathy, mental retardation in some patients
 Reduced chemotaxis and phagolysosome fusion, increased respiratory burst activity, defective egress from marrow, abnormal skin window; defect in CHS1
 Giant primary granules in neutrophils and other granule-bearing cells (Wright's stain); genetic detection
 
Specific Granule Deficiency (Autosomal Recessive)
 
Recurrent infections of skin, ears, and sinopulmonary tract; delayed wound healing; decreased inflammation; bleeding diathesis
 Abnormal chemotaxis, impaired respiratory burst and bacterial killing, failure to upregulate chemotactic and adhesion receptors with stimulation, defect in transcription of granule proteins; defect in C/EBP
 Lack of secondary (specific) granules in neutrophils (Wright's stain), no neutrophil-specific granule contents (i.e., lactoferrin), no defensins, platelet  granule abnormality; genetic detection
 
Myeloperoxidase Deficiency (Autosomal Recessive)
 
Clinically normal except in patients with underlying disease such as diabetes mellitus; then candidiasis or other fungal infections
 No myeloperoxidase due to pre- and posttranslational defects in myeloperoxidase deficiency
 No peroxidase in neutrophils; genetic detection
 
Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency
 
Type 1: Delayed separation of umbilical cord, sustained neutrophilia, recurrent infections of skin and mucosa, gingivitis, periodontal disease

Type 2: Mental retardation, short stature, Bombay (hh) blood phenotype, recurrent infections, neutrophilia

Type 3: Petechial hemorrhage, recurrent infections
 Impaired phagocyte adherence, aggregation, spreading, chemotaxis, phagocytosis of C3bi-coated particles; defective production of CD18 subunit common to leukocyte integrins Impaired phagocyte rolling along endothelium due to defects in fucose transporter Impaired signaling for integrin activation resulting in impaired adhesion due to mutation in FERMT3
 Reduced phagocyte surface expression of the CD18-containing integrins with monoclonal antibodies against LFA-1 (CD18/CD11a), Mac-1 or CR3 (CD18/CD11b), p150,95 (CD18/CD11c); genetic detection Reduced phagocyte surface expression of Sialyl-Lewisx, with monoclonal antibodies against CD15s; genetic detection Reduced signaling for adhesion through integrins; genetic detection
 
Phagocyte Activation Defects (X-linked and Autosomal Recessive)
 
NEMO deficiency: mild hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia; broad-based immune defect: pyogenic and encapsulated bacteria, viruses, Pneumocystis, mycobacteria; X-linked IRAK4 and MyD88 deficiency: susceptibility to pyogenic bacteria such as staphylococci, streptococci, clostridia; resistant to candida; autosomal recessive
 Impaired phagocyte activation by IL-1, IL-18, TLR, CD40L, TNF- leading to problems with inflammation and antibody production Impaired phagocyte activation by endotoxin through TLR and other pathways; TNF- signaling preserved
 Poor in vitro response to endotoxin; lack of NF-B activation; genetic detection Poor in vitro response to endotoxin; lack of NF-B activation by endotoxin; genetic detection
 
Hyper IgE每Recurrent Infection Syndrome (Autosomal Dominant) (Job's Syndrome)
 
Eczematoid or pruritic dermatitis, "cold" skin abscesses, recurrent pneumonias with S . aureus with bronchopleural fistulas and cyst formation, mild eosinophilia, mucocutaneous candidiasis, characteristic facies, restrictive lung disease, scoliosis, delayed primary dental deciduation DOCK8 deficiency (autosomal recessive) Severe eczema, atopic dermatitis, cutaneous abscesses, HSV, HPV, and molluscum infections, severe allergies, cancer
 Reduced chemotaxis in some patients, reduced suppressor T cell activity. Mutation in STAT3 Impaired T cell proliferation to mitogens
 Somatic and immune features involving lungs, skeleton, and immune system; serum IgE > 2000 IU/mL; genetic testing Severe allergies, viral infections, high IgE, eosinophilia, low IgM, progressive lymphopenia, genetic detection
 
Mycobacteria Susceptibility (Autosomal Dominant and Recessive Forms)
 
Severe extrapulmonary or disseminated infections with bacille Calmette-Gu谷rin (BCG), nontuberculous mycobacteria, salmonella, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, poor granuloma formation
 Inability to kill intracellular organisms due to low IFN- production or response; mutations in IFN- receptors, IL-12 receptor, IL-12 p40, STAT1, NEMO
 Low or very high levels of IFN- receptor 1; functional assays of cytokine production and response; genetic detection
 
 


Abbreviations: C/EBP, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-; DHR, dihydrorhodamine (oxidation test); DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary; HPV, human papilloma virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; IRAK4, IL-1 receptor每associated kinase 4; LFA-1, leukocyte function每associated antigen 1; MyD88, myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88; NADPH, nicotinamide每adenine dinueleotide phosphate; NBT, nitroblue tetrazolium (dye test); NEMO, NF-B essential modulator; NF-B, nuclear factor B; STAT1, 每3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1, 每3; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 

Disorders of Adhesion

Three main types of leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) have been described. All are autosomal recessive and result in the inability of neutrophils to exit the circulation to sites of infection, leading to leukocytosis and increased susceptibility to infection (Fig. 60-8). Patients with LAD 1 have mutations in CD18, the common component of the integrins LFA-1, Mac-1, and p150,95, leading to a defect in tight adhesion between neutrophils and the endothelium. The heterodimer formed by CD18/CD11b (Mac-1) is also the receptor for the complement-derived opsonin C3bi (CR3). The CD18 gene is located on distal chromosome 21q. The severity of the defect determines the severity of clinical disease. Complete lack of expression of the leukocyte integrins results in a severe phenotype in which inflammatory stimuli do not increase the expression of leukocyte integrins on neutrophils or activated T and B cells. Neutrophils (and monocytes) from patients with LAD 1 adhere poorly to endothelial cells and protein-coated surfaces and exhibit defective spreading, aggregation, and chemotaxis. Patients with LAD 1 have recurrent bacterial infections involving the skin, oral and genital mucosa, and respiratory and intestinal tracts; persistent leukocytosis (resting neutrophil counts of 15,000每20,000/L) because cells do not marginate; and, in severe cases, a history of delayed separation of the umbilical stump. Infections, especially of the skin, may become necrotic with progressively enlarging borders, slow healing, and development of dysplastic scars. The most common bacteria are Staphylococcus aureus and enteric gram-negative bacteria. LAD 2 is caused by an abnormality of fucosylation of SLex (CD15s), the ligand on neutrophils that interacts with selectins on endothelial cells and is responsible for neutrophil rolling along the endothelium. Infection susceptibility in LAD 2 appears to be less severe than in LAD 1. LAD 2 is also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation IIc (CDGIIc) due to mutation in a GDP-fucose transporter (SLC35C1). LAD 3 is characterized by infection susceptibility, leukocytosis, and petechial hemorrhage due to impaired integrin activation caused by mutations in the gene FERMT3.

Disorders of Neutrophil Granules

The most common neutrophil defect is myeloperoxidase deficiency, a primary granule defect inherited as an autosomal recessive trait; the incidence is ~1 in 2000 persons. Isolated myeloperoxidase deficiency is not associated with clinically compromised defenses, presumably because other defense systems such as hydrogen peroxide generation are amplified. Microbicidal activity of neutrophils is delayed but not absent. Myeloperoxidase deficiency may make other acquired host defense defects more serious. An acquired form of myeloperoxidase deficiency occurs in myelomonocytic leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia.

Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare disease with autosomal recessive inheritance due to defects in the lysosomal transport protein LYST, encoded by the gene CHS1 at 1q42. This protein is required for normal packaging and disbursement of granules. Neutrophils (and all cells containing lysosomes) from patients with CHS characteristically have large granules (Fig. 60-9), making it a systemic disease. Patients with CHS have nystagmus, partial oculocutaneous albinism, and an increased number of infections resulting from many bacterial agents. Some CHS patients develop an "accelerated phase" in childhood with a hemophagocytic syndrome and an aggressive lymphoma requiring bone marrow transplantation. CHS neutrophils and monocytes have impaired chemotaxis and abnormal rates of microbial killing due to slow rates of fusion of the lysosomal granules with phagosomes. NK cell function is also impaired. CHS patients may develop a severe disabling peripheral neuropathy in adulthood that can lead to bed confinement.

Figure 60-9

 
 
 
Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome. The granulocytes contain huge cytoplasmic granules formed from aggregation and fusion of azurophilic and specific granules. Large abnormal granules are found in other granule-containing cells throughout the body.
 
 

Specific granule deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease in which the production of secondary granules and their contents, as well as the primary granule component defensins, is defective. The defect in bacterial killing leads to severe bacterial infections. One type of specific granule deficiency is due to a mutation in the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-, a regulator of expression of granule components.

Chronic Granulomatous Disease

Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a group of disorders of granulocyte and monocyte oxidative metabolism. Although CGD is rare, with an incidence of 1 in 200,000 individuals, it is an important model of defective neutrophil oxidative metabolism. Most often CGD is inherited as an X-linked recessive trait; 30% of patients inherit the disease in an autosomal recessive pattern. Mutations in the genes for the five proteins that assemble at the plasma membrane account for all patients with CGD. Two proteins (a 91-kDa protein, abnormal in X-linked CGD, and a 22-kDa protein, absent in one form of autosomal recessive CGD) form the heterodimer cytochrome b-558 in the plasma membrane. Three other proteins (40-, 47-, and 67-kDa, abnormal in the other autosomal recessive forms of CGD) are cytoplasmic in origin and interact with the cytochrome after cell activation to form NADPH oxidase, required for hydrogen peroxide production. Leukocytes from patients with CGD have severely diminished hydrogen peroxide production. The genes involved in each of the defects have been cloned and sequenced and the chromosome locations identified. Patients with CGD characteristically have increased numbers of infections due to catalase-positive microorganisms (organisms that destroy their own hydrogen peroxide). When patients with CGD become infected, they often have extensive inflammatory reactions, and lymph node suppuration is common despite the administration of appropriate antibiotics. Aphthous ulcers and chronic inflammation of the nares are often present. Granulomas are frequent and can obstruct the gastrointestinal or genitourinary tracts. The excessive inflammation reflects failure to downregulate inflammation, reflecting failure to inhibit the synthesis, degradation of or response to chemoattractants or residual antigens, leading to persistent neutrophil accumulation. Impaired killing of intracellular microorganisms by macrophages may lead to persistent cell-mediated immune activation and granuloma formation. Autoimmune complications such as immune thrombocytopenic purpura and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis are also increased in CGD. In addition, discoid lupus is more common in X-linked carriers. Late complications including nodular regenerative hyperplasia and portal hypertension are increasingly recognized in long-term survivors of severe CGD.

Disorders of Phagocyte Activation

Phagocytes depend on cell-surface stimulation to induce signals that evoke multiple levels of the inflammatory response, including cytokine synthesis, chemotaxis, and antigen presentation. Mutations affecting the major pathway that signals through NF-B have been noted in patients with a variety of infection susceptibility syndromes. If the defects are at a very late stage of signal transduction, in the protein critical for NF-B activation known as the NF-B essential modulator (NEMO), then affected males develop ectodermal dysplasia and severe immune deficiency with susceptibility to bacteria, fungi, mycobacteria, and viruses. If the defects in NF-B activation are closer to the cell-surface receptors, in the proteins transducing Toll-like receptor signals, IL-1 receptor每associated kinase 4 (IRAK4), and myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88), then children have a marked susceptibility to pyogenic infections early in life but develop resistance to infection later.
 
Mononuclear Phagocytes

The mononuclear phagocyte system is composed of monoblasts, promonocytes, and monocytes, in addition to the structurally diverse tissue macrophages that make up what was previously referred to as the reticuloendothelial system. Macrophages are long-lived phagocytic cells capable of many of the functions of neutrophils. They are also secretory cells that participate in many immunologic and inflammatory processes distinct from neutrophils. Monocytes leave the circulation by diapedesis more slowly than neutrophils and have a half-life in the blood of 12每24 h.

After blood monocytes arrive in the tissues, they differentiate into macrophages ("big eaters") with specialized functions suited for specific anatomic locations. Macrophages are particularly abundant in capillary walls of the lung, spleen, liver, and bone marrow, where they function to remove microorganisms and other noxious elements from the blood. Alveolar macrophages, liver Kupffer cells, splenic macrophages, peritoneal macrophages, bone marrow macrophages, lymphatic macrophages, brain microglial cells, and dendritic macrophages all have specialized functions. Macrophage-secreted products include lysozyme, neutral proteases, acid hydrolases, arginase, complement components, enzyme inhibitors (plasmin, 2-macroglobulin), binding proteins (transferrin, fibronectin, transcobalamin II), nucleosides, and cytokines (TNF-; IL-1, -8, -12, -18). IL-1 (Chaps. 16 and 314) has many functions, including initiating fever in the hypothalamus, mobilizing leukocytes from the bone marrow, and activating lymphocytes and neutrophils. TNF- is a pyrogen that duplicates many of the actions of IL-1 and plays an important role in the pathogenesis of gram-negative shock (Chap. 271). TNF- stimulates production of hydrogen peroxide and related toxic oxygen species by macrophages and neutrophils. In addition, TNF- induces catabolic changes that contribute to the profound wasting (cachexia) associated with many chronic diseases.

Other macrophage-secreted products include reactive oxygen and nitrogen metabolites, bioactive lipids (arachidonic acid metabolites and platelet-activating factors), chemokines, CSFs, and factors stimulating fibroblast and vessel proliferation. Macrophages help regulate the replication of lymphocytes and participate in the killing of tumors, viruses, and certain bacteria (Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Listeria monocytogenes). Macrophages are key effector cells in the elimination of intracellular microorganisms. Their ability to fuse to form giant cells that coalesce into granulomas in response to some inflammatory stimuli is important in the elimination of intracellular microbes and is under the control of IFN-. Nitric oxide induced by IFN- is an important effector against intracellular parasites, including tuberculosis and Leishmania.

Macrophages play an important role in the immune response (Chap. 314). They process and present antigen to lymphocytes and secrete cytokines that modulate and direct lymphocyte development and function. Macrophages participate in autoimmune phenomena by removing immune complexes and other substances from the circulation. Polymorphisms in macrophage receptors for immunoglobulin (FcRII) determine susceptibility to some infections and autoimmune diseases. In wound healing, they dispose of senescent cells, and they contribute to atheroma development. Macrophage elastase mediates development of emphysema from cigarette smoking.

Disorders of the Mononuclear Phagocyte System

Many disorders of neutrophils extend to mononuclear phagocytes. Thus, drugs that suppress neutrophil production in the bone marrow can cause monocytopenia. Transient monocytopenia occurs after stress or glucocorticoid administration. Monocytosis is associated with tuberculosis, brucellosis, subacute bacterial endocarditis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, malaria, and visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar). Monocytosis also occurs with malignancies, leukemias, myeloproliferative syndromes, hemolytic anemias, chronic idiopathic neutropenias, and granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis, regional enteritis, and some collagen vascular diseases. Patients with LAD, hyperimmunoglobulin E每recurrent infection (Job's) syndrome, CHS, and CGD all have defects in the mononuclear phagocyte system.

Monocyte cytokine production or response is impaired in some patients with disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial infection who are not infected with HIV. Genetic defects in the pathways regulated by IFN- and IL-12 lead to impaired killing of intracellular bacteria, mycobacteria, salmonellae, and certain viruses (Fig. 60-10).

Figure 60-10

 
 
 
Lymphocyte-macrophage interactions underlying resistance to mycobacteria and other intracellular parasites such as Salmonella. Mycobacteria infect macrophages, leading to the production of IL-12, which activates T or NK cells through its receptor, leading to production of IL-2 and IFN-. IFN- acts through its receptor on macrophages to upregulate TNF- and IL-12 and kill intracellular parasites. Mutant forms of the cytokines and receptors shown in large type have been found in severe cases of nontuberculous mycobacterial infection and salmonellosis. AFB, acid fast bacilli; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; NEMO, NF-B essential modulator; NK, natural killer; STAT1, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
 

Certain viral infections impair mononuclear phagocyte function. For example, influenza virus infection causes abnormal monocyte chemotaxis. Mononuclear phagocytes can be infected by HIV using CCR5, the chemokine receptor that acts as a co-receptor with CD4 for HIV. T lymphocytes produce IFN-, which induces FcR expression and phagocytosis and stimulates hydrogen peroxide production by mononuclear phagocytes and neutrophils. In certain diseases, such as AIDS, IFN- production may be deficient, whereas in other diseases, such as T cell lymphomas, excessive release of IFN- may be associated with erythrophagocytosis by splenic macrophages.

Autoinflammatory diseases are characterized by abnormal cytokine regulation, leading to excess inflammation in the absence of infection. These diseases can mimic infectious or immunodeficient syndromes. Gain-of-function mutations in the TNF- receptor cause TNF- receptor每associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS), which is characterized by recurrent fever in the absence of infection, due to persistent stimulation of the TNF- receptor (Chap. 330). Diseases with abnormal IL-1 regulation leading to fever include familial Mediterranean fever due to mutations in PYRIN. Mutations in cold-induced autoinflammatory syndrome 1 (CIAS1) lead to neonatal-onset multisystem autoinflammatory disease, familial cold urticaria, and Muckle-Wells syndrome. The syndrome of pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, and sterile pyogenic arthritis (PAPA syndrome) is caused by mutations in CD2BP1. In contrast to these syndromes of overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines, blockade of TNF- by the antagonists infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, or etanercept has been associated with severe infections due to tuberculosis, nontuberculous mycobacteria, and fungi (Chap. 330).

Monocytopenia occurs with acute infections, with stress, and after treatment with glucocorticoids. Monocytopenia also occurs in aplastic anemia, hairy cell leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, and as a direct result of myelotoxic drugs.
 
Eosinophils

Eosinophils and neutrophils share similar morphology, many lysosomal constituents, phagocytic capacity, and oxidative metabolism. Eosinophils express a specific chemoattractant receptor and respond to a specific chemokine, eotaxin, but little is known about their required role. Eosinophils are much longer lived than neutrophils, and unlike neutrophils, tissue eosinophils can recirculate. During most infections, eosinophils appear unimportant. However, in invasive helminthic infections, such as hookworm, schistosomiasis, strongyloidiasis, toxocariasis, trichinosis, filariasis, echinococcosis, and cysticercosis, the eosinophil plays a central role in host defense. Eosinophils are associated with bronchial asthma, cutaneous allergic reactions, and other hypersensitivity states.

The distinctive feature of the red-staining (Wright's stain) eosinophil granule is its crystalline core consisting of an arginine-rich protein (major basic protein) with histaminase activity, important in host defense against parasites. Eosinophil granules also contain a unique eosinophil peroxidase that catalyzes the oxidation of many substances by hydrogen peroxide and may facilitate killing of microorganisms.

Eosinophil peroxidase, in the presence of hydrogen peroxide and halide, initiates mast cell secretion in vitro and thereby promotes inflammation. Eosinophils contain cationic proteins, some of which bind to heparin and reduce its anticoagulant activity. Eosinophil-derived neurotoxin and eosinophil cationic protein are ribonucleases that can kill respiratory syncytial virus. Eosinophil cytoplasm contains Charcot-Leyden crystal protein, a hexagonal bipyramidal crystal first observed in a patient with leukemia and then in sputum of patients with asthma; this protein is lysophospholipase and may function to detoxify certain lysophospholipids.

Several factors enhance the eosinophil's function in host defense. T cell每derived factors enhance the ability of eosinophils to kill parasites. Mast cell每derived eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECFa) increases the number of eosinophil complement receptors and enhances eosinophil killing of parasites. Eosinophil CSFs (e.g., IL-5) produced by macrophages increase eosinophil production in the bone marrow and activate eosinophils to kill parasites.

Eosinophilia

Eosinophilia is the presence of >500 eosinophils per L of blood and is common in many settings besides parasite infection. Significant tissue eosinophilia can occur without an elevated blood count. A common cause of eosinophilia is allergic reaction to drugs (iodides, aspirin, sulfonamides, nitrofurantoin, penicillins, and cephalosporins). Allergies such as hay fever, asthma, eczema, serum sickness, allergic vasculitis, and pemphigus are associated with eosinophilia. Eosinophilia also occurs in collagen vascular diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, eosinophilic fasciitis, allergic angiitis, and periarteritis nodosa) and malignancies (e.g., Hodgkin disease; mycosis fungoides; chronic myeloid leukemia; and cancer of the lung, stomach, pancreas, ovary, or uterus), as well as in Job's syndrome, DOCK8 deficiency (see below), and CGD. Eosinophilia is commonly present in helminthic infections. IL-5 is the dominant eosinophil growth factor. Therapeutic administration of the cytokinesIL-2 and GM-CSF frequently leads to transient eosinophilia. The most dramatic hypereosinophilic syndromes are Loeffler's syndrome, tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, Loeffler's endocarditis, eosinophilic leukemia, and idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (50,000每100,000/L). IL-5 is the dominant eosinophil growth factor, and can be specifically inhibited with the monoclonal antibody mepolizumab.

The idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome represents a heterogeneous group of disorders with the common feature of prolonged eosinophilia of unknown cause and organ system dysfunction, including the heart, central nervous system, kidneys, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and skin. The bone marrow is involved in all affected individuals, but the most severe complications involve the heart and central nervous system. Clinical manifestations and organ dysfunction are highly variable. Eosinophils are found in the involved tissues and likely cause tissue damage by local deposition of toxic eosinophil proteins such as eosinophil cationic protein and major basic protein. In the heart, the pathologic changes lead to thrombosis, endocardial fibrosis, and restrictive endomyocardiopathy. The damage to tissues in other organ systems is similar. Some cases are due to mutations involving the platelet-derived growth factor receptor, and these are extremely sensitive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib. Glucocorticoids, hydroxyurea, and IFN- each have been used successfully, as have therapeutic antibodies against IL-5. Cardiovascular complications are managed aggressively.

The eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome is a multisystem disease, with prominent cutaneous, hematologic, and visceral manifestations, that frequently evolves into a chronic course and can occasionally be fatal. The syndrome is characterized by eosinophilia (eosinophil count >1000/L) and generalized disabling myalgias without other recognized causes. Eosinophilic fasciitis, pneumonitis, and myocarditis; neuropathy culminating in respiratory failure; and encephalopathy may occur. The disease is caused by ingesting contaminants in l-tryptophan每containing products. Eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and fibroblasts accumulate in the affected tissues, but their role in pathogenesis is unclear. Activation of eosinophils and fibroblasts and the deposition of eosinophil-derived toxic proteins in affected tissues may contribute. IL-5 and transforming growth factor  have been implicated as potential mediators. Treatment is withdrawal of products containing l-tryptophan and the administration of glucocorticoids. Most patients recover fully, remain stable, or show slow recovery, but the disease can be fatal in up to 5% of patients.

Eosinopenia

Eosinopenia occurs with stress, such as acute bacterial infection, and after treatment with glucocorticoids. The mechanism of eosinopenia of acute bacterial infection is unknown but is independent of endogenous glucocorticoids, since it occurs in animals after total adrenalectomy. There is no known adverse effect of eosinopenia.
 
Hyperimmunoglobulin E每Recurrent Infection Syndrome

The hyperimmunoglobulin E每recurrent infection syndrome, or Job's syndrome, is a rare multisystem disease in which the immune and somatic systems are affected, including neutrophils, monocytes, T cells, B cells, and osteoclasts. Autosomal dominant mutations in signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) lead to inhibition of normal STAT signaling with broad and profound effects. Patients have characteristic facies with broad nose, kyphoscoliosis and osteoporosis, and eczema. The primary teeth erupt normally but do not deciduate, often requiring extraction. Patients develop recurrent sinopulmonary and cutaneous infections that tend to be much less inflamed than appropriate for the degree of infection and have been referred to as "cold abscesses." Characteristically, pneumonias cavitate, leading to pneumatoceles. Coronary artery aneurysms are common, as are cerebral demyelinated plaques that accumulate with age. Importantly, IL-17每producing cells, which are thought responsible for protection against extracellular and mucosal infections, are profoundly reduced in Job's syndrome. Despite very high IgE levels, these patients do not have elevated levels of allergy. An important syndrome with clinical overlap with STAT3 deficiency is due to autosomal recessive defects in dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8). In DOCK8 deficiency, IgE elevation is joined to severe allergy, viral susceptibility, and increased rates of cancer.
 
Laboratory Diagnosis and Management

Initial studies of WBC and differential and often a bone marrow examination may be followed by assessment of bone marrow reserves (steroid challenge test), marginated circulating pool of cells (epinephrine challenge test), and marginating ability (endotoxin challenge test) (Fig. 60-7). In vivo assessment of inflammation is possible with a Rebuck skin window test or an in vivo skin blister assay, which measures the ability of leukocytes and inflammatory mediators to accumulate locally in the skin. In vitro tests of phagocyte aggregation, adherence, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, degranulation, and microbicidal activity (for S. aureus) may help pinpoint cellular or humoral lesions. Deficiencies of oxidative metabolism are detected with either the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) dye test or the dihydrorhodamine (DHR) oxidation test. These tests are based on the ability of products of oxidative metabolism to alter the oxidation states of reporter molecules so that they can be detected microscopically (NBT) or by flow cytometry (DHR). Qualitative studies of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide production may further define neutrophil oxidative function.

Patients with leukopenias or leukocyte dysfunction often have delayed inflammatory responses. Therefore, clinical manifestations may be minimal despite overwhelming infection, and unusual infections must always be suspected. Early signs of infection demand prompt, aggressive culturing for microorganisms, use of antibiotics, and surgical drainage of abscesses. Prolonged courses of antibiotics are often required. In patients with CGD, prophylactic antibiotics (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) and antifungals (itraconazole) markedly diminish the frequency of life-threatening infections. Glucocorticoids may relieve gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract obstruction by granulomas in patients with CGD. Although TNF- blocking agents may markedly relieve inflammatory bowel symptoms, extreme caution must be exercised in their use in CGD inflammatory bowel disease, as it profoundly increases these patients' already heightened susceptibility to infection. Recombinant human IFN-, which nonspecifically stimulates phagocytic cell function, reduces the frequency of infections in patients with CGD by 70% and reduces the severity of infection. This effect of IFN- in CGD is additive to the effect of prophylactic antibiotics. The recommended dose is 50 g/m2 subcutaneously three times weekly. IFN- has also been used successfully in the treatment of leprosy, nontuberculous mycobacteria, and visceral leishmaniasis.

Rigorous oral hygiene reduces but does not eliminate the discomfort of gingivitis, periodontal disease, and aphthous ulcers; chlorhexidine mouthwash and tooth brushing with a hydrogen peroxide每sodium bicarbonate paste helps many patients. Oral antifungal agents (fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole) have reduced mucocutaneous candidiasis in patients with Job's syndrome. Androgens, glucocorticoids, lithium, and immunosuppressive therapy have been used to restore myelopoiesis in patients with neutropenia due to impaired production. Recombinant G-CSF is useful in the management of certain forms of neutropenia due to depressed neutrophil production, especially those related to cancer chemotherapy. Patients with chronic neutropenia with evidence of a good bone marrow reserve need not receive prophylactic antibiotics. Patients with chronic or cyclic neutrophil counts <500/L may benefit from prophylactic antibiotics and G-CSF during periods of neutropenia. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg) twice daily can prevent infection. Increased numbers of fungal infections are not seen in patients with CGD on this regimen. Oral quinolones such as levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin are alternatives.

In the setting of cytotoxic chemotherapy with severe, persistent neutropenia, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prevents Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia. These patients, and patients with phagocytic cell dysfunction, should avoid heavy exposure to airborne soil, dust, or decaying matter (mulch, manure), which are often rich in Nocardia and the spores of Aspergillus and other fungi. Restriction of activities or social contact has no proven role in reducing risk of infection.

Although aggressive medical care for many patients with phagocytic disorders can allow them to go for years without a life-threatening infection, there may still be delayed effects of prolonged antimicrobials and other inflammatory complications. Cure of most congenital phagocyte defects is possible by bone marrow transplantation, and rates of success are improving (Chap. 114). The identification of specific gene defects in patients with LAD 1, CGD, and other immunodeficiencies has led to gene therapy trials in a number of genetic white cell disorders.
 
Further Readings

Heimall J et al: Pathogenesis of hyper IgE syndrome. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 38:32, 2010 Holland SM: Chronic granulomatous disease. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 38:3, 2010 

 
International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee on Primary Immunodeficiencies: Primary immunodeficiencies: 2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124:1161, 2009 

 
Klein C, Welte K: Genetic insights into congenital neutropenia. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 38:68, 2010[PMID: 19440858] 

 
Kuhns DB, et al: Residual NADPH opidase and survival in chronic granulomatous disease. N Engl J Med 363:2600, 2010[PMID: 21190454] 

 
Notarangelo LD: Primary immunodeficiencies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 125:S182, 2010. 

 
Ogbogu PU et al: Hypereosinophilic syndrome: A multicenter, retrospective analysis of clinical characteristics and response to therapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124:1319, 2009[PMID: 19910029] 

 
van de Vosse E et al: Genetic deficiencies of innate immune signalling in human infectious disease. Lancet Infect Dis 9:688, 2009 
^^