
Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System: Introduction

The majority of diseases of the respiratory system fall into one of three major categories: (1) obstructive lung diseases; (2) restrictive disorders; and (3) abnormalities of the vasculature. Obstructive lung diseases are most common and primarily include disorders of the airways such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, and bronchiolitis. Diseases resulting in restrictive pathophysiology include parenchymal lung diseases, abnormalities of the chest wall and pleura, as well as neuromuscular disease. Disorders of the pulmonary vasculature are not always recognized and include pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary venoocclusive disease. Although many specific diseases fall into these major categories, both infective and neoplastic processes can affect the respiratory system and may result in myriad pathologic findings, including obstruction, restriction, and pulmonary vascular disease (see Table 251-1).

Table 251每1. Categories of Respiratory Disease

 
 
Category
 Examples
 
Obstructive lung disease
 Asthma
 
  COPD
 
  Bronchiectasis
 
  Bronchiolitis
 
Restrictive pathophysiology〞parenchymal disease
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)
 
  Asbestosis
 
  Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis (DIP)
 
  Sarcoidosis
 
Restrictive pathophysiology〞neuromuscular weakness
 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
 
  Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome 
Restrictive pathophysiology〞chest wall/pleural disease
 Kyphoscoliosis 
 
  Ankylosing spondylitis  
  Chronic pleural effusions 
Pulmonary vascular disease
 Pulmonary embolism
 
  Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) 
Malignancy
 Bronchogenic carcinoma (non-small-cell and small cell) 
 
  Metastatic disease 
Infectious diseases
 Pneumonia 
 
  Bronchitis 
  Tracheitis 
 


Abbreviation: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
 

The majority of respiratory diseases present with abnormal gas exchange. Disorders can also be grouped into the categories of gas exchange abnormalities, including hypoxemic, hypercarbic, or combined impairment. Importantly, many diseases of the lung do not manifest gas exchange abnormalities.

As with the evaluation of most patients, the approach to a patient with disease of the respiratory system begins with a thorough history. A focused physical examination is helpful in further categorizing the specific pathophysiology. Many patients will subsequently undergo pulmonary function testing, chest imaging, blood and sputum analysis, a variety of serologic or microbiologic studies, and diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy. This step-wise approach is discussed in detail below.
 
History

Dyspnea and Cough

The cardinal symptoms of respiratory disease are dyspnea and cough (Chaps. 33 and 34). Dyspnea can result from many causes, some of which are not predominantly caused by lung pathology. The words a patient uses to describe breathlessness or shortness of breath can suggest certain etiologies of the dyspnea. Patients with obstructive lung disease often complain of "chest tightness" or "inability to get a deep breath," whereas patients with congestive heart failure more commonly report "air hunger" or a sense of suffocation.

The tempo of onset and duration of a patient's dyspnea are helpful in determining the etiology. Acute shortness of breath is usually associated with sudden physiological changes, such as laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, or pneumothorax. Patients with underlying lung disease commonly have progressive shortness of breath or episodic dyspnea. Patients with COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) have a gradual progression of dyspnea on exertion, punctuated by acute exacerbations of shortness of breath. In contrast, most asthmatics have normal breathing the majority of the time and have recurrent episodes of dyspnea usually associated with specific triggers, such as an upper respiratory tract infection or exposure to allergens.

Specific questioning should focus on factors that incite the dyspnea, as well as any intervention that helps resolve the patient's shortness of breath. Of the obstructive lung diseases, asthma is most likely to have specific triggers related to sudden onset of dyspnea, although this can also be true of COPD. Many patients with lung disease report dyspnea on exertion. It is useful to determine the degree of activity that results in shortness of breath as it gives the clinician a gauge of the patient's degree of disability. Many patients adapt their level of activity to accommodate progressive limitation. For this reason it is important, particularly in older patients, to delineate the activities in which they engage and how they have changed over time. Dyspnea on exertion is often an early symptom of underlying lung or heart disease and warrants a thorough evaluation.

Cough is the other common presenting symptom that generally indicates disease of the respiratory system. The clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it. Acute cough productive of phlegm is often a symptom of infection of the respiratory system, including processes affecting the upper airway (e.g., sinusitis, tracheitis) as well as the lower airways (e.g., bronchitis, bronchiectasis) and lung parenchyma (e.g., pneumonia). Both the quantity and quality of the sputum, including whether it is blood-streaked or frankly bloody, should be determined. Hemoptysis warrants an evaluation as delineated in Chap. 34.

Chronic cough (defined as persisting for more than 8 weeks) is commonly associated with obstructive lung diseases, particularly asthma and chronic bronchitis, as well as "nonrespiratory" diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux (GERD) and postnasal drip. Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, frequently present with a persistent, nonproductive cough. As with dyspnea, all causes of cough are not respiratory in origin, and assessment should consider a broad differential, including cardiac and gastrointestinal diseases as well as psychogenic causes.

Additional Symptoms

Patients with respiratory disease may complain of wheezing, which is suggestive of airways disease, particularly asthma. Hemoptysis, which must be distinguished from epistaxis or hematemesis, can be a symptom of a variety of lung diseases, including infections of the respiratory tract, bronchogenic carcinoma, and pulmonary embolism. Chest pain or discomfort is also often thought to be respiratory in origin. As the lung parenchyma is not innervated with pain fibers, pain in the chest from respiratory disorders usually results from either diseases of the parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax) or pulmonary vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary hypertension). As many diseases of the lung can result in strain on the right side of the heart, patients may also present with symptoms of cor pulmonale, including abdominal bloating or distention, and pedal edema (Chap. 234).

Additional History

A thorough social history is an essential component of the evaluation of patients with respiratory disease. All patients should be asked about current or previous cigarette smoking as this exposure is associated with many diseases of the respiratory system, most notably COPD and bronchogenic lung cancer but also a variety of diffuse parenchymal lung diseases [e.g., desquamative interstitial pneumonitis (DIP) and pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis]. For most disorders, the duration and intensity of exposure to cigarette smoke increases the risk of disease. There is growing evidence that "second-hand smoke" is also a risk factor for respiratory tract pathology; for this reason, patients should be asked about parents, spouses, or housemates who smoke. It is becoming less common for patients to be exposed to cigarette smoke on the job, but for older patients, an occupational history should include the potential for heavy cigarette smoke exposure (e.g., flight attendants working prior to prohibition of smoking on airplanes).

Possible inhalational exposures should be explored, including those at the work place (e.g., asbestos, wood smoke) and those associated with leisure (e.g., pigeon excrement from pet birds, paint fumes) (Chap. 256). Travel predisposes to certain infections of the respiratory tract, most notably the risk of tuberculosis. Potential exposure to fungi found in specific geographic regions or climates (e.g., Histoplasma capsulatum) should be explored.

Associated symptoms of fever and chills should raise the suspicion of infective etiologies, both pulmonary and systemic. Some systemic diseases, commonly rheumatologic or autoimmune, present with respiratory tract manifestations. Review of systems should include evaluation for symptoms that suggest undiagnosed rheumatologic disease. These may include joint pain or swelling, rashes, dry eyes, dry mouth, or constitutional symptoms. Additionally, carcinomas from a variety of primary sources commonly metastasize to the lung and cause respiratory symptoms. Finally, therapy for other conditions, including both radiation and medications, can result in diseases of the chest.

Physical Examination

The clinician's suspicion for respiratory disease often begins with a patient's vital signs. The respiratory rate is often informative, whether elevated (tachypnea) or depressed (hypopnea). In addition, pulse oximetry should be measured as many patients with respiratory disease will have hypoxemia, either at rest or with exertion.

Simple observation of the patient is informative. Patients with respiratory disease may be in distress, often using accessory muscles of respiration to breathe. Severe kyphoscoliosis can result in restrictive pathophysiology. Inability to complete a sentence in conversation is generally a sign of severe impairment and should result in an expedited evaluation of the patient.

Auscultation

The majority of the manifestations of respiratory disease present with abnormalities of the chest examination. Wheezes suggest airway obstruction and are most commonly a manifestation of asthma. Peribronchial edema in the setting of congestive heart failure, often referred to as "cardiac asthma," can also result in diffuse wheezes as can any other process that causes narrowing of small airways. For this reason, clinicians must take care not to attribute all wheezing to asthma.

Rhonchi are a manifestation of obstruction of medium-sized airways, most often with secretions. In the acute setting, this may be a sign of viral or bacterial bronchitis. Chronic rhonchi suggest bronchiectasis or COPD. Bronchiectasis, or permanent dilation and irregularity of the bronchi, often causes what is referred to as a "musical chest" with a combination of rhonchi, pops, and squeaks. Stridor or a low-pitched, focal inspiratory wheeze usually heard over the neck, is a manifestation of upper airway obstruction and should result in an expedited evaluation of the patient as it can precede complete upper airway obstruction and respiratory failure.

Crackles, or rales, are commonly a sign of alveolar disease. A variety of processes that fill the alveoli with fluid result in crackles. Pneumonia, or infection of the lower respiratory tract and air spaces, may cause crackles. Pulmonary edema, of cardiogenic or noncardiogenic cause, is associated with crackles, generally more prominent at the bases. Interestingly, diseases that result in fibrosis of the interstitium (e.g., IPF) also result in crackles often sounding like Velcro being ripped apart. Although some clinicians make a distinction between "wet" and "dry" crackles, this has not been shown to be a reliable way to differentiate among etiologies of respiratory disease.

One way to help distinguish between crackles associated with alveolar fluid and those associated with interstitial fibrosis is to assess for egophony. Egophony is the auscultation of the sound "AH" instead of "EEE" when a patient phonates "EEE." This change in note is due to abnormal sound transmission through consolidated lung and will be present in pneumonia but not in IPF. Similarly, areas of alveolar filling have increased whispered pectoriloquy as well as transmission of larger airway sounds (i.e., bronchial breath sounds in a lung zone where vesicular breath sounds are expected).

The lack of breath sounds or diminished breath sounds can also help determine the etiology of respiratory disease. Patients with emphysema often have a quiet chest with diffusely decreased breath sounds. A pneumothorax or pleural effusion may present with an area of absent breath sounds, although this is not always the case.

Remainder of Chest Examination

In addition to auscultation, percussion of the chest helps distinguish among pathologic processes of the respiratory system. Diseases of the pleural space are often suggested by differences in percussion note. An area of dullness may suggest a pleural effusion, whereas hyperresonance, particularly at the apex, can indicate air in the pleural space (i.e., pneumothorax).

Tactile fremitus will be increased in areas of lung consolidation, such as pneumonia, and decreased with pleural effusion. Decreased diaphragmatic excursion can suggest neuromuscular weakness manifesting as respiratory disease or hyperinflation associated with COPD.

Careful attention should also be paid to the cardiac examination with particular emphasis on signs of right heart failure as it is associated with chronic hypoxemic lung disease and pulmonary vascular disease. The clinician should feel for a right ventricular heave and listen for a prominent P2 component of the second heart sound, as well as a right-sided S4.

Other Systems

Pedal edema, if symmetric, may suggest cor pulmonale, and if asymmetric may be due to deep venous thrombosis and associated pulmonary embolism. Jugular venous distention may also be a sign of volume overload associated with right heart failure. Pulsus paradoxus is an ominous sign in a patient with obstructive lung disease as it is associated with significant negative intrathoracic (pleural) pressures required for ventilation, and impending respiratory failure.

As stated earlier, rheumatologic disease may manifest primarily as lung disease. Owing to this association, particular attention should be paid to joint and skin examination. Clubbing can be found in many lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, IPF, and lung cancer, although it can also be associated with inflammatory bowel disease or as a congenital finding of no clinical importance. Patients with COPD do not usually have clubbing; thus, this sign should warrant an investigation for second process, most commonly an unrecognized bronchogenic carcinoma, in these patients. Cyanosis is seen in hypoxemic respiratory disorders that result in more than 5 g/dL deoxygenated hemoglobin.
 
Diagnostic Evaluation

The sequence of studies is dictated by the clinician's differential diagnosis determined by the history and physical examination. Acute respiratory symptoms are often evaluated with multiple tests obtained at the same time in order to diagnose any life threatening diseases rapidly (e.g., pulmonary embolism or multilobar pneumonia). In contrast, chronic dyspnea and cough can be evaluated in a more protracted, step-wise fashion.

Pulmonary Function Testing

(See also Chap. 253) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis. A diminished forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as less than 70% of predicted value) is diagnostic of obstruction. History as well as further testing can help distinguish among different obstructive diseases. COPD is almost exclusively seen in cigarette smokers. Asthmatics often show an acute response to inhaled bronchodilators (e.g., albuterol). In addition to the measurements of FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop. A plateau of the inspiratory or expiratory curves suggests large airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively.

Normal spirometry or spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including lung volume measurement and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity (TLC) less than 80% of the predicted value for a patient's age, race, gender, and height defines restrictive pathophysiology. Restriction can result from parenchymal disease, neuromuscular weakness, or chest wall or pleural diseases. Restriction with impaired gas exchange, as indicated by a decreased DLCO, suggests parenchymal lung disease. Additional testing, such as maximal expiratory pressure (MEP) and maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), can help diagnose neuromuscular weakness. Normal spirometry, normal lung volumes, and a low DLCO should prompt further evaluation for pulmonary vascular disease.

Arterial blood gas testing is often also helpful in assessing respiratory disease. Hypoxemia, while usually apparent with pulse oximetry, can be further evaluated with the measurement of arterial PO2 and the calculation of an alveolar gas and arterial blood oxygen tension difference [(A-a)DO2]. It should also be noted that at times, most often due to abnormal hemoglobins or non-oxygen hemoglobin-ligand complexes, pulse oximetry can be misleading (such as observed with carboxyhemoglobin). Diseases that cause ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunt physiology will have an increased (A-a)DO2 at rest. Arterial blood gas testing also allows for the measurement of arterial PCO2. Most commonly, acute or chronic obstructive lung disease presents with hypercarbia; however, many diseases of the respiratory system can cause hypercarbia if the resulting increase in work of breathing is greater than that which allows a patient to sustain an adequate minute ventilation.

Chest Imaging

(See Chap. e34) Most patients with disease of the respiratory system will undergo imaging of the chest as part of initial evaluation. Clinicians should generally begin with a plain chest radiograph, preferably posterior-anterior (PA) and lateral films. Several findings, including opacities of the parenchyma, blunting of the costophrenic angles, mass lesions, and volume loss, can be very helpful in determining an etiology. It should be noted that many diseases of the respiratory system, particularly those of the airways and pulmonary vasculature, are associated with a normal chest radiograph.

Subsequent computed tomography of the chest (CT scan) is often obtained. The CT scan allows better delineation of parenchymal processes, pleural disease, masses or nodules, and large airways. If administered with contrast, the pulmonary vasculature can be assessed with particular utility for determination of pulmonary emboli. Intravenous contrast also allows lymph nodes to be delineated in greater detail.
 
Further Studies

Depending on the clinician's suspicion, a variety of other studies may be obtained. Concern for large airway lesions may warrant bronchoscopy. This procedure may also be used to sample the alveolar space with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or to obtain nonsurgical lung biopsies. Blood testing may include assessment for hypercoagulable states in the setting of pulmonary vascular disease, serologic testing for infectious or rheumatologic disease, or assessment of inflammatory markers or leukocyte counts (e.g., eosinophils). Sputum evaluation for malignant cells or microorganisms may be appropriate. An echocardiogram to assess right- and left-sided heart function is often obtained. Finally, at times, a surgical lung biopsy is needed to diagnose certain diseases of the respiratory system. All of these studies will be guided by the preceding history, physical examination, pulmonary function testing, and chest imaging.
 
Further Readings

Irwin RS et al: Diagnosis and management of cough executive summary: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 129:1S, 2006 

 
Manning HL, Schwartzstein RM: Pathophysiology of dyspnea. N Engl J Med 333:1547, 1995[PMID: 7477171]  [Full Text]

 
Schwartzstein RM, Parker MJ: Respiratory Physiology: A Clinical Approach. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 2006 

 
Weinberger SE et al: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008 
 
 

^^
Introduction

The primary function of the respiratory system is to oxygenate blood and eliminate carbon dioxide, which requires that blood come into virtual contact with fresh air to facilitate diffusion of respiratory gases between blood and gas. This process occurs in the lung alveoli, where blood flowing through alveolar wall capillaries is separated from alveolar gas by an extremely thin membrane of flattened endothelial and epithelial cells, across which respiratory gases diffuse and equilibrate. Blood flow through the lung is unidirectional via a continuous vascular path, along which venous blood absorbs oxygen from and loses CO2 to inspired gas. The path for airflow, in contrast, reaches a dead end at the alveolar walls; as such, the alveolar space must be ventilated tidally, with inflow of fresh gas and outflow of alveolar gas alternating periodically at the respiratory rate (RR). To achieve an enormous alveolar surface area (typically 70 m2) for blood-gas diffusion within the modest volume of a thoracic cavity (typically 7 L), nature has distributed both blood flow and ventilation among millions of tiny alveoli through multigenerational branching of both pulmonary arteries and bronchial airways. As a consequence of variations in tube lengths and calibers along these pathways, and of the effects of gravity, tidal pressure fluctuations, and anatomic constraints from the chest wall, there is variation among alveoli in their relative ventilations and perfusions. Not surprisingly, for the lung to be most efficient in exchanging gas, the fresh gas ventilation of a given alveolus must be matched to its perfusion.

For the respiratory system to succeed in oxygenating blood and eliminating carbon dioxide, it must be able to ventilate the lung tidally to freshen alveolar gas; it must provide for perfusion of the individual alveolus in a manner proportional to its ventilation; and it must allow for adequate diffusion of respiratory gases between alveolar gas and capillary blood. Furthermore, it must be able to accommodate severalfold increases in the demand for oxygen uptake or CO2 elimination imposed by metabolic needs or acid-base derangement. Given these multiple requirements for normal operation, it is not surprising that many diseases disturb respiratory function. Here, we consider in greater detail the physiologic determinants of lung ventilation and perfusion, and how their matching distributions and rapid gas diffusion allow for normal gas exchange. We also discuss how common diseases derange these normal functions, and thereby impair gas exchange〞or at least raise the work of the respiratory muscles or heart to maintain adequate respiratory function.
 
Ventilation

It is useful to think about the respiratory system as having three independently functioning components〞the lung including its airways, the neuromuscular system, and the chest wall; the latter includes everything that is not lung or active neuromuscular system. As such, the mass of the respiratory muscles is part of the chest wall, while the force they generate is part of the neuromuscular system; the abdomen (especially an obese abdomen) and the heart (especially an enlarged heart) are, for these purposes, part of the chest wall. Each of these three components has mechanical properties that relate to its enclosed volume, or in the case of the neuromuscular system, the respiratory system volume at which it is operating, and to the rate of change of its volume (i.e., flow).

Volume-Related Mechanical Properties〞Statics

Figure 252-1 shows the volume-related properties of each component of the respiratory system. Due both to surface tension at the air-liquid interface between alveolar wall lining fluid and alveolar gas and to elastic recoil of the lung tissue itself, the lung requires a positive transmural pressure difference between alveolar gas and its pleural surface to stay inflated; this difference is called the elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and it increases with lung volume. Importantly, the lung becomes rather stiff at high lung volumes, so that relatively small volume changes are accompanied by large changes in transpulmonary pressure; in contrast, the lung is compliant at lower lung volumes, including those at which tidal breathing normally occurs. Note that at zero inflation pressure, even normal lungs retain some air in the alveoli. This occurs because the small peripheral airways of the lung are tethered open by radially outward pull from inflated lung parenchyma attached to adventitia; as the lung deflates during exhalation, those small airways are pulled open progressively less, and eventually they close, trapping some gas in the alveoli. This effect can be exaggerated with age and especially with obstructive airways diseases, resulting in gas trapping at quite large lung volumes.

Figure 252-1

 
 
 
Pressure-volume curves of the isolated lung, isolated chest wall, combined respiratory system, inspiratory muscles, and expiratory muscles. FRC, functional residual capacity; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 


The elastic behavior of the passive chest wall (i.e., in the absence of neuromuscular activation) differs markedly from that of the lung. Whereas the lung tends toward full deflation with no distending (transmural) pressure, the chest wall encloses a large volume when pleural pressure equals body surface (atmospheric) pressure. Furthermore, the chest wall is compliant at high enclosed volumes, readily expanding even further in response to increases in transmural pressure. The chest wall also remains compliant at small negative transmural pressures (i.e., when pleural pressure falls slightly below atmospheric pressure), but as the volume enclosed by the chest wall becomes quite small in response to large negative transmural pressures, the passive chest wall becomes stiff due to squeezing together of ribs and intercostal muscles, diaphragm stretch, displacement of abdominal contents, and straining of ligaments and bony articulations. Under normal circumstances, the lung and the passive chest wall enclose essentially the same volume, the only difference between these being the volumes of the pleural fluid and of the lung parenchyma (both quite small). As such, and because the lung and chest wall function in mechanical series, the pressure required to displace the passive respiratory system (lungs + chest wall) at any volume is simply the sum of the elastic recoil pressure of the lungs and the transmural pressure across the chest wall. When plotted against respiratory system volume, this relationship assumes a sigmoid shape, exhibiting stiffness at high lung volumes (imparted by the lung), stiffness at low lung volumes (imparted by the chest wall, or sometimes by airway closure), and compliance in the middle range of lung volumes. There is also a passive resting point of the respiratory system, attained when alveolar gas pressure equals body surface pressure (i.e., the transrespiratory system pressure is zero). At this volume [called functional residual capacity (FRC)], the outward recoil of the chest wall is balanced exactly by the inward recoil of the lung. As these recoils are transmitted through the pleural fluid, the latter is pulled both outward and inward simultaneously at FRC, and, thus, its pressure falls below atmospheric pressure (typically, 每5 cmH2O).

The normal passive respiratory system would equilibrate at FRC and remain there were it not for the actions of respiratory muscles. The inspiratory muscles act on the chest wall to generate the equivalent of positive pressure across the lungs and passive chest wall, while the expiratory muscles generate the equivalent of negative transrespiratory pressure. The maximal pressures these sets of muscles can generate varies with the lung volume at which they operate, due to length-tension relationships in striated muscle sarcomeres and to changes in mechanical advantage as the angles of insertion change with lung volume (Fig. 252-1). Nonetheless, under normal conditions the respiratory muscles are substantially "overpowered" for their roles, and generate more than adequate force to drive the respiratory system to its stiffness extremes, as determined by the lung [total lung capacity (TLC)] or chest wall or airway closure [residual volume (RV)]; importantly, the latter always prevents the adult lung from emptying completely under normal circumstances. The excursion between full and minimal lung inflation is called vital capacity (VC; Fig. 252-2), and is readily seen to be the difference between volumes at two unrelated stiffness extremes〞one determined by the lung (TLC) and the other determined by the chest wall or airways (RV). Thus, although VC is easy to measure (see below), it tells one little about the intrinsic properties of the respiratory system. It is much more useful, as we shall see, for the clinician to know TLC and RV individually.

Figure 252-2

 
 
 
Spirogram demonstrating a slow vital capacity maneuver and various lung volumes.
 
 

Flow-Related Mechanical Properties〞Dynamics

The passive chest wall and active neuromuscular system do exhibit mechanical behaviors related to the rate of change of volume, but these become quantitatively important only at markedly supraphysiologic breathing frequencies (e.g., during high-frequency mechanical ventilation), and, thus, we shall not address these here. In contrast, the dynamic airflow properties of the lung substantially determine the ability to ventilate and contribute importantly to the work of breathing, and are often deranged by disease. Understanding these properties is, therefore, well worthwhile.

As with flow of any fluid (gas or liquid) in any tube, maintenance of airflow within the pulmonary airways requires a pressure gradient that falls along the direction of flow, the magnitude of which is determined by the flow rate and the frictional resistance to flow. During quiet tidal breathing, the pressure gradients driving inspiratory or expiratory flow are small owing to the very low frictional resistance of normal pulmonary airways (normally <2 cmH2O/L per second). However, during rapid exhalation another phenomenon reduces flow below that which would have been expected were frictional resistance the only impediment to flow. This phenomenon is called dynamic airflow limitation, and it occurs because the bronchial airways through which air is exhaled are collapsible rather than rigid (Fig. 252-3). An important anatomic feature of the pulmonary airways is its treelike branching structure. While the individual airways in each successive generation, from most proximal (trachea) to most distal (respiratory bronchioles), are smaller than those of the parent generation, their number increases exponentially such that the summed cross-sectional area of the airways becomes very large toward the lung periphery. Because flow (volume/time) is constant along the airway tree, the velocity of airflow (flow/summed cross-sectional area) is much greater in the central airways than in the peripheral airways. During exhalation, gas leaving the alveoli must therefore gain velocity as it proceeds toward the mouth. The energy required for this "convective" acceleration is drawn from the component of gas energy manifested as its local pressure, thereby reducing intraluminal gas pressure (the Bernoulli effect), reducing airway transmural pressure, reducing airway size (Fig. 252-3), and reducing flow. If one tries to exhale more forcefully, the local velocity increases further and reduces airway size further, resulting in no net increase in flow. Under these circumstances, flow has reached its maximum possible value, or its flow limit. Lungs normally exhibit such dynamic airflow limitation. The maximum value of flow is related to the gas density, airway cross-section and distensibility, the elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and the frictional pressure loss to the flow-limiting airway site. Under normal conditions, maximal expiratory flow falls with lung volume (Fig. 252-4), due primarily to the dependence of lung recoil pressure on lung volume (Fig. 252-1). In pulmonary fibrosis, lung recoil pressure is increased at any lung volume, and, thus, the maximum expiratory flow is relatively elevated when considered in relation to lung volume. Conversely, in emphysema, lung recoil pressure is reduced, which is a principal mechanism by which maximal expiratory flows fall. Diseases that narrow the airway lumen at any transmural pressure, such as asthma or chronic bronchitis, or which cause excessive airway collapsibility, like tracheomalacia, also reduce maximal expiratory flow.

Figure 252-3

 
 
 
Luminal area versus transmural pressure relationship. Transmural pressure represents the pressure difference across the airway wall from inside to outside.
 
 

Figure 252-4

 
 
 
 
 
Flow-volume loops. A. Normal. B. Airflow obstruction. C. Fixed central airway obstruction. RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 

The Bernoulli effect also acts during inspiration, but the more negative pleural pressures during inspiration lower the pressure outside of airways, thereby increasing transmural pressure and promoting airway expansion. Thus, inspiratory airflow limitation seldom occurs due to diffuse pulmonary airway disease. Conversely, extrathoracic airway narrowing (as due to a tracheal adenoma or post-tracheostomy stricture) can lead to inspiratory airflow limitation (Fig. 252-4).

The phenomenon of flow limitation and the importance of airway size and distensibility and of upstream pressure (lung elastic recoil pressure for forced exhalation) can easily be appreciated by sniffing through one's nose with low, medium, or substantial effort. If one keeps the nostrils relaxed, increasing from low to medium inspiratory effort raises inspiratory flow through the nose somewhat, but inhaling even harder will likely not increase inspiratory nasal airflow more but, rather, will just collapse the nares, a manifestation of dynamic airflow limitation. One can increase inspiratory nasal airflow, however, by flaring one's nostrils using the alae nasi muscles. This increases nostril area (reducing velocity for a given flow through the nares) and stiffens the nostril walls (reducing their narrowing in response to negative transmural pressure). Springlike nasal strips sometimes used by football players have the same effect. In patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a narrowed and excessively compliant pharyngeal airway also collapses in response to negative transmural pressure generated by the Bernoulli effect and by inspiratory frictional pressure loss in the nose (which is why an upper respiratory infection often worsens OSA). Increasing the upstream driving pressure from which these phenomena lower intrapharyngeal gas pressure with positive nasal airway pressure keeps pharyngeal transmural pressure positive, preventing inspiratory airflow limitation. Inspiratory airflow limitation in the nose or in the pharynx of patients with OSA closely parallels expiratory flow limitation in the lung.

Work of Breathing

In health, the elastic (volume change每related) and dynamic (flow-related) loads that must be overcome to ventilate the lungs at rest are small, and the work required of the respiratory muscles is minimal. However, the work of breathing can increase considerably, due either to requirement for substantially increased ventilation, an abnormally increased mechanical load, or both. As discussed below, the rate of ventilation is primarily set by the need to eliminate carbon dioxide, and, thus, ventilation increases during exercise (sometimes more than 20-fold) and during metabolic acidosis as a compensatory response. Naturally, the work rate required to overcome the elasticity of the respiratory system increases with both the depth and frequency of tidal breaths, while the work required to overcome the dynamic load increases with total ventilation. A modest increase of ventilation is most efficiently achieved by increasing tidal volume but not respiratory rate, which is the normal ventilatory response to lower level exercise. At high levels of exercise, deep breathing persists, but respiratory rate also increases. The pattern chosen by the respiratory controller minimizes the work of breathing.

Work of breathing also increases when disease reduces the compliance of the respiratory system or increases the resistance to airflow. The former occurs commonly in diseases of the lung parenchyma (interstitial processes or fibrosis, alveolar filling diseases such as pulmonary edema or pneumonia, or substantial lung resection), and the latter occurs in obstructive airways diseases such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and cystic fibrosis. Furthermore, severe airflow obstruction can functionally reduce the compliance of the respiratory system by leading to dynamic hyperinflation. In this scenario, expiratory flows slowed by the obstructive airways disease may be insufficient to allow for complete exhalation during the expiratory phase of tidal breathing; as a result, the "functional residual capacity" from which the next breath is inhaled is greater than the static FRC. With repetition of incomplete exhalations of each tidal breath, the operating FRC becomes dynamically elevated, sometimes to a level that approaches TLC. At these high lung volumes, the respiratory system is much less compliant than at normal breathing volumes, and, thus, the elastic work of each tidal breath is also increased. The dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation that accompanies severe airflow obstruction causes patients to sense difficulty in breathing in〞even though the pathophysiologic abnormality at root cause is expiratory airflow obstruction.

Adequacy of Ventilation

As noted above, the respiratory control system that sets the rate of ventilation responds to chemical signals, including arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen tensions and blood pH, and to volitional needs, such as the need to inhale deeply before playing a long phrase on the trumpet. Disturbances in ventilation are discussed in Chap. 264. Here, we focus on the relationship between ventilation of the lung and carbon dioxide elimination.

At the end of each tidal exhalation, the conducting airways are filled with alveolar gas that had not reached the mouth when expiratory flow stopped. During the ensuing inhalation, fresh gas immediately enters the airway tree at the mouth, but the gas first entering the alveoli at the start of inhalation is that same alveolar gas in the conducting airways that had just left the alveoli. As such, fresh gas does not enter the alveoli until the volume of the conducting airways has been inspired. This volume is called the anatomic dead space. Quiet breathing with tidal volumes smaller than the anatomic dead space introduces no fresh gas into the alveoli at all; only that part of the inspired tidal volume (VT) that is greater than the dead space (VD) introduces fresh gas into the alveoli. Importantly, the dead space can be further increased functionally if some of the inspired tidal volume is delivered to a part of the lung that receives no pulmonary blood flow, and, thus, cannot contribute to gas exchange, as can occur in the portion of the lung distal to a large pulmonary embolus. As such, exhaled minute ventilation (E = VT x RR) includes a component of dead space ventilation (D = VD x RR) and a component of fresh gas alveolar ventilation (A = [VT 每 VD] x RR). Carbon dioxide elimination from the alveoli is equal to A times the difference in CO2 fraction between inspired air (essentially zero) and alveolar gas (typically 5.6%, after correcting for humidification of inspired air, corresponding to 40 mmHg). In the steady state, the alveolar fraction of CO2 is equal to the metabolic CO2 production divided by the alveolar ventilation. Because, as discussed below, alveolar and arterial CO2 tensions are equal, and because the respiratory controller normally strives to maintain arterial PCO2 (PaCO2) at 40 mmHg, the adequacy of alveolar ventilation is reflected in PaCO2. If PaCO2 falls much below 40 mmHg, alveolar hyperventilation is present, and if PaCO2 exceeds 40 mmHg, then alveolar hypoventilation is present. Ventilatory failure is characterized by extreme alveolar hypoventilation.

As a consequence of oxygen uptake of alveolar gas into capillary blood, alveolar oxygen tension falls below that of inspired gas. The rate of oxygen uptake (determined by the body's metabolic oxygen consumption) is related to the average rate of metabolic carbon dioxide production and their ratio, called the "respiratory quotient" (R = CO2/ O2), depends largely on the fuel being metabolized. For a typical A merican diet, R is usually around 0.85, and more oxygen is absorbed than CO2 is excreted. Together, these phenomena allow the estimation of alveolar oxygen tension, according to the following relationship, known as the alveolar gas equation:

    PaO2 = FIO2 x (Pbar 每 PH2O) 每 PaCO2/R

The alveolar gas equation also highlights the influences of inspired oxygen fraction (FIO2), barometric pressure (Pbar), and vapor pressure of water (PH2O = 47 mmHg at 37∼C) in addition to alveolar ventilation (which sets PACO2) in determining PAO2. An implication of the alveolar gas equation is that severe arterial hypoxemia rarely occurs as a pure consequence of alveolar hypoventilation at sea level while breathing air. The potential for alveolar hypoventilation to induce severe hypoxemia with otherwise normal lungs increases as Pbar falls with increasing altitude.
 
Gas Exchange

Diffusion

For oxygen to be delivered to the peripheral tissues, it must pass from alveolar gas into alveolar capillary blood by diffusing through alveolar membrane. The aggregate alveolar membrane is highly optimized for this process, with a very large surface area and minimal thickness. Diffusion through the alveolar membrane is so efficient in the human lung that in most circumstances its hemoglobin becomes fully oxygen saturated by the time a red blood cell has traveled just one-third the length of the alveolar capillary. As such, uptake of alveolar oxygen is ordinarily limited by the amount of blood transiting the alveolar capillaries rather than how rapidly oxygen can diffuse across the membrane; thus, oxygen uptake from the lung is said to be "perfusion limited." Carbon dioxide also equilibrates rapidly across the alveolar membrane. Thus, the oxygen and CO2 tensions in capillary blood leaving a normal alveolus are essentially equal to those in alveolar gas. In only rare circumstances is oxygen uptake from normal lungs diffusion-limited, which can occur at high altitude and/or by high-performance athletes exerting maximum effort. Diffusion limitation can also occur in interstitial lung disease if substantially thickened alveolar walls remain perfused.

Ventilation-Perfusion Heterogeneity

As noted above, for gas exchange to be most efficient, the ventilation to each individual alveolus should be matched to the perfusion to its accompanying capillaries for each of millions of alveoli. Due to the differential effects of gravity on lung mechanics and blood flow throughout the lung, and due to differences of airway and vascular architecture among various respiratory paths, there is minor ventilation/perfusion heterogeneity even in the normal lung; however, / heterogeneity can be particularly marked in disease. Two extreme examples are (1) ventilation of unperfused lung distal to a pulmonary embolus, in which ventilation of the physiologic dead space is "wasted" in the sense that it does not contribute to gas exchange; and (2) perfusion of nonventilated lung, a condition known as a "shunt." The latter allows venous blood to pass through the lung unaltered; when mixed with fully oxygenated blood leaving other well-ventilated lung units, shunted venous blood disproportionately lowers the mixed arterial PaO2, due to the nonlinear oxygen content versus the PO2 relationship of hemoglobin (Fig. 252-5). Furthermore, the resulting arterial hypoxemia is refractory to supplemental inspired oxygen. This is because raising inspired FIO2 has no effect on alveolar gas tensions in nonventilated alveoli, and while raising inspired FIO2 does increase PAO2 in ventilated alveoli, the oxygen content of blood exiting ventilated units increases only slightly as hemoglobin will already have been nearly fully saturated and the solubility of oxygen in plasma is quite small.

Figure 252-5

 
 
 
Influence of air vs oxygen breathing on mixed arterial oxygenation in shunt and ventilation/perfusion heterogeneity. Partial pressure of oxygen (mmHg) and oxygen saturations are shown for mixed venous blood, end capillary blood for normal versus affected alveoli, and for mixed arterial blood.
 
 

More commonly occurring than the two extreme examples given above is a widening of the distribution of ventilation/ perfusion ratios; such /  heterogeneity is a common consequence of lung disease. In this circumstance, perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli results in the incomplete oxygenation of exiting blood. When mixed with well-oxygenated blood leaving higher /  regions, this partially preoxygenated blood disproportionately lowers arterial PaO2, although to a lower extent than does a similar perfusion fraction of blood leaving regions of pure shunt. In addition, in contrast to shunt regions, inhalation of supplemental oxygen does raise the PAO2 even in relatively underventilated low /  regions, and so the arterial hypoxemia induced by /  heterogeneity is typically responsive to oxygen therapy (Fig. 252-5).

In sum, arterial hypoxemia can be caused by substantial reduction of inspired oxygen tension, by severe alveolar hypoventilation, or by perfusion of relatively underventilated (low / ) or completely unventilated (shunt) lung regions, and, in unusual circumstances, by limitation of gas diffusion.

Approach to the Patient: Disturbances of Respiratory Function

There are many diseases that injure the respiratory system, but there are relatively few ways in which it responds to that injury. For this reason, the pattern of physiologic abnormalities may or may not provide sufficient information to discriminate among conditions. The following studies are commonly used to characterize a patient's respiratory function and often lead to a better understanding of the underlying disorder.

Measurement of Ventilatory Function

Lung Volumes

Figure 252-2 demonstrates a spirometry tracing in which the volume of air entering or exiting the lung is plotted over time. In a slow vital capacity maneuver, the subject inhales from FRC, fully inflating the lungs to TLC, and then the patient exhales slowly to RV; VC is the difference between TLC and RV, and represents the maximum excursion of the respiratory system. Spirometry discloses relative volume changes during these maneuvers, but cannot reveal the absolute volumes at which they occur. To determine absolute lung volumes, two approaches are commonly used〞inert gas dilution and body plethysmography. In the former, a known amount of a nonabsorbable inert gas (usually helium or neon) is inhaled in a single large breath or is rebreathed from a closed circuit; the inert gas is diluted by the gas resident in the lung at the time of inhalation, and its final concentration reveals the volume of resident gas contributing to the dilution. A drawback of this method is that regions of the lung that ventilate poorly (e.g., due to airflow obstruction) may not receive much inspired inert gas and so do not contribute to its dilution. As such, inert gas dilution often underestimates true lung volumes.

In the second approach, FRC is determined by measuring the compressibility of gas within the chest, which is proportional to the volume of gas being compressed. The patient sits in a body plethysmograph, a chamber usually made of transparent plastic to minimize claustrophobia, and at the end of a normal tidal breath (i.e., when lung volume is FRC) is instructed to pant against a closed shutter, thus, periodically compressing air within the lung slightly. Pressure fluctuations at the mouth and volume fluctuations within the body box (equal but opposite to those of the chest) are measured, and from these the thoracic gas volume is calculated using Boyle's law. Once FRC is obtained, TLC and RV are calculated by adding the inspiratory capacity or subtracting expiratory reserve volume, respectively, values determined during spirometry (Fig. 252-2). The most important determinants of healthy individuals' lung volumes are height, age, and gender, but there is considerable additional normal variation beyond that accounted for by these parameters. In addition, race influences lung volumes; on average TLC values are about 12% smaller in African Americans and 6% smaller in Asian Americans when compared with those of white Americans. In practice, a mean "normal" value is predicted by multivariate regression equations using height, age, and gender, and the patient's value is divided by the predicted value (often with "race correction" applied) to determine "percent predicted." For most measures of lung function, 85每115% of the predicted value can be normal, but in health the various lung volumes tend to scale together. For example, if one is "normal big" with TLC 110% of the predicted value, then all other lung volumes and spirometry values will also approximate 110% of their respective predicted values. This pattern is particularly helpful in evaluating airflow, as discussed below.

Air Flow

As noted above, spirometry plays a key role in lung volume determination. But even more often, spirometry is used to measure air flow, which reflects the dynamic properties of the lung. During a forced vital capacity maneuver, the patient inhales to TLC and then exhales rapidly and forcefully to RV; this ensures that flow limitation has been achieved, so that the precise effort made has little influence on actual flow. The total amount of air exhaled is the forced vital capacity (FVC) and the amount of air exhaled in the first second is the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1); note that FEV1 is a flow rate, as it reveals volume change per time. As with lung volumes, an individual's maximal expiratory flows should be compared to predicted values based on height, age, and gender. While the FEV1/FVC ratio is typically reduced in airflow obstruction, airflow obstruction can also reduce FVC by raising RV. If this occurs, the FEV1/FVC ratio may be "artifactually normal," erroneously suggesting that airflow obstruction is absent. To circumvent this problem, it is useful to compare FEV1 as a fraction of its predicted value with TLC as a fraction of its predicted value. In health, these are usually similar. In contrast, even an FEV1 value that is 95% of its predicted value may actually be relatively low if TLC is 110% of its respective prediction. In this case, airflow obstruction might be present, despite the "normal" value for FEV1.

The relationships among volume, flow, and time during spirometry are best displayed in two plots〞the spirogram (volume vs. time) and the flow-volume loop (flow vs. volume) (Fig. 252-4). In conditions that cause airflow obstruction, the site of obstruction can sometimes be correlated with the shape of the flow-volume loop. In diseases that cause lower airway obstruction such as asthma or emphysema, flows decrease more rapidly with declining lung volumes leading to a characteristic scooping of the flow-volume loop. In contrast, fixed upper airway obstruction typically leads to inspiratory and/or expiratory flow plateaus (Fig. 252-4).

Airways Resistance

The total resistance of the pulmonary and upper airways is measured in the same body plethysmography used to measure FRC. The patient is asked once again to pant, but this time against a closed and then opened shutter. Panting against the closed shutter reveals the thoracic gas volume as above. When the shutter is opened, flow is now directed to and from the body box, so that volume fluctuations in the box reveal the extent of thoracic gas compression, which in turn reveals the pressure fluctuations driving flow. Flow is measured simultaneously, allowing the calculation of lung resistance (as flow divided by pressure). In health, airways resistance is very small, <2 cmH2O/L per second, and half of this resides within the upper airway. Of the lung's contribution, most of the resistance originates in the central airways. For this reason, airways resistance measurement tends to be insensitive to peripheral airflow obstruction.

Respiratory Muscle Strength

To measure respiratory muscle strength, the patient is instructed to exhale or inhale with maximum effort against a closed shutter while pressure is monitored at the mouth. Pressures greater than ㊣60 cmH2O at FRC are considered adequate, making unlikely the possibility that respiratory muscle weakness accounts for any other ventilatory dysfunction that might be identified.

Measurement of Gas Exchange

Diffusing Capacity

This test uses a small (and safe) amount of carbon monoxide to measure gas exchange across the alveolar membrane during a 10-second breath hold. Carbon monoxide in exhaled breath is analyzed to determine the quantity of CO absorbed by crossing the alveolar membrane and combining with hemoglobin in red blood cells. This "single-breath diffusing capacity" [diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)] value increases with the surface area available for diffusion and the amount of hemoglobin within the capillaries, and varies inversely with alveolar membrane thickness. Thus, DLCO decreases in diseases that thicken or destroy alveolar membranes (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema), curtail the pulmonary vasculature (e.g., pulmonary hypertension), or reduce alveolar capillary hemoglobin (e.g., anemia). Single-breath diffusing capacity may be elevated in acute congestive heart failure, asthma, polycythemia, and pulmonary hemorrhage.

Arterial Blood Gases

The effectiveness of gas exchange can be assessed by measuring the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in a sample of blood obtained by arterial puncture. The oxygen content of blood (CaO2) depends upon arterial saturation (%O2Sat), which is set by PaO2, pH, and PaCO2 according to the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve; CaO2 can also be measured by oximetry (see below):

    CaO2 (mL/dL = 1.34 (mL/dL/g) x [hemoglobin](g) x%O2Sat + 0.003 (mL/dL/mmHg) x PaO2 (mmHg)

Pulse Oximetry

Continuous monitoring of arterial blood gases requires either repeated arterial punctures or an indwelling arterial catheter, and so may be difficult in many circumstances. Instead, the oxygen saturation fraction of hemoglobin can be measured continuously using pulse oximetry, a tool that measures the absorbance by hemoglobin of several wavelengths of light transmitted across a finger, toe, or ear by a noninvasive probe. However, since oxygen content varies relatively little with PaO2 at saturations above 90%, it is difficult to know the precise PaO2 using this device. In addition, as noted above, PaCO2 is needed to fully assess the mechanism of hypoxemia, a value that is not revealed by pulse oximetry.
 
Clinical Correlations: Typical Examples

This chapter has highlighted the physiologic processes underlying respiratory system function and the techniques used by clinicians to assess them. Figure 252-6 lists abnormalities in pulmonary function testing typically found in a number of common respiratory disorders and highlights the simultaneous occurrence of multiple physiologic abnormalities. Importantly, some of these respiratory disorders can coexist, which results in more complex superposition of these abnormalities.

Figure 252-6

 
 
 
Commonly seen abnormalities of pulmonary function (see text). Pulmonary function values are expressed as percent of normal predicted values, except for Raw, which is expressed as cmH2O/L/s (normal <2 cmH2O/L/s). The figures at the bottom of each column show typical configuration of flow-volume loops in each condition, including the flow-volume relationship during tidal breathing. b.d., bronchodilator; DLCO, diffusion capacity of lung for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in one second; FRC, functional residual capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity; Raw, airways resistance; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Increased Elastic Recoil〞Example: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis raises lung recoil at all lung volumes, thereby lowering TLC, FRC, and RV, as well as FVC. Maximal expiratory flows are also reduced compared with normal values, but are relatively elevated when considered in relation to lung volumes. The latter occurs both because the increased lung recoil drives greater maximal flow at any lung volume and because airway diameters are relatively increased due to greater radially outward traction exerted on bronchi by the stiff lung parenchyma. Airway resistance is also normal, for the same reason. Pulmonary capillaries are destroyed by the fibrotic process resulting in marked reduction in diffusing capacity. Oxygenation is often severely reduced due to persistent perfusion of alveolar units that are relatively underventilated due to fibrosis of nearby (and mechanically linked) lung. The flow-volume loop looks like a miniature version of a normal loop but is shifted toward lower absolute lung volumes and displays maximum expiratory flows that are increased for any given volume when compared to the normal tracing.

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Chest Wall Abnormality〞Example: Moderate Obesity

As the size of the average American continues to increase, this pattern may become the most commonly seen of pulmonary function abnormalities. In moderate obesity, the outward recoil of the chest wall is blunted due to the weight of chest wall fat and to the space occupied by intraabdominal fat. As such, preserved inward recoil of the lung now overbalances the reduced outward recoil of the chest wall, and FRC falls. Because respiratory muscle strength and lung recoil remain normal, TLC is typically unchanged (although TLC may fall in massive obesity) and RV is normal (but may be reduced in massive obesity). Mild hypoxemia may be present, due to perfusion of alveolar units that are poorly ventilated because of airway closure that occurs in dependent portions of the lung while breathing near the reduced FRC. Flows remain normal, as does DLCO, unless obstructive sleep apnea (which often accompanies obesity) and associated chronic intermittent hypoxemia have induced pulmonary arterial hypertension, in which case DLCO may be low.

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Reduced Muscle Strength〞Example: Myasthenia Gravis

FRC remains normal, as both lung recoil and passive chest wall recoil are normal. However, TLC is low and RV is elevated, as respiratory muscle strength is insufficient to push the passive respiratory system fully toward either volume extreme. Caught between the low TLC and the elevated RV, FVC and FEV1 are reduced as "innocent bystanders." As airway size and the lung vasculature are unaffected, both airways resistance (Raw) and DLCO are normal. Oxygenation is normal unless weakness becomes so severe that the patient has insufficient strength to reopen collapsed alveoli during sighs, with resulting atelectasis.

Airflow Obstruction Due to Decreased Airway Diameter〞Example: Acute Asthma

During an episode of acute asthma, luminal narrowing due to smooth muscle constriction and inflammation and thickening within the small- and medium-sized bronchi raise frictional resistance and reduce airflow. Scooping of the flow-volume loop is caused by reduction of airflow, especially at lower lung volumes. Often, airflow obstruction can be reversed by inhalation of 2-adrenergic agonists acutely or by treatment with inhaled steroids chronically. Total lung capacity (TLC) usually remains normal (although elevated TLC is sometimes seen in long-standing asthma), but FRC may be dynamically elevated. RV is often increased due to exaggerated airway closure at low lung volumes, and this elevation of RV reduces FVC. Because central airways are narrowed, airways resistance is usually elevated. Mild arterial hypoxemia is often present due to perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli distal to obstructed airways (and is responsive to oxygen supplementation), but DLCO is normal or mildly elevated.

Airflow Obstruction Due to Decreased Elastic Recoil〞Example: Severe Emphysema

Loss of lung elastic recoil in severe emphysema results in pulmonary hyperinflation, of which elevated TLC is the hallmark. FRC is more severely elevated due both to loss of lung elastic recoil and to dynamic hyperinflation (the same phenomenon as autoPEEP, which is the unintended positive end-expiratory pressure). Residual volume is very severely elevated due to airway closure and because exhalation toward RV may take so long that RV cannot be reached before the patient must inhale again. Both FVC and FEV1 are markedly decreased, the former due to the severe elevation of RV, and the latter because loss of lung elastic recoil reduces the pressure driving maximal expiratory flow and also reduces tethering open of small intrapulmonary airways. The flow-volume loop demonstrates marked scooping of the flow-volume loop, with an initial transient spike of flow attributable largely to expulsion of air from collapsing central airways at the onset of forced exhalation. Otherwise, the central airways remain relatively unaffected, so Raw is normal in "pure" emphysema. Loss of alveolar surface and capillaries in the alveolar walls reduces DLCO, but because poorly ventilated emphysematous acini are also poorly perfused (due to loss of their capillaries), arterial hypoxemia is usually not seen at rest until emphysema becomes very severe. However, during exercise, PaO2 may fall precipitously if extensive destruction of the pulmonary vasculature prevents a sufficient increase in cardiac output and mixed venous oxygen content falls substantially. Under these circumstances, any venous admixture through low / . Q units has a particularly marked effect in lowering mixed arterial oxygen tension.

Acknowledgement

The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Steven E. Weinberger and Irene M. Rosen to this chapter in previous edits and the helpful contributions of Drs. Mary Strek and Jeff Jacobson.
 
Further Readings

Hyatt RE et al: Interpretation of Pulmonary Function Testing, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009 

 
MacIntyre N: Standardization of the single-breath determination of carbon monoxide uptake in the lung. Eur Respir J 26:720, 2005[PMID: 16204605]  [Full Text]

 
Miller MR et al: Standardization of spirometry. Eur Respir J 26:319, 2005[PMID: 16055882]  [Full Text]

 
Wanger J: Standardization of measurements of lung volumes. Eur Respir J 26:511, 2005[PMID: 16135736]  [Full Text]

 
Weinberger SE: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004 
 
 


^^
Introduction

The primary function of the respiratory system is to oxygenate blood and eliminate carbon dioxide, which requires that blood come into virtual contact with fresh air to facilitate diffusion of respiratory gases between blood and gas. This process occurs in the lung alveoli, where blood flowing through alveolar wall capillaries is separated from alveolar gas by an extremely thin membrane of flattened endothelial and epithelial cells, across which respiratory gases diffuse and equilibrate. Blood flow through the lung is unidirectional via a continuous vascular path, along which venous blood absorbs oxygen from and loses CO2 to inspired gas. The path for airflow, in contrast, reaches a dead end at the alveolar walls; as such, the alveolar space must be ventilated tidally, with inflow of fresh gas and outflow of alveolar gas alternating periodically at the respiratory rate (RR). To achieve an enormous alveolar surface area (typically 70 m2) for blood-gas diffusion within the modest volume of a thoracic cavity (typically 7 L), nature has distributed both blood flow and ventilation among millions of tiny alveoli through multigenerational branching of both pulmonary arteries and bronchial airways. As a consequence of variations in tube lengths and calibers along these pathways, and of the effects of gravity, tidal pressure fluctuations, and anatomic constraints from the chest wall, there is variation among alveoli in their relative ventilations and perfusions. Not surprisingly, for the lung to be most efficient in exchanging gas, the fresh gas ventilation of a given alveolus must be matched to its perfusion.

For the respiratory system to succeed in oxygenating blood and eliminating carbon dioxide, it must be able to ventilate the lung tidally to freshen alveolar gas; it must provide for perfusion of the individual alveolus in a manner proportional to its ventilation; and it must allow for adequate diffusion of respiratory gases between alveolar gas and capillary blood. Furthermore, it must be able to accommodate severalfold increases in the demand for oxygen uptake or CO2 elimination imposed by metabolic needs or acid-base derangement. Given these multiple requirements for normal operation, it is not surprising that many diseases disturb respiratory function. Here, we consider in greater detail the physiologic determinants of lung ventilation and perfusion, and how their matching distributions and rapid gas diffusion allow for normal gas exchange. We also discuss how common diseases derange these normal functions, and thereby impair gas exchange〞or at least raise the work of the respiratory muscles or heart to maintain adequate respiratory function.
 
Ventilation

It is useful to think about the respiratory system as having three independently functioning components〞the lung including its airways, the neuromuscular system, and the chest wall; the latter includes everything that is not lung or active neuromuscular system. As such, the mass of the respiratory muscles is part of the chest wall, while the force they generate is part of the neuromuscular system; the abdomen (especially an obese abdomen) and the heart (especially an enlarged heart) are, for these purposes, part of the chest wall. Each of these three components has mechanical properties that relate to its enclosed volume, or in the case of the neuromuscular system, the respiratory system volume at which it is operating, and to the rate of change of its volume (i.e., flow).

Volume-Related Mechanical Properties〞Statics

Figure 252-1 shows the volume-related properties of each component of the respiratory system. Due both to surface tension at the air-liquid interface between alveolar wall lining fluid and alveolar gas and to elastic recoil of the lung tissue itself, the lung requires a positive transmural pressure difference between alveolar gas and its pleural surface to stay inflated; this difference is called the elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and it increases with lung volume. Importantly, the lung becomes rather stiff at high lung volumes, so that relatively small volume changes are accompanied by large changes in transpulmonary pressure; in contrast, the lung is compliant at lower lung volumes, including those at which tidal breathing normally occurs. Note that at zero inflation pressure, even normal lungs retain some air in the alveoli. This occurs because the small peripheral airways of the lung are tethered open by radially outward pull from inflated lung parenchyma attached to adventitia; as the lung deflates during exhalation, those small airways are pulled open progressively less, and eventually they close, trapping some gas in the alveoli. This effect can be exaggerated with age and especially with obstructive airways diseases, resulting in gas trapping at quite large lung volumes.

Figure 252-1

 
 
 
Pressure-volume curves of the isolated lung, isolated chest wall, combined respiratory system, inspiratory muscles, and expiratory muscles. FRC, functional residual capacity; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 


The elastic behavior of the passive chest wall (i.e., in the absence of neuromuscular activation) differs markedly from that of the lung. Whereas the lung tends toward full deflation with no distending (transmural) pressure, the chest wall encloses a large volume when pleural pressure equals body surface (atmospheric) pressure. Furthermore, the chest wall is compliant at high enclosed volumes, readily expanding even further in response to increases in transmural pressure. The chest wall also remains compliant at small negative transmural pressures (i.e., when pleural pressure falls slightly below atmospheric pressure), but as the volume enclosed by the chest wall becomes quite small in response to large negative transmural pressures, the passive chest wall becomes stiff due to squeezing together of ribs and intercostal muscles, diaphragm stretch, displacement of abdominal contents, and straining of ligaments and bony articulations. Under normal circumstances, the lung and the passive chest wall enclose essentially the same volume, the only difference between these being the volumes of the pleural fluid and of the lung parenchyma (both quite small). As such, and because the lung and chest wall function in mechanical series, the pressure required to displace the passive respiratory system (lungs + chest wall) at any volume is simply the sum of the elastic recoil pressure of the lungs and the transmural pressure across the chest wall. When plotted against respiratory system volume, this relationship assumes a sigmoid shape, exhibiting stiffness at high lung volumes (imparted by the lung), stiffness at low lung volumes (imparted by the chest wall, or sometimes by airway closure), and compliance in the middle range of lung volumes. There is also a passive resting point of the respiratory system, attained when alveolar gas pressure equals body surface pressure (i.e., the transrespiratory system pressure is zero). At this volume [called functional residual capacity (FRC)], the outward recoil of the chest wall is balanced exactly by the inward recoil of the lung. As these recoils are transmitted through the pleural fluid, the latter is pulled both outward and inward simultaneously at FRC, and, thus, its pressure falls below atmospheric pressure (typically, 每5 cmH2O).

The normal passive respiratory system would equilibrate at FRC and remain there were it not for the actions of respiratory muscles. The inspiratory muscles act on the chest wall to generate the equivalent of positive pressure across the lungs and passive chest wall, while the expiratory muscles generate the equivalent of negative transrespiratory pressure. The maximal pressures these sets of muscles can generate varies with the lung volume at which they operate, due to length-tension relationships in striated muscle sarcomeres and to changes in mechanical advantage as the angles of insertion change with lung volume (Fig. 252-1). Nonetheless, under normal conditions the respiratory muscles are substantially "overpowered" for their roles, and generate more than adequate force to drive the respiratory system to its stiffness extremes, as determined by the lung [total lung capacity (TLC)] or chest wall or airway closure [residual volume (RV)]; importantly, the latter always prevents the adult lung from emptying completely under normal circumstances. The excursion between full and minimal lung inflation is called vital capacity (VC; Fig. 252-2), and is readily seen to be the difference between volumes at two unrelated stiffness extremes〞one determined by the lung (TLC) and the other determined by the chest wall or airways (RV). Thus, although VC is easy to measure (see below), it tells one little about the intrinsic properties of the respiratory system. It is much more useful, as we shall see, for the clinician to know TLC and RV individually.

Figure 252-2

 
 
 
Spirogram demonstrating a slow vital capacity maneuver and various lung volumes.
 
 

Flow-Related Mechanical Properties〞Dynamics

The passive chest wall and active neuromuscular system do exhibit mechanical behaviors related to the rate of change of volume, but these become quantitatively important only at markedly supraphysiologic breathing frequencies (e.g., during high-frequency mechanical ventilation), and, thus, we shall not address these here. In contrast, the dynamic airflow properties of the lung substantially determine the ability to ventilate and contribute importantly to the work of breathing, and are often deranged by disease. Understanding these properties is, therefore, well worthwhile.

As with flow of any fluid (gas or liquid) in any tube, maintenance of airflow within the pulmonary airways requires a pressure gradient that falls along the direction of flow, the magnitude of which is determined by the flow rate and the frictional resistance to flow. During quiet tidal breathing, the pressure gradients driving inspiratory or expiratory flow are small owing to the very low frictional resistance of normal pulmonary airways (normally <2 cmH2O/L per second). However, during rapid exhalation another phenomenon reduces flow below that which would have been expected were frictional resistance the only impediment to flow. This phenomenon is called dynamic airflow limitation, and it occurs because the bronchial airways through which air is exhaled are collapsible rather than rigid (Fig. 252-3). An important anatomic feature of the pulmonary airways is its treelike branching structure. While the individual airways in each successive generation, from most proximal (trachea) to most distal (respiratory bronchioles), are smaller than those of the parent generation, their number increases exponentially such that the summed cross-sectional area of the airways becomes very large toward the lung periphery. Because flow (volume/time) is constant along the airway tree, the velocity of airflow (flow/summed cross-sectional area) is much greater in the central airways than in the peripheral airways. During exhalation, gas leaving the alveoli must therefore gain velocity as it proceeds toward the mouth. The energy required for this "convective" acceleration is drawn from the component of gas energy manifested as its local pressure, thereby reducing intraluminal gas pressure (the Bernoulli effect), reducing airway transmural pressure, reducing airway size (Fig. 252-3), and reducing flow. If one tries to exhale more forcefully, the local velocity increases further and reduces airway size further, resulting in no net increase in flow. Under these circumstances, flow has reached its maximum possible value, or its flow limit. Lungs normally exhibit such dynamic airflow limitation. The maximum value of flow is related to the gas density, airway cross-section and distensibility, the elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and the frictional pressure loss to the flow-limiting airway site. Under normal conditions, maximal expiratory flow falls with lung volume (Fig. 252-4), due primarily to the dependence of lung recoil pressure on lung volume (Fig. 252-1). In pulmonary fibrosis, lung recoil pressure is increased at any lung volume, and, thus, the maximum expiratory flow is relatively elevated when considered in relation to lung volume. Conversely, in emphysema, lung recoil pressure is reduced, which is a principal mechanism by which maximal expiratory flows fall. Diseases that narrow the airway lumen at any transmural pressure, such as asthma or chronic bronchitis, or which cause excessive airway collapsibility, like tracheomalacia, also reduce maximal expiratory flow.

Figure 252-3

 
 
 
Luminal area versus transmural pressure relationship. Transmural pressure represents the pressure difference across the airway wall from inside to outside.
 
 

Figure 252-4

 
 
 
 
 
Flow-volume loops. A. Normal. B. Airflow obstruction. C. Fixed central airway obstruction. RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 

The Bernoulli effect also acts during inspiration, but the more negative pleural pressures during inspiration lower the pressure outside of airways, thereby increasing transmural pressure and promoting airway expansion. Thus, inspiratory airflow limitation seldom occurs due to diffuse pulmonary airway disease. Conversely, extrathoracic airway narrowing (as due to a tracheal adenoma or post-tracheostomy stricture) can lead to inspiratory airflow limitation (Fig. 252-4).

The phenomenon of flow limitation and the importance of airway size and distensibility and of upstream pressure (lung elastic recoil pressure for forced exhalation) can easily be appreciated by sniffing through one's nose with low, medium, or substantial effort. If one keeps the nostrils relaxed, increasing from low to medium inspiratory effort raises inspiratory flow through the nose somewhat, but inhaling even harder will likely not increase inspiratory nasal airflow more but, rather, will just collapse the nares, a manifestation of dynamic airflow limitation. One can increase inspiratory nasal airflow, however, by flaring one's nostrils using the alae nasi muscles. This increases nostril area (reducing velocity for a given flow through the nares) and stiffens the nostril walls (reducing their narrowing in response to negative transmural pressure). Springlike nasal strips sometimes used by football players have the same effect. In patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), a narrowed and excessively compliant pharyngeal airway also collapses in response to negative transmural pressure generated by the Bernoulli effect and by inspiratory frictional pressure loss in the nose (which is why an upper respiratory infection often worsens OSA). Increasing the upstream driving pressure from which these phenomena lower intrapharyngeal gas pressure with positive nasal airway pressure keeps pharyngeal transmural pressure positive, preventing inspiratory airflow limitation. Inspiratory airflow limitation in the nose or in the pharynx of patients with OSA closely parallels expiratory flow limitation in the lung.

Work of Breathing

In health, the elastic (volume change每related) and dynamic (flow-related) loads that must be overcome to ventilate the lungs at rest are small, and the work required of the respiratory muscles is minimal. However, the work of breathing can increase considerably, due either to requirement for substantially increased ventilation, an abnormally increased mechanical load, or both. As discussed below, the rate of ventilation is primarily set by the need to eliminate carbon dioxide, and, thus, ventilation increases during exercise (sometimes more than 20-fold) and during metabolic acidosis as a compensatory response. Naturally, the work rate required to overcome the elasticity of the respiratory system increases with both the depth and frequency of tidal breaths, while the work required to overcome the dynamic load increases with total ventilation. A modest increase of ventilation is most efficiently achieved by increasing tidal volume but not respiratory rate, which is the normal ventilatory response to lower level exercise. At high levels of exercise, deep breathing persists, but respiratory rate also increases. The pattern chosen by the respiratory controller minimizes the work of breathing.

Work of breathing also increases when disease reduces the compliance of the respiratory system or increases the resistance to airflow. The former occurs commonly in diseases of the lung parenchyma (interstitial processes or fibrosis, alveolar filling diseases such as pulmonary edema or pneumonia, or substantial lung resection), and the latter occurs in obstructive airways diseases such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and cystic fibrosis. Furthermore, severe airflow obstruction can functionally reduce the compliance of the respiratory system by leading to dynamic hyperinflation. In this scenario, expiratory flows slowed by the obstructive airways disease may be insufficient to allow for complete exhalation during the expiratory phase of tidal breathing; as a result, the "functional residual capacity" from which the next breath is inhaled is greater than the static FRC. With repetition of incomplete exhalations of each tidal breath, the operating FRC becomes dynamically elevated, sometimes to a level that approaches TLC. At these high lung volumes, the respiratory system is much less compliant than at normal breathing volumes, and, thus, the elastic work of each tidal breath is also increased. The dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation that accompanies severe airflow obstruction causes patients to sense difficulty in breathing in〞even though the pathophysiologic abnormality at root cause is expiratory airflow obstruction.

Adequacy of Ventilation

As noted above, the respiratory control system that sets the rate of ventilation responds to chemical signals, including arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen tensions and blood pH, and to volitional needs, such as the need to inhale deeply before playing a long phrase on the trumpet. Disturbances in ventilation are discussed in Chap. 264. Here, we focus on the relationship between ventilation of the lung and carbon dioxide elimination.

At the end of each tidal exhalation, the conducting airways are filled with alveolar gas that had not reached the mouth when expiratory flow stopped. During the ensuing inhalation, fresh gas immediately enters the airway tree at the mouth, but the gas first entering the alveoli at the start of inhalation is that same alveolar gas in the conducting airways that had just left the alveoli. As such, fresh gas does not enter the alveoli until the volume of the conducting airways has been inspired. This volume is called the anatomic dead space. Quiet breathing with tidal volumes smaller than the anatomic dead space introduces no fresh gas into the alveoli at all; only that part of the inspired tidal volume (VT) that is greater than the dead space (VD) introduces fresh gas into the alveoli. Importantly, the dead space can be further increased functionally if some of the inspired tidal volume is delivered to a part of the lung that receives no pulmonary blood flow, and, thus, cannot contribute to gas exchange, as can occur in the portion of the lung distal to a large pulmonary embolus. As such, exhaled minute ventilation (E = VT x RR) includes a component of dead space ventilation (D = VD x RR) and a component of fresh gas alveolar ventilation (A = [VT 每 VD] x RR). Carbon dioxide elimination from the alveoli is equal to A times the difference in CO2 fraction between inspired air (essentially zero) and alveolar gas (typically 5.6%, after correcting for humidification of inspired air, corresponding to 40 mmHg). In the steady state, the alveolar fraction of CO2 is equal to the metabolic CO2 production divided by the alveolar ventilation. Because, as discussed below, alveolar and arterial CO2 tensions are equal, and because the respiratory controller normally strives to maintain arterial PCO2 (PaCO2) at 40 mmHg, the adequacy of alveolar ventilation is reflected in PaCO2. If PaCO2 falls much below 40 mmHg, alveolar hyperventilation is present, and if PaCO2 exceeds 40 mmHg, then alveolar hypoventilation is present. Ventilatory failure is characterized by extreme alveolar hypoventilation.

As a consequence of oxygen uptake of alveolar gas into capillary blood, alveolar oxygen tension falls below that of inspired gas. The rate of oxygen uptake (determined by the body's metabolic oxygen consumption) is related to the average rate of metabolic carbon dioxide production and their ratio, called the "respiratory quotient" (R = CO2/ O2), depends largely on the fuel being metabolized. For a typical A merican diet, R is usually around 0.85, and more oxygen is absorbed than CO2 is excreted. Together, these phenomena allow the estimation of alveolar oxygen tension, according to the following relationship, known as the alveolar gas equation:

    PaO2 = FIO2 x (Pbar 每 PH2O) 每 PaCO2/R

The alveolar gas equation also highlights the influences of inspired oxygen fraction (FIO2), barometric pressure (Pbar), and vapor pressure of water (PH2O = 47 mmHg at 37∼C) in addition to alveolar ventilation (which sets PACO2) in determining PAO2. An implication of the alveolar gas equation is that severe arterial hypoxemia rarely occurs as a pure consequence of alveolar hypoventilation at sea level while breathing air. The potential for alveolar hypoventilation to induce severe hypoxemia with otherwise normal lungs increases as Pbar falls with increasing altitude.
 
Gas Exchange

Diffusion

For oxygen to be delivered to the peripheral tissues, it must pass from alveolar gas into alveolar capillary blood by diffusing through alveolar membrane. The aggregate alveolar membrane is highly optimized for this process, with a very large surface area and minimal thickness. Diffusion through the alveolar membrane is so efficient in the human lung that in most circumstances its hemoglobin becomes fully oxygen saturated by the time a red blood cell has traveled just one-third the length of the alveolar capillary. As such, uptake of alveolar oxygen is ordinarily limited by the amount of blood transiting the alveolar capillaries rather than how rapidly oxygen can diffuse across the membrane; thus, oxygen uptake from the lung is said to be "perfusion limited." Carbon dioxide also equilibrates rapidly across the alveolar membrane. Thus, the oxygen and CO2 tensions in capillary blood leaving a normal alveolus are essentially equal to those in alveolar gas. In only rare circumstances is oxygen uptake from normal lungs diffusion-limited, which can occur at high altitude and/or by high-performance athletes exerting maximum effort. Diffusion limitation can also occur in interstitial lung disease if substantially thickened alveolar walls remain perfused.

Ventilation-Perfusion Heterogeneity

As noted above, for gas exchange to be most efficient, the ventilation to each individual alveolus should be matched to the perfusion to its accompanying capillaries for each of millions of alveoli. Due to the differential effects of gravity on lung mechanics and blood flow throughout the lung, and due to differences of airway and vascular architecture among various respiratory paths, there is minor ventilation/perfusion heterogeneity even in the normal lung; however, / heterogeneity can be particularly marked in disease. Two extreme examples are (1) ventilation of unperfused lung distal to a pulmonary embolus, in which ventilation of the physiologic dead space is "wasted" in the sense that it does not contribute to gas exchange; and (2) perfusion of nonventilated lung, a condition known as a "shunt." The latter allows venous blood to pass through the lung unaltered; when mixed with fully oxygenated blood leaving other well-ventilated lung units, shunted venous blood disproportionately lowers the mixed arterial PaO2, due to the nonlinear oxygen content versus the PO2 relationship of hemoglobin (Fig. 252-5). Furthermore, the resulting arterial hypoxemia is refractory to supplemental inspired oxygen. This is because raising inspired FIO2 has no effect on alveolar gas tensions in nonventilated alveoli, and while raising inspired FIO2 does increase PAO2 in ventilated alveoli, the oxygen content of blood exiting ventilated units increases only slightly as hemoglobin will already have been nearly fully saturated and the solubility of oxygen in plasma is quite small.

Figure 252-5

 
 
 
Influence of air vs oxygen breathing on mixed arterial oxygenation in shunt and ventilation/perfusion heterogeneity. Partial pressure of oxygen (mmHg) and oxygen saturations are shown for mixed venous blood, end capillary blood for normal versus affected alveoli, and for mixed arterial blood.
 
 

More commonly occurring than the two extreme examples given above is a widening of the distribution of ventilation/ perfusion ratios; such /  heterogeneity is a common consequence of lung disease. In this circumstance, perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli results in the incomplete oxygenation of exiting blood. When mixed with well-oxygenated blood leaving higher /  regions, this partially preoxygenated blood disproportionately lowers arterial PaO2, although to a lower extent than does a similar perfusion fraction of blood leaving regions of pure shunt. In addition, in contrast to shunt regions, inhalation of supplemental oxygen does raise the PAO2 even in relatively underventilated low /  regions, and so the arterial hypoxemia induced by /  heterogeneity is typically responsive to oxygen therapy (Fig. 252-5).

In sum, arterial hypoxemia can be caused by substantial reduction of inspired oxygen tension, by severe alveolar hypoventilation, or by perfusion of relatively underventilated (low / ) or completely unventilated (shunt) lung regions, and, in unusual circumstances, by limitation of gas diffusion.

Approach to the Patient: Disturbances of Respiratory Function

There are many diseases that injure the respiratory system, but there are relatively few ways in which it responds to that injury. For this reason, the pattern of physiologic abnormalities may or may not provide sufficient information to discriminate among conditions. The following studies are commonly used to characterize a patient's respiratory function and often lead to a better understanding of the underlying disorder.

Measurement of Ventilatory Function

Lung Volumes

Figure 252-2 demonstrates a spirometry tracing in which the volume of air entering or exiting the lung is plotted over time. In a slow vital capacity maneuver, the subject inhales from FRC, fully inflating the lungs to TLC, and then the patient exhales slowly to RV; VC is the difference between TLC and RV, and represents the maximum excursion of the respiratory system. Spirometry discloses relative volume changes during these maneuvers, but cannot reveal the absolute volumes at which they occur. To determine absolute lung volumes, two approaches are commonly used〞inert gas dilution and body plethysmography. In the former, a known amount of a nonabsorbable inert gas (usually helium or neon) is inhaled in a single large breath or is rebreathed from a closed circuit; the inert gas is diluted by the gas resident in the lung at the time of inhalation, and its final concentration reveals the volume of resident gas contributing to the dilution. A drawback of this method is that regions of the lung that ventilate poorly (e.g., due to airflow obstruction) may not receive much inspired inert gas and so do not contribute to its dilution. As such, inert gas dilution often underestimates true lung volumes.

In the second approach, FRC is determined by measuring the compressibility of gas within the chest, which is proportional to the volume of gas being compressed. The patient sits in a body plethysmograph, a chamber usually made of transparent plastic to minimize claustrophobia, and at the end of a normal tidal breath (i.e., when lung volume is FRC) is instructed to pant against a closed shutter, thus, periodically compressing air within the lung slightly. Pressure fluctuations at the mouth and volume fluctuations within the body box (equal but opposite to those of the chest) are measured, and from these the thoracic gas volume is calculated using Boyle's law. Once FRC is obtained, TLC and RV are calculated by adding the inspiratory capacity or subtracting expiratory reserve volume, respectively, values determined during spirometry (Fig. 252-2). The most important determinants of healthy individuals' lung volumes are height, age, and gender, but there is considerable additional normal variation beyond that accounted for by these parameters. In addition, race influences lung volumes; on average TLC values are about 12% smaller in African Americans and 6% smaller in Asian Americans when compared with those of white Americans. In practice, a mean "normal" value is predicted by multivariate regression equations using height, age, and gender, and the patient's value is divided by the predicted value (often with "race correction" applied) to determine "percent predicted." For most measures of lung function, 85每115% of the predicted value can be normal, but in health the various lung volumes tend to scale together. For example, if one is "normal big" with TLC 110% of the predicted value, then all other lung volumes and spirometry values will also approximate 110% of their respective predicted values. This pattern is particularly helpful in evaluating airflow, as discussed below.

Air Flow

As noted above, spirometry plays a key role in lung volume determination. But even more often, spirometry is used to measure air flow, which reflects the dynamic properties of the lung. During a forced vital capacity maneuver, the patient inhales to TLC and then exhales rapidly and forcefully to RV; this ensures that flow limitation has been achieved, so that the precise effort made has little influence on actual flow. The total amount of air exhaled is the forced vital capacity (FVC) and the amount of air exhaled in the first second is the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1); note that FEV1 is a flow rate, as it reveals volume change per time. As with lung volumes, an individual's maximal expiratory flows should be compared to predicted values based on height, age, and gender. While the FEV1/FVC ratio is typically reduced in airflow obstruction, airflow obstruction can also reduce FVC by raising RV. If this occurs, the FEV1/FVC ratio may be "artifactually normal," erroneously suggesting that airflow obstruction is absent. To circumvent this problem, it is useful to compare FEV1 as a fraction of its predicted value with TLC as a fraction of its predicted value. In health, these are usually similar. In contrast, even an FEV1 value that is 95% of its predicted value may actually be relatively low if TLC is 110% of its respective prediction. In this case, airflow obstruction might be present, despite the "normal" value for FEV1.

The relationships among volume, flow, and time during spirometry are best displayed in two plots〞the spirogram (volume vs. time) and the flow-volume loop (flow vs. volume) (Fig. 252-4). In conditions that cause airflow obstruction, the site of obstruction can sometimes be correlated with the shape of the flow-volume loop. In diseases that cause lower airway obstruction such as asthma or emphysema, flows decrease more rapidly with declining lung volumes leading to a characteristic scooping of the flow-volume loop. In contrast, fixed upper airway obstruction typically leads to inspiratory and/or expiratory flow plateaus (Fig. 252-4).

Airways Resistance

The total resistance of the pulmonary and upper airways is measured in the same body plethysmography used to measure FRC. The patient is asked once again to pant, but this time against a closed and then opened shutter. Panting against the closed shutter reveals the thoracic gas volume as above. When the shutter is opened, flow is now directed to and from the body box, so that volume fluctuations in the box reveal the extent of thoracic gas compression, which in turn reveals the pressure fluctuations driving flow. Flow is measured simultaneously, allowing the calculation of lung resistance (as flow divided by pressure). In health, airways resistance is very small, <2 cmH2O/L per second, and half of this resides within the upper airway. Of the lung's contribution, most of the resistance originates in the central airways. For this reason, airways resistance measurement tends to be insensitive to peripheral airflow obstruction.

Respiratory Muscle Strength

To measure respiratory muscle strength, the patient is instructed to exhale or inhale with maximum effort against a closed shutter while pressure is monitored at the mouth. Pressures greater than ㊣60 cmH2O at FRC are considered adequate, making unlikely the possibility that respiratory muscle weakness accounts for any other ventilatory dysfunction that might be identified.

Measurement of Gas Exchange

Diffusing Capacity

This test uses a small (and safe) amount of carbon monoxide to measure gas exchange across the alveolar membrane during a 10-second breath hold. Carbon monoxide in exhaled breath is analyzed to determine the quantity of CO absorbed by crossing the alveolar membrane and combining with hemoglobin in red blood cells. This "single-breath diffusing capacity" [diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)] value increases with the surface area available for diffusion and the amount of hemoglobin within the capillaries, and varies inversely with alveolar membrane thickness. Thus, DLCO decreases in diseases that thicken or destroy alveolar membranes (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema), curtail the pulmonary vasculature (e.g., pulmonary hypertension), or reduce alveolar capillary hemoglobin (e.g., anemia). Single-breath diffusing capacity may be elevated in acute congestive heart failure, asthma, polycythemia, and pulmonary hemorrhage.

Arterial Blood Gases

The effectiveness of gas exchange can be assessed by measuring the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in a sample of blood obtained by arterial puncture. The oxygen content of blood (CaO2) depends upon arterial saturation (%O2Sat), which is set by PaO2, pH, and PaCO2 according to the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve; CaO2 can also be measured by oximetry (see below):

    CaO2 (mL/dL = 1.34 (mL/dL/g) x [hemoglobin](g) x%O2Sat + 0.003 (mL/dL/mmHg) x PaO2 (mmHg)

Pulse Oximetry

Continuous monitoring of arterial blood gases requires either repeated arterial punctures or an indwelling arterial catheter, and so may be difficult in many circumstances. Instead, the oxygen saturation fraction of hemoglobin can be measured continuously using pulse oximetry, a tool that measures the absorbance by hemoglobin of several wavelengths of light transmitted across a finger, toe, or ear by a noninvasive probe. However, since oxygen content varies relatively little with PaO2 at saturations above 90%, it is difficult to know the precise PaO2 using this device. In addition, as noted above, PaCO2 is needed to fully assess the mechanism of hypoxemia, a value that is not revealed by pulse oximetry.
 
Clinical Correlations: Typical Examples

This chapter has highlighted the physiologic processes underlying respiratory system function and the techniques used by clinicians to assess them. Figure 252-6 lists abnormalities in pulmonary function testing typically found in a number of common respiratory disorders and highlights the simultaneous occurrence of multiple physiologic abnormalities. Importantly, some of these respiratory disorders can coexist, which results in more complex superposition of these abnormalities.

Figure 252-6

 
 
 
Commonly seen abnormalities of pulmonary function (see text). Pulmonary function values are expressed as percent of normal predicted values, except for Raw, which is expressed as cmH2O/L/s (normal <2 cmH2O/L/s). The figures at the bottom of each column show typical configuration of flow-volume loops in each condition, including the flow-volume relationship during tidal breathing. b.d., bronchodilator; DLCO, diffusion capacity of lung for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in one second; FRC, functional residual capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity; Raw, airways resistance; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity.
 
 

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Increased Elastic Recoil〞Example: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis raises lung recoil at all lung volumes, thereby lowering TLC, FRC, and RV, as well as FVC. Maximal expiratory flows are also reduced compared with normal values, but are relatively elevated when considered in relation to lung volumes. The latter occurs both because the increased lung recoil drives greater maximal flow at any lung volume and because airway diameters are relatively increased due to greater radially outward traction exerted on bronchi by the stiff lung parenchyma. Airway resistance is also normal, for the same reason. Pulmonary capillaries are destroyed by the fibrotic process resulting in marked reduction in diffusing capacity. Oxygenation is often severely reduced due to persistent perfusion of alveolar units that are relatively underventilated due to fibrosis of nearby (and mechanically linked) lung. The flow-volume loop looks like a miniature version of a normal loop but is shifted toward lower absolute lung volumes and displays maximum expiratory flows that are increased for any given volume when compared to the normal tracing.

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Chest Wall Abnormality〞Example: Moderate Obesity

As the size of the average American continues to increase, this pattern may become the most commonly seen of pulmonary function abnormalities. In moderate obesity, the outward recoil of the chest wall is blunted due to the weight of chest wall fat and to the space occupied by intraabdominal fat. As such, preserved inward recoil of the lung now overbalances the reduced outward recoil of the chest wall, and FRC falls. Because respiratory muscle strength and lung recoil remain normal, TLC is typically unchanged (although TLC may fall in massive obesity) and RV is normal (but may be reduced in massive obesity). Mild hypoxemia may be present, due to perfusion of alveolar units that are poorly ventilated because of airway closure that occurs in dependent portions of the lung while breathing near the reduced FRC. Flows remain normal, as does DLCO, unless obstructive sleep apnea (which often accompanies obesity) and associated chronic intermittent hypoxemia have induced pulmonary arterial hypertension, in which case DLCO may be low.

Ventilatory Restriction Due to Reduced Muscle Strength〞Example: Myasthenia Gravis

FRC remains normal, as both lung recoil and passive chest wall recoil are normal. However, TLC is low and RV is elevated, as respiratory muscle strength is insufficient to push the passive respiratory system fully toward either volume extreme. Caught between the low TLC and the elevated RV, FVC and FEV1 are reduced as "innocent bystanders." As airway size and the lung vasculature are unaffected, both airways resistance (Raw) and DLCO are normal. Oxygenation is normal unless weakness becomes so severe that the patient has insufficient strength to reopen collapsed alveoli during sighs, with resulting atelectasis.

Airflow Obstruction Due to Decreased Airway Diameter〞Example: Acute Asthma

During an episode of acute asthma, luminal narrowing due to smooth muscle constriction and inflammation and thickening within the small- and medium-sized bronchi raise frictional resistance and reduce airflow. Scooping of the flow-volume loop is caused by reduction of airflow, especially at lower lung volumes. Often, airflow obstruction can be reversed by inhalation of 2-adrenergic agonists acutely or by treatment with inhaled steroids chronically. Total lung capacity (TLC) usually remains normal (although elevated TLC is sometimes seen in long-standing asthma), but FRC may be dynamically elevated. RV is often increased due to exaggerated airway closure at low lung volumes, and this elevation of RV reduces FVC. Because central airways are narrowed, airways resistance is usually elevated. Mild arterial hypoxemia is often present due to perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli distal to obstructed airways (and is responsive to oxygen supplementation), but DLCO is normal or mildly elevated.

Airflow Obstruction Due to Decreased Elastic Recoil〞Example: Severe Emphysema

Loss of lung elastic recoil in severe emphysema results in pulmonary hyperinflation, of which elevated TLC is the hallmark. FRC is more severely elevated due both to loss of lung elastic recoil and to dynamic hyperinflation (the same phenomenon as autoPEEP, which is the unintended positive end-expiratory pressure). Residual volume is very severely elevated due to airway closure and because exhalation toward RV may take so long that RV cannot be reached before the patient must inhale again. Both FVC and FEV1 are markedly decreased, the former due to the severe elevation of RV, and the latter because loss of lung elastic recoil reduces the pressure driving maximal expiratory flow and also reduces tethering open of small intrapulmonary airways. The flow-volume loop demonstrates marked scooping of the flow-volume loop, with an initial transient spike of flow attributable largely to expulsion of air from collapsing central airways at the onset of forced exhalation. Otherwise, the central airways remain relatively unaffected, so Raw is normal in "pure" emphysema. Loss of alveolar surface and capillaries in the alveolar walls reduces DLCO, but because poorly ventilated emphysematous acini are also poorly perfused (due to loss of their capillaries), arterial hypoxemia is usually not seen at rest until emphysema becomes very severe. However, during exercise, PaO2 may fall precipitously if extensive destruction of the pulmonary vasculature prevents a sufficient increase in cardiac output and mixed venous oxygen content falls substantially. Under these circumstances, any venous admixture through low / . Q units has a particularly marked effect in lowering mixed arterial oxygen tension.

Acknowledgement

The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Steven E. Weinberger and Irene M. Rosen to this chapter in previous edits and the helpful contributions of Drs. Mary Strek and Jeff Jacobson.
 
Further Readings

Hyatt RE et al: Interpretation of Pulmonary Function Testing, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009 

 
MacIntyre N: Standardization of the single-breath determination of carbon monoxide uptake in the lung. Eur Respir J 26:720, 2005[PMID: 16204605]  [Full Text]

 
Miller MR et al: Standardization of spirometry. Eur Respir J 26:319, 2005[PMID: 16055882]  [Full Text]

 
Wanger J: Standardization of measurements of lung volumes. Eur Respir J 26:511, 2005[PMID: 16135736]  [Full Text]

 
Weinberger SE: Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004 
 
 

^^
Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease: Introduction

The diagnostic modalities available for assessing the patient with suspected or known respiratory system disease include imaging studies and techniques for acquiring biologic specimens, some of which involve direct visualization of part of the respiratory system. Methods to characterize the functional changes developing as a result of disease, including pulmonary function tests and measurements of gas exchange, are discussed in Chap. 252.
 
Imaging Studies

Routine Radiography

Routine chest radiography, generally including both posteroanterior (PA) and lateral views, is an integral part of the diagnostic evaluation of diseases involving the pulmonary parenchyma, the pleura, and, to a lesser extent, the airways and the mediastinum (see Chaps. 251 and e34). Lateral decubitus views are often useful for determining whether pleural abnormalities represent freely flowing fluid, whereas apical lordotic views can often visualize disease at the lung apices better than the standard PA view. Portable equipment is often used for acutely ill patients who either cannot be transported to a radiology suite or cannot stand for PA and lateral views. Portable films are more difficult to interpret owing to several limitations: (1) the single antero posterior (AP) projection obtained; (2) variability in over- and underexposure of film; (3) a shorter focal spot-film distance leading to lack of edge sharpness, and loss of fine detail; and (4) magnification of the cardiac silhouette and other anterior structures by the AP projection. Common radiographic patterns and their clinical correlates are reviewed in Chap. e34.

Advances in computer technology and the availability of reusable radiation detectors have allowed the development of digital or computed radiography. The images obtained in this format can be subjected to significant postprocessing analysis to improve diagnostic information. In addition, the benefit of immediate availability of the images, the ability to store images electronically, and the facility of transfer within or between health care systems have led many hospital systems to convert to digital systems.

Computed Tomography

Computed tomography (CT) offers several advantages over routine chest radiography (Figs. 253-1A, B and 253-2A, B; see also Figs. 261-3, 261-4, and 268-4). First, the use of cross-sectional images allows distinction between densities that would be superimposed on plain radiographs. Second, CT is far better than routine radiographic studies at characterizing tissue density, distinguishing subtle density differences between adjacent structures, and providing accurate size assessment of lesions.

Figure 253-1

 
 
 
 
Chest x-ray (A) and CT scan (B) from a patient with emphysema. The extent and distribution of emphysema are not well appreciated on plain film but clearly evident on CT scan obtained.
 
 

Figure 253-2

 
 
 
 
Chest x-ray (A) and CT scan (B) demonstrating a right lower-lobe mass. The mass is not well appreciated on the plain film because of the hilar structures and known calcified adenopathy. CT is superior to plain radiography for the detection of abnormal mediastinal densities and the distinction of masses from adjacent vascular structures.
 
 

CT is particularly valuable in assessing hilar and mediastinal disease (which is often poorly characterized by plain radiography), in identifying and characterizing disease adjacent to the chest wall or spine (including pleural disease), and in identifying areas of fat density or calcification in pulmonary nodules (Fig. 253-2). Its utility in the assessment of mediastinal disease has made CT an important tool in the staging of lung cancer (Chap. 89), as an assessment of tumor involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes is critical to proper staging. With the additional use of contrast material, CT also makes it possible to distinguish vascular from nonvascular structures, which is particularly important in distinguishing lymph nodes and masses from vascular structures primarily in the mediastinum, and vascular disorders such as pulmonary embolism.

In high-resolution CT (HRCT), the thickness of individual cross-sectional images is 1每2 mm, rather than the usual 7每10 mm in conventional CT. The visible detail on HRCT scans allows better recognition of subtle parenchymal and airway disease, thickened interlobular septa, ground-glass opacification, small nodules, and the abnormally thickened or dilated airways seen in bronchiectasis. Using HRCT, characteristic patterns are recognized for many interstitial lung diseases such as lymphangitic carcinoma, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, and eosinophilic granuloma. However, there is debate about, the settings in which the presence of a characteristic pattern on HRCT eliminates the need for obtaining lung tissue to make a diagnosis.

Helical CT Scanning

Recent advances in computer processing have allowed the development of helical CT scanning. Helical CT technology results in faster scans with improved contrast enhancement and thinner collimation. The image is obtained during a single breath-holding maneuver that allows less motion artifact. In addition, helical CT scanning allows the collection of continuous data over a larger volume of lung than is possible with conventional CT. Data from the imaging procedure can be reconstructed as images in planes other than the traditional cross-sectional (axial) view, including coronal, or sagittal planes (Fig. 253-3A). Finally, sophisticated volumetric "3D" representations of structures can be produced (Fig. 253-3B) including the ability to perform a virtual bronchoscopy, mimicking direct visualization through a bronchoscope (Fig. 253-4).

Figure 253-3

 
 
 
 
Spiral CT with reconstruction of images in planes other than axial view. Spiral CT in a lung transplant patient with a dehiscence and subsequent aneurysm of the anastomosis. CT images were reconstructed in the sagittal view (A) and using digital subtraction to view images of the airways only (B), which demonstrate the exact location and extent of the abnormality.
 
 

Figure 253-4

 
 
 
MRA image of the vasculature of a patient after lung transplant. The image demonstrates the detailed view of the vasculature that can be obtained using digital subtraction techniques. Images from a patient after lung transplant show the venous and arterial anastomosis on the right; a slight narrowing is seen at the site of the anastomosis, which is considered within normal limits and not suggestive of obstruction.
 
 

Multidetector CT (MDCT)

Refinements in detector technology have allowed production of scanners with additional detectors along the scanning axis (z-axis). These scanners, called multidetector CT (MDCT) scanners, can obtain multiple slices in a single rotation that are thinner and can be acquired in a shorter period of time. This results in enhanced resolution and increased image reconstruction ability. As the technology has progressed, higher numbers (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 16, 32, 40 and currently up to 64) of detectors are used to produce clearer final images. The development of MDCT allows for even shorter breath holds, which are beneficial for all patients but especially children, the elderly, and the critically ill. However, it should be noted that despite the advantages of MDCT, there is an increase in radiation dose compared to single-detector CT to consider. With MDCT, the additional detectors along the z-axis result in improved use of the contrast bolus. In addition, the shorter breath holds secondary to faster scanning times and increased resolution have all led to improved imaging of the pulmonary vasculature and the ability to detect segmental and subsegmental emboli. In contrast to pulmonary angiography, CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) also allows simultaneous detection of parenchymal abnormalities that may be contributing to a patient's clinical presentation. Secondary to these advantages and increasing availability, CTPA has rapidly become the test of choice for many clinicians in the evaluation of pulmonary embolism; it is considered equal to pulmonary angiography in terms of accuracy, and with less associated risks.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

The role of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in the evaluation of respiratory system disease is less well-defined than that of CT. Magnetic resonance provides poorer spatial resolution and less detail of the pulmonary parenchyma, and for these reasons is currently not considered a substitute for CT in imaging the thorax. However, the use of hyperpolarized gas in conjunction with MR has led to the investigational use of MR for imaging the lungs, particularly in obstructive lung disease. Of note, MR examinations are difficult to obtain among several subgroups of patients. Patients who cannot lie still or who cannot lie on their backs may have MR images that are of poor quality; some tests require patients to hold their breaths for 15 to 25 seconds at a time in order to get good MR images. MR is generally avoided in unstable and/or ventilated patients and those with severe trauma because of the hazards of the MR environment and the difficulties in monitoring patients within the MR room. The presence of metallic foreign bodies, pacemakers, and intracranial aneurysm clips also preclude use of MR.

An advantage of MR is the use of nonionizing electromagnetic radiation. Additionally, MR is well suited to distinguish vascular from nonvascular structures without the need for contrast. Blood vessels appear as hollow tubular structures because flowing blood does not produce a signal on MR imaging. Therefore, MR can be useful in demonstrating pulmonary emboli, defining aortic lesions such as aneurysms or dissection, or other vascular abnormalities (Fig. 253-5) if radiation and IV contrast medium cannot be used. Gadolinium can be used as an intravascular contrast agent for MR angiography (MRA); however, synchronization of data acquisition with the peak arterial bolus is one of the major challenges of MRA; the flow of contrast medium from the peripheral injection site to the vessel of interest is affected by a number of factors including heart rate, stroke volume, and the presence of proximal stenotic lesions.

Figure 253-5

 
 
 
Virtual bronchoscopic image of the trachea. The view projected is one that would be obtained from the trachea looking down to the carina. The left and right main stem airways are seen bifurcating from the carina.
 
 

Nuclear Medicine Techniques

Nuclear imaging depends on the selective uptake of various compounds by organs of the body. In thoracic imaging, these compounds are concentrated by one of three mechanisms: blood pool or compartmentalization (e.g., within the heart), physiologic incorporation (e.g., bone or thyroid) and capillary blockage (e.g., lung scan). Radioactive isotopes can be administered by either the IV or inhaled routes or both. When injected intravenously, albumin macroaggregates labeled with [99mTc] become lodged in pulmonary capillaries; the distribution of the trapped radioisotope follows the distribution of blood flow. When inhaled, radiolabeled xenon gas can be used to demonstrate the distribution of ventilation. Using these techniques, ventilation-perfusion lung scanning was a commonly used technique for the evaluation of pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary thromboembolism produces one or more regions of ventilation-perfusion mismatch [i.e., regions in which there is a defect in perfusion that follows the distribution of a vessel and that is not accompanied by a corresponding defect in ventilation (Chap. 262)]. However, with advances in CT scanning, scintigraphic imaging has been largely replaced by CT angiography in patients with suspected pulmonary embolism.

Another common use of ventilation-perfusion scans is in patients with impaired lung function, who are being considered for lung resection. Because many patients with bronchogenic carcinoma have coexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the question arises as to whether or not a patient can tolerate lung resection. The distribution of the isotope(s) can be used to assess the regional distribution of blood flow and ventilation, allowing the physician to estimate the level of postoperative lung function.

Positron Emission Tomographic Scanning

Positron emission tomographic (PET) scanning is commonly used to identify malignant lesions in the lung, based on their increased uptake and metabolism of glucose. The technique involves injection of a radiolabeled glucose analogue, [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG), which is taken up by metabolically active malignant cells. However, FDG is trapped within the cell following phosphorylation, and the unstable [18F] decays by emission of positrons, which can be detected by a specialized PET camera or by a gamma camera that has been adapted for imaging of positron-emitting nuclides. This technique has been used in the evaluation of solitary pulmonary nodules and in staging lung cancer through the detection or exclusion of mediastinal lymph node involvement and identification of extrathoracic disease. The limited anatomical definition of radionuclide imaging has been improved by the development of hybrid imaging that allows the superimposition of nuclear medicine and CT images, a technique known as functional每anatomical mapping. Today, most PET scans are performed using instruments with combined PET and CT scanners. The hybrid PET/CT scans provide images that help pinpoint the abnormal metabolic activity to anatomical structures seen on CT. The combined scans provide more accurate diagnoses than the two scans performed separately. FDG每PET can differentiate benign from malignant lesions as small as 1 cm. However, false-negative findings can occur in lesions with low metabolic activity such as carcinoid tumors and bronchioloalveolar cell carcinomas, or in lesions <1 cm in which the required threshold of metabolically active malignant cells is not present for PET diagnosis. False-positive results can be seen due to FDG uptake in inflammatory conditions such as pneumonia and granulomatous diseases.

Pulmonary Angiography

The pulmonary arterial system can be visualized by pulmonary angiography, in which radiopaque contrast medium is injected through a catheter placed in the pulmonary artery. When performed in cases of pulmonary embolism, pulmonary angiography demonstrates the consequences of an intravascular thrombus〞either a defect in the lumen of a vessel (a filling defect) or an abrupt termination (cutoff) of the vessel. Other, less common indications for pulmonary angiography include visualization of a suspected pulmonary arteriovenous malformation and assessment of pulmonary arterial invasion by a neoplasm. The risks associated with modern arteriography are extremely small, generally of greatest concern in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension. With advances in CT scanning, MDCT angiography (MDCTA) is replacing conventional angiography for the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.

Ultrasound

Diagnostic ultrasound (US) produces images using echoes or reflection of the ultrasound beam from interfaces between tissues with differing acoustic properties. US is nonionizing and safe to perform on pregnant patients and children. It is helpful in the detection and localization of pleural abnormalities, and a quick and effective way of guiding percutaneous needle biopsy of peripheral lung, pleural, or chest wall lesions. US is also helpful in identifying septations within loculated collections and can facilitate placement of a needle for sampling of pleural liquid (i.e., for thoracentesis), improving the yield and safety of the procedure. Bedside availability makes it valuable in the intensive care setting. Real-time imaging can be used to assess the movement of the diaphragm. Using the Doppler mode, patterns of blood flow in both large and small vessels can be visualized. Because US energy is rapidly dissipated in air, it is not useful for evaluation of the pulmonary parenchyma and cannot be used if there is any aerated lung between the US probe and the abnormality of interest.

Endobronchial US, in which the US probe is passed through a bronchoscope, is emerging as a valuable adjunct to bronchoscopy, allowing identification and localization of pathology adjacent to airway walls or within the mediastinum, discussed further below.

Virtual Bronchoscopy

The three-dimensional (3D) image of the thorax obtained by MDCT can be digitally stored, reanalyzed, and displayed as 3D reconstructions of the airways down to the sixth- to seventh-generation. Using these computed generated reconstructions, a "virtual" bronchoscopy can be performed (Fig. 253-5). Virtual bronchoscopy has been proposed as an adjunct to conventional bronchoscopy in several clinical situations: It can allow accurate assessment of the extent and length of an airway stenosis, including the airway distal to the narrowing; it can provide useful information about the relationship of the airway abnormality to adjacent mediastinal structures; and it allows preprocedure planning for therapeutic bronchoscopy to help ensure the appropriate equipment is available for the procedure. Virtual bronchoscopy can also be used to perform noninvasive follow-up of patients with treated airway lesions. Navigational systems using virtual bronchoscopy have been developed to allow pathfinding to guide the bronchoscopist to a peripheral region within the lung, allowing peripheral lung lesions to be sampled more efficiently. Finally, with the advent of endobronchial lung volume reduction surgery in the management of pulmonary emphysema, virtual bronchoscopy may be able to help target the area of peripheral lung for endobronchial valve procedures. The extent of emphysema in each segmental region together with other anatomic details may help in choosing the most appropriate subsegments. However, software packages for the generation of virtual bronchoscopic images are relatively early in development and their utilization and potential impact on patient care are still unknown. In addition to allowing virtual bronchoscopy, advances in computing capabilities and digital imaging allow the bronchoscopic images obtained through a real bronchoscopic examination to be stored as digital images and reviewed after completion of the procedure.
 
Medical Techniques for Obtaining Biologic Specimens

Collection of Sputum

Sputum can be collected either by spontaneous expectoration or after inhalation of an irritating aerosol such as hypertonic saline. The latter method, called sputum induction, is commonly used to obtain sputum for diagnostic studies, either because sputum is not spontaneously being produced or because of an expected higher yield of certain types of findings. Knowledge of the appearance and quality of the sputum specimen obtained is especially important when one is interested in Gram's method and culture. Because sputum consists mainly of secretions from the tracheobronchial tree rather than the upper airway, the finding of alveolar macrophages and other inflammatory cells is consistent with a lower respiratory tract origin of the sample, whereas the presence of squamous epithelial cells in a "sputum" sample indicates contamination by secretions from the upper airways.

In addition to processing for routine bacterial pathogens by Gram's method and culture, sputum can be processed for a variety of other pathogens, including staining and culture for mycobacteria or fungi, culture for viruses, and staining for Pneumocystis jiroveci. In the specific case of sputum obtained for evaluation of P. jiroveci pneumonia in a patient infected with HIV, for example, sputum should be collected by induction rather than spontaneous expectoration, and an immunofluorescent stain should be used to detect the organisms. Cytologic staining of sputum for malignant cells, using the traditional Papanicolaou method, allows noninvasive evaluation for suspected lung cancer. Traditional stains and cultures are now also being supplemented in some cases by immunologic techniques and by molecular biologic methods, including the use of polymerase chain reaction amplification and DNA probes.

Percutaneous Needle Aspiration (Transthoracic)

A needle can be inserted through the chest wall into a pulmonary lesion to aspirate material for analysis by cytologic or microbiologic techniques. Aspiration can be performed to obtain a diagnosis or to decompress and/or drain a fluid collection. The procedure is usually carried out under CT or ultrasound guidance to assist positioning of the needle and assure localization in the lesion. The low potential risk of this procedure (intrapulmonary bleeding or creation of a pneumothorax with collapse of the underlying lung) in experienced hands is usually acceptable owing to the information obtained. However, a limitation of the technique is sampling error due to the small size of the tissue sample. Thus, findings other than a specific cytologic or microbiologic diagnosis are of limited clinical value.

Thoracentesis

Sampling of pleural liquid by thoracentesis is commonly performed for diagnostic purposes or, in the case of a large effusion, for palliation of dyspnea. Diagnostic sampling, either by blind needle aspiration or after localization by US, allows the collection of liquid for microbiologic and cytologic studies. Analysis of the fluid obtained for its cellular composition and chemical constituents, including glucose, protein, and lactate dehydrogenase, allows the effusion to be classified as either exudative or transudative (Chap. 263).

Bronchoscopy

Bronchoscopy is the process of direct visualization of the tracheobronchial tree. Although bronchoscopy is now performed almost exclusively with flexible fiberoptic instruments, rigid bronchoscopy, generally performed in an operating room on a patient under general anesthesia, still has a role in selected circumstances, primarily because of a larger suction channel and the fact that the patient can be ventilated through the bronchoscope channel. These situations include the retrieval of a foreign body and the suctioning of a massive hemorrhage, for which the small suction channel of the bronchoscope may be insufficient.

Flexible Fiberoptic Bronchoscopy

This outpatient procedure is usually performed in an awake but sedated patient (conscious sedation). The bronchoscope is passed through either the mouth or the nose, between the vocal cords, and into the trachea. The ability to flex the scope makes it possible to visualize virtually all airways to the level of subsegmental bronchi. The bronchoscopist is able to identify endobronchial pathology, including tumors, granulomas, bronchitis, foreign bodies, and sites of bleeding. Samples from airway lesions can be taken by several methods, including washing, brushing, and biopsy. Washing involves instillation of sterile saline through a channel of the bronchoscope and onto the surface of a lesion. A portion of the liquid is collected by suctioning through the bronchoscope, and the recovered material can be analyzed for cells (cytology) or organisms (by standard stains and cultures). Brushing or biopsy of the surface of the lesion, using a small brush or biopsy forceps at the end of a long cable inserted through a channel of the bronchoscope, allows recovery of cellular material or tissue for analysis by standard cytologic and histopathologic methods.

The bronchoscope can be used to sample material not only from the regions that can be directly visualized (i.e., the airways) but also from the more distal pulmonary parenchyma. With the bronchoscope wedged into a subsegmental airway, aliquots of sterile saline can be instilled through the scope, allowing sampling of cells and organisms even from alveolar spaces. This procedure, called bronchoalveolar lavage, has been particularly useful for the recovery of organisms such as P. jiroveci in patients with HIV infection.

Brushing and biopsy of the distal lung parenchyma can also be performed with the same instruments that are used for endobronchial sampling. These instruments can be passed through the scope into small airways, where they penetrate the airway wall, allowing biopsy of peribronchial alveolar tissue. This procedure, called transbronchial biopsy, is used when there is either relatively diffuse disease or a localized lesion of adequate size. With the aid of fluoroscopic imaging, the bronchoscopist is able to determine not only whether and when the instrument is in the area of abnormality, but also the proximity of the instrument to the pleural surface. If the forceps are too close to the pleural surface, there is a risk of violating the visceral pleura and creating a pneumothorax; the other potential complication of transbronchial biopsy is pulmonary hemorrhage. The incidence of these complications is less than several percent.

Transbronchial Needle Aspiration (TBNA)

Another procedure involves use of a hollow-bore needle passed through the bronchoscope for sampling of tissue adjacent to the trachea or a large bronchus. The needle is passed through the airway wall (transbronchial), and cellular material can be aspirated from mass lesions or enlarged lymph nodes, generally in a search for malignant cells. Other promising new techniques that are not yet widely available include fluorescence bronchoscopy (to detect early endobronchial malignancy) and endobronchial ultrasound (to better identify and localize peribronchial and mediastinal pathology). Mediastinoscopy has been considered the gold standard for mediastinal staging; however, TBNA allows sampling from the lungs and surrounding lymph nodes without the need for surgery or general anesthesia.

Endobronchial Ultrasound (EBUS)每Transbronchial Needle Aspiration (TBNA)

Further advances in needle aspiration techniques have been accomplished with the development of endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS). The technology uses an ultrasonic bronchoscope fitted with a probe that allows for needle aspiration of mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes guided by real-time US images. This procedure offers access to more difficult-to-reach areas and smaller lymph nodes in the staging of malignancies. EBUS每TBNA has the potential to access the same paratracheal and subcarinal lymph node stations as mediastinoscopy, but also extends out to the hilar lymph nodes (levels 10 and 11).The usefulness of EBUS for clinical indications other than lung cancer is unclear, although studies on sarcoidosis point to the effectiveness of endobronchial ultrasonography in diagnosing this disease.

Interventional Pulmonology (IP)

Interventional pulmonology was initially developed to focus on procedures to help palliate patients with advanced thoracic malignancies. However, the availability of advanced bronchoscopic and pleuroscopic techniques is enabling interventional pulmonologists to provide alternatives to surgery for patients with a wide variety of thoracic disorders and problems. IP can be defined as "the art and science of medicine as related to the performance of diagnostic and invasive therapeutic procedures that which require additional training and expertise beyond that which required in a standard pulmonary medicine training program."

A central role for an IP physician is the acquisition of tissue for diagnosing mass lesions within the thorax. Several techniques already discussed are part of the day-to-day procedural armamentarium used by an IP physician. TBNA to obtain cytologic, histologic, or microbiologic sampling of lesions within the airway wall, the lung parenchyma, and mediastinum. TBNA is frequently performed in combination with EBUS to improve diagnostic yield. Transthoracic needle aspiration and biopsy (TTNA/B) refers to the percutaneous sampling of lesions involving the chest wall, lung parenchyma, and mediastinum for cytologic, histopathologic, or microbiologic examinations.

Autofluorescence Bronchoscopy

Autofluorescence bronchoscopy (AFB) uses bronchoscopes with an additional light source that allows an experienced operator (interventional pulmonologist or surgeon) to distinguish between normal and abnormal tissue. This technique can be used as a screening tool in high-risk individuals to inspect the tracheobronchial tree in order to identify premalignant lesions (airway dysplasia) and carcinoma in situ.
 
Medical Thoracoscopy

Medical thoracoscopy (or pleuroscopy) focuses on the diagnosis of pleural-based problems. The procedure is performed with a conventional rigid or a semirigid pleuroscope (similar in design to a bronchoscope and enabling the operator to inspect the pleural surface, sample and/or drain pleural fluid, or perform targeted biopsies of the parietal pleura). Medical thoracoscopy can be performed in the endoscopy suite or operating room with the patient under conscious sedation and local anesthesia. In contrast, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) requires general anesthesia and is only performed in the OR. A common diagnostic indication for medical thoracoscopy is the evaluation of a pleural effusion or biopsy of presumed parietal pleural carcinomatosis. It can also be used to place a chest tube under visual guidance, or perform chemical or talc pleurodesis, a therapeutic intervention to prevent a recurrent pleural effusion (usually malignant) or recurrent pneumothorax.

Therapeutic Bronchoscopy

The bronchoscope may provide the opportunity for treatment as well as diagnosis. A central role of the IP physican is the performance of therapeutic bronchoscopy. For example, an aspirated foreign body may be retrieved with an instrument passed through the bronchoscope (either flexible or rigid), and bleeding may be controlled with a balloon catheter similarly introduced. Newer interventional techniques performed through a bronchoscope include methods for achieving and maintaining patency of airways that are partially or completely occluded, especially by tumors. These techniques include laser therapy, cryotherapy, argon plasma coagulation, electrocautery, balloon bronchoplasty and dilation, and stent placement. Many IP physicians are also trained in performing percutaneous tracheotomy.
 
Surgical Techniques for Obtaining Biologic Specimens

Evaluation and diagnosis of disorders of the chest commonly involve collaboration between pulmonologists and thoracic surgeons. While procedures such as mediastinoscopy, VATS, and thoracotomy are performed by thoracic surgeons, there is overlap in many minimally invasive techniques that can be performed by a pulmonologist or a thoracic surgeon.

Mediastinoscopy and Mediastinotomy

Proper staging of lung cancer is of paramount concern when determining a treatment regimen. Although CT and PET scanning are useful for determining the size and nature of mediastinal lymph nodes as part of the staging of lung cancer, tissue biopsy and histopathologic examination are often critical for the diagnosis of mediastinal masses or enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. The two major surgical procedures used to obtain specimens from masses or nodes in the mediastinum are mediastinoscopy (via a suprasternal approach) and mediastinotomy (via a parasternal approach). Both procedures are performed under general anesthesia by a qualified surgeon. In the case of suprasternal mediastinoscopy, a rigid mediastinoscope is inserted at the suprasternal notch and passed into the mediastinum along a pathway just anterior to the trachea. Tissue can be obtained with biopsy forceps passed through the scope, sampling masses or nodes that are in a paratracheal or pretracheal position (levels 2R, 2L, 3, 4R, 4L). Aortopulmonary lymph nodes (levels 5, 6) are not accessible by this route and thus are commonly sampled by parasternal mediastinotomy (the Chamberlain procedure). This approach involves a parasternal incision and dissection directly down to a mass or node that requires biopsy.

As an alternative to surgery, a bronchoscope can be used to perform TBNA (discussed above) to obtain tissue from the mediastinum, and, when combined with EBUS, can allow access to the same lymph node stations associated with mediastinoscopy, but also extend access out to the hilar lymph nodes (levels 10, 11). Finally, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)每fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is a second procedure that complements EBUS每FNA in the staging of lung cancer. EUS每FNA is performed via the esophagus and is ideally suited for sampling lymph nodes in the posterior mediastinum (levels 7, 8, 9). Because US imaging cannot penetrate air filled spaces, the area directly anterior to the trachea cannot accurately be assessed and is a "blind spot" for EUS每FNA. However, EBUS每FNA can visualize the anterior lymph nodes and can complement EUS每FNA. The combination of EUS每FNA and EBUS每FNA is a technique that is becoming an alternative to surgery for staging the mediastinum in thoracic malignancies.

Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery

Advances in video technology have allowed the development of thoracoscopy, or VATS, for the diagnosis and management of pleural as well as parenchymal lung disease. This procedure is performed in the operating room using single-lung ventilation with double-lumen endotracheal intubation and involves the passage of a rigid scope with a distal lens through a trocar inserted into the pleura. A high-quality image is shown on a monitor screen, allowing the operator to manipulate instruments passed into the pleural space through separate small intercostal incisions. With these instruments the operator can biopsy lesions of the pleura under direct visualization. In addition, this procedure is now used commonly to biopsy peripheral lung tissue or to remove peripheral nodules for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. This much less invasive procedure has largely supplanted the traditional "open lung biopsy" performed via thoracotomy. The decision to use a VATS technique versus performing an open thoracotomy is made by the thoracic surgeon and is based on whether a patient can tolerate the single-lung ventilation that is required to allow adequate visualization of the lung. With further advances in instrumentation and experience, VATS can be used to perform procedures previously requiring thoracotomy, including stapled lung biopsy, resection of pulmonary nodules, lobectomy, pneumonectomy, pericardial window, or other standard thoracic surgical procedures; but allows them to be performed in a minimally invasive manner.

Thoracotomy

Although frequently replaced by VATS, thoracotomy remains an option for the diagnostic sampling of lung tissue. It provides the largest amount of material, and it can be used to biopsy and/or excise lesions that are too deep or too close to vital structures for removal by VATS. The choice between VATS and thoracotomy needs to be made on a case-by-case basis.

Acknowledgment

We wish to acknowledge Dr. Scott Manaker and Dr. Steven Weinberger for their contributions to prior versions of this chapter.
 
Further Readings

Brown ma, Semelka RC: MRI: Basic Principles and Applications, 3rd ed. Hoboken, Wiley-Liss, 2003 

 
Detterbeck FC. Evolution and science, progress and change. Thorax 62:654, 2007[PMID: 17687093]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞, et al: Seeking a home for a PET. Defining the appropriate place for positron emission tomography imaging in the diagnosis of pulmonary nodules or masses. Parts 1 and 2. Chest 125:2294, 2300, 2004 

 
De Wever W et al: Multidetector CT-generated virtual bronchoscopy: An illustrated review of the potential clinical indications. Eur Respir J 23:776, 2004 

 
〞〞〞: Virtual bronchoscopy: Accuracy and usefulness〞an overview. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 26:364, 2005 

 
Kalra MK, Saini S: A practical approach to MDCT, in MDCT: A Practical Approach, S Saini et al (eds). Milan, Springer, 2006 

 
Kavanagh JJ et al: Pulmonary embolism imaging with MDCT, in MDCT: A Practical Approach, S Saini et al (eds). Milan, Springer, 2006 

 
Lee P, Colt HG: State of the art: Pleuroscopy. J Thorac Oncol 2:663, 2007[PMID: 17607126]  [Full Text]

 
Medford ARL et al: Mediastinal staging procedures in lung cancer: EBUS, TBNA and mediastinoscopy. Curr Opin Pulmon Med 15:334, 2009[PMID: 19395972]  [Full Text]

 
Moghissi K et al: Current indications and future perspective of fluorescence bronchoscopy: A review study. Photodiagn Photodyn Ther 5:238, 2008[PMID: 19356663]  [Full Text]

 
Muller NL, Silva CIS: Normal chest radiograph, in Imaging of the Chest, vol. 1, NL Muller, CIS Silva (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders/Elsevier, 2008 

 
Patel S, Kazerooni EA: Helical CT for the evaluation of acute pulmonary embolism. AJR Am J Roentgenol 185:135, 2005[PMID: 15972414]  [Full Text]

 
Varela-Lema L et al: Effectiveness and safety of endobronchial ultrasound每transbronchial needle aspiration: A systematic review. Eur Respir J 33:1156, 2009[PMID: 19407050]  [Full Text]

 
Wahidi MM et al: State of the art interventional pulmonology. Chest 131:261, 2007[PMID: 17218585]  [Full Text]

 
Wallace MB et al. Minimally invasive endoscopic staging of suspected lung cancer. JAMA 299:540, 2008[PMID: 18252884]  [Full Text]

 
Weinberger SE (ed): Principles of Pulmonary Medicine, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2004 
 
 


^^
Asthma: Introduction

Asthma is a syndrome characterized by airflow obstruction that varies markedly, both spontaneously and with treatment. Asthmatics harbor a special type of inflammation in the airways that makes them more responsive than nonasthmatics to a wide range of triggers, leading to excessive narrowing with consequent reduced airflow and symptomatic wheezing and dyspnea. Narrowing of the airways is usually reversible, but in some patients with chronic asthma there may be an element of irreversible airflow obstruction. The increasing global prevalence of asthma, the large burden it now imposes on patients, and the high health care costs have led to extensive research into its mechanisms and treatment.
 
Prevalence

Asthma is one of the most common chronic diseases globally and currently affects approximately 300 million people worldwide. The prevalence of asthma has risen in affluent countries over the last 30 years but now appears to have stabilized, with approximately 10每12% of adults and 15% of children affected by the disease. In developing countries where the prevalence of asthma had been much lower, there is a rising prevalence, which is associated with increased urbanization. The prevalence of atopy and other allergic diseases has also increased over the same time, suggesting that the reasons for the increase are likely to be systemic rather than confined to the lungs. This epidemiologic observation suggests that there is a maximum number of individuals in the community, who are likely to be affected by asthma, most likely by genetic predisposition. Most patients with asthma in affluent countries are atopic, with allergic sensitization to the house dust mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and other environmental allergens.

Because asthma is both common and frequently complicated by the effects of smoking on the lungs, it is difficult to be certain about the natural history of the disease in adults. Asthma can present at any age, with a peak age of 3 years. In childhood, twice as many males as females are asthmatic, but by adulthood the sex ratio has equalized. The commonly held belief that children "grow out of their asthma" is justified to some extent. Long-term studies that have followed children until they reach the age of 40 years suggest that many with asthma become asymptomatic during adolescence but that asthma returns in some during adult life, particularly in those with persistent symptoms and severe asthma. Adults with asthma, including those with onset during adulthood, rarely become permanently asymptomatic. The severity of asthma does not vary significantly within a given patient; those with mild asthma rarely progress to more severe disease, whereas those with severe asthma usually have severe disease at the onset.

Deaths from asthma are uncommon, and in many affluent countries have been steadily declining over the last decade. A rise in asthma mortality seen in several countries during the 1960s was associated with increased use of short-acting 2-adrenergic agonists (as rescue therapy), but there is now compelling evidence that the more widespread use of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) in patients with persistent asthma is responsible for the decrease in mortality in recent years. Major risk factors for asthma deaths are poorly controlled disease with frequent use of bronchodilator inhalers, lack of corticosteroid therapy, and previous admissions to hospital with near-fatal asthma.

It has proved difficult to agree on a definition of asthma, but there is good agreement on the description of the clinical syndrome and disease pathology. Until the etiologic mechanisms of the disease are better understood, it will be difficult to provide an accurate definition.
 
Etiology

Asthma is a heterogeneous disease with interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Several risk factors have been implicated (Table 254-1).

Table 254-1 Risk Factors and Triggers Involved in Asthma

 
 
Endogenous Factors Environmental Factors 
Genetic predisposition Indoor allergens 
Atopy Outdoor allergens 
Airway hyperresponsiveness Occupational sensitizers 
Gender Passive smoking 
Ethnicity? Respiratory infections 
Obesity?   
Early viral infections?   
Triggers    
Allergens   
Upper respiratory tract viral infections   
Exercise and hyperventilation   
Cold air   
Sulfur dioxide and irritant gases   
Drugs (-blockers, aspirin)   
Stress   
Irritants (household sprays, paint fumes)   
 

 

Atopy

Atopy is the major risk factor for asthma, and nonatopic individuals have a very low risk of developing asthma. Patients with asthma commonly suffer from other atopic diseases, particularly allergic rhinitis, which may be found in over 80% of asthmatic patients, and atopic dermatitis (eczema). Atopy may be found in 40每50% of the population in affluent countries, with only a proportion of atopic individuals becoming asthmatic. This observation suggests that some other environmental or genetic factor(s) predispose to the development of asthma in atopic individuals. The allergens that lead to sensitization are usually proteins that have protease activity, and the most common allergens are derived from house dust mites, cat and dog fur, cockroaches (in inner cities), grass and tree pollens, and rodents (in laboratory workers). Atopy is due to the genetically determined production of specific IgE antibody, with many patients showing a family history of allergic diseases.

Intrinsic Asthma

A minority of asthmatic patients (approximately 10%) have negative skin tests to common inhalant allergens and normal serum concentrations of IgE. These patients, with nonatopic or intrinsic asthma, usually show later onset of disease (adult-onset asthma), commonly have concomitant nasal polyps, and may be aspirin-sensitive. They usually have more severe, persistent asthma. Little is understood about mechanism, but the immunopathology in bronchial biopsies and sputum appears to be identical to that found in atopic asthma. There is recent evidence for increased local production of IgE in the airways, suggesting that there may be common IgE-mediated mechanisms; staphylococcal enterotoxins, which serve as "superantigens," have been implicated.

Infections

Although viral infections are common as triggers of asthma exacerbations, it is uncertain whether they play a role in etiology. There is some association between respiratory syncytial virus infection in infancy and the development of asthma, but the specific pathogenesis is difficult to elucidate, as this infection is very common in children. More recently, atypical bacteria such as Mycoplasma and Chlamydophila, have been implicated in the mechanism of severe asthma, but thus far, the evidence is not very convincing of a true association.

Genetic Considerations

The familial association of asthma and a high degree of concordance for asthma in identical twins indicate a genetic predisposition to the disease; however, whether or not the genes predisposing to asthma are similar or in addition to those predisposing to atopy is not yet clear. It now seems likely that different genes may also contribute to asthma specifically, and there is increasing evidence that the severity of asthma is also genetically determined. Genetic screens with classical linkage analysis and single-nucleotide polymorphisms of various candidate genes indicate that asthma is polygenic, with each gene identified having a small effect that is often not replicated in different populations. This observation suggests that the interaction of many genes is important, and these may differ in different populations. The most consistent findings have been associations with polymorphisms of genes on chromosome 5q, including the T helper 2 (TH2) cells interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13, which are associated with atopy. There is increasing evidence for a complex interaction between genetic polymorphisms and environmental factors that will require very large population studies to unravel. Novel genes that have been associated with asthma, including ADAM-33, DPP-10, and GPRA, have also been identified by positional cloning, but their function in disease pathogenesis is not yet clear. Recent genome-wide association studies have identified further novel genes, although, again, their functional role is not yet clear. Genetic polymorphisms may also be important in determining the response to asthma therapy. For example, the Arg-Gly-16 variant in the 2-receptor has been associated with reduced response to 2-agonists, and repeats of an Sp1 recognition sequence in the promoter region of 5-lipoxygenase may affect the response to antileukotrienes. However, these effects are small and inconsistent and do not yet have any implications for asthma therapy.

Environmental Factors

It is likely that environmental factors in early life determine which atopic individuals become asthmatic. The increasing prevalence of asthma, particularly in developing countries, over the last few decades also indicates the importance of environmental mechanisms interacting with a genetic predisposition.

Hygiene Hypothesis

The observation that allergic sensitization and asthma were less common in children with older siblings first suggested that lower levels of infection may be a factor in affluent societies that increase the risks of asthma. This "hygiene hypothesis" proposes that lack of infections in early childhood preserves the TH2 cell bias at birth, whereas exposure to infections and endotoxin results in a shift toward a predominant protective TH1 immune response. Children brought up on farms who are exposed to a high level of endotoxin are less likely to develop allergic sensitization than children raised on dairy farms. Intestinal parasite infection may also be associated with a reduced risk of asthma. While there is considerable epidemiologic support for the hygiene hypothesis, it cannot account for the parallel increase in TH1-driven diseases such as diabetes mellitus over the same period.

Diet

The role of dietary factors is controversial. Observational studies have shown that diets low in antioxidants such as vitamin C and vitamin A, magnesium, selenium, and omega-3 polyunsaturated fats (fish oil) or high in sodium and omega-6 polyunsaturates are associated with an increased risk of asthma. Vitamin D deficiency may also predispose to the development of asthma. However, interventional studies with supplementary diets have not supported an important role for these dietary factors. Obesity is also an independent risk factor for asthma, particularly in women, but the mechanisms are thus far unknown.

Air Pollution

Air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide, ozone, and diesel particulates, may trigger asthma symptoms, but the role of different air pollutants in the etiology of the disease is much less certain. Most evidence argues against an important role for air pollution as asthma is no more prevalent in cities with a high ambient level of traffic pollution than in rural areas with low levels of pollution. Asthma had a much lower prevalence in East Germany compared to West Germany despite a much higher level of air pollution, but since reunification these differences have decreased as eastern Germany has become more affluent. Indoor air pollution may be more important with exposure to nitrogen oxides from cooking stoves and exposure to passive cigarette smoke. There is some evidence that maternal smoking is a risk factor for asthma, but it is difficult to dissociate this association from an increased risk of respiratory infections.

Allergens

Inhaled allergens are common triggers of asthma symptoms and have also been implicated in allergic sensitization. Exposure to house dust mites in early childhood is a risk factor for allergic sensitization and asthma, but rigorous allergen avoidance has not shown any evidence for a reduced risk of developing asthma. The increase in house dust mites in centrally heated poorly ventilated homes with fitted carpets has been implicated in the increasing prevalence of asthma in affluent countries. Domestic pets, particularly cats, have also been associated with allergic sensitization, but early exposure to cats in the home may be protective through the induction of tolerance.

Occupational Exposure

Occupational asthma is relatively common and may affect up to 10% of young adults. Over 200 sensitizing agents have been identified. Chemicals such as toluene diisocyanate and trimellitic anhydride, may lead to sensitization independent of atopy. Individuals may also be exposed to allergens in the workplace such as small animal allergens in laboratory workers and fungal amylase in wheat flour in bakers. Occupational asthma may be suspected when symptoms improve during weekends and holidays.

Other Factors

Several other factors have been implicated in the etiology of asthma, including lower maternal age, duration of breast-feeding, prematurity and low birthweight, and inactivity, but are unlikely to contribute to the recent global increase in asthma prevalence. There is also an association with acetaminophen (paracetamol) consumption in childhood, which remains unexplained.
 
Pathogenesis

Asthma is associated with a specific chronic inflammation of the mucosa of the lower airways. One of the main aims of treatment is to reduce this inflammation.

Pathology

The pathology of asthma has been revealed through examining the lungs at autopsy of patients who have died of asthma and from bronchial biopsies in patients with usually mild asthma. The airway mucosa is infiltrated with activated eosinophils and T lymphocytes, and there is activation of mucosal mast cells. The degree of inflammation is poorly related to disease severity and may be found in atopic patients without asthma symptoms. The inflammation is reduced by treatment with ICS. A characteristic finding is thickening of the basement membrane due to subepithelial collagen deposition. This feature is also found in patients with eosinophilic bronchitis presenting as cough who do not have asthma and is, therefore, likely to be a marker of eosinophilic inflammation in the airway as eosinophils release fibrogenic factors. The epithelium is often shed or friable, with reduced attachments to the airway wall and increased numbers of epithelial cells in the lumen. The airway wall itself may be thickened and edematous, particularly in fatal asthma. Another common finding in fatal asthma is occlusion of the airway lumen by a mucous plug, which is comprised of mucous glycoproteins secreted from goblet cells and plasma proteins from leaky bronchial vessels (Fig. 254-1). There is also vasodilation and increased numbers of blood vessels (angiogenesis). Direct observation by bronchoscopy indicates that the airways may be narrowed, erythematous, and edematous. The pathology of asthma is remarkably uniform in different types of asthma, including atopic, nonatopic, occupational, aspirin-sensitive, and pediatric asthma. These pathologic changes are found in all airways, but do not extend to the lung parenchyma; peripheral airway inflammation is found particularly in patients with severe asthma. The involvement of airways may be patchy and this is consistent with bronchographic findings of uneven narrowing of the airways.

Figure 254-1

 
 
 
Histopathology of a small airway in fatal asthma. The lumen is occluded with a mucous plug, there is goblet cell metaplasia, and the airway wall is thickened, with an increase in basement membrane thickness and airway smooth muscle. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Hogg, University of British Colombia.)
 
 

Inflammation

There is inflammation in the respiratory mucosa from the trachea to terminal bronchioles, but with a predominance in the bronchi (cartilaginous airways). Considerable research has identified the major cellular components of inflammation, but it is still uncertain how inflammatory cells interact and how inflammation translates into the symptoms of asthma (Fig. 254-2). There is good evidence that the specific pattern of airway inflammation in asthma is associated with airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR), the physiologic abnormality of asthma, which is correlated with variable airflow obstruction. The pattern of inflammation in asthma is characteristic of allergic diseases, with similar inflammatory cells seen in the nasal mucosa in rhinitis. However, an indistinguishable pattern of inflammation is found in intrinsic asthma, and this may reflect local rather than systemic IgE production. Although most attention has focused on the acute inflammatory changes seen in asthma, this is a chronic condition, with inflammation persisting over many years in most patients. The mechanisms involved in persistence of inflammation in asthma are still poorly understood. Superimposed on this chronic inflammatory state are acute inflammatory episodes, which correspond to exacerbations of asthma. Many inflammatory cells are known to be involved in asthma with no key cell that is predominant (Fig. 254-3).

Figure 254-2

 
 
 
Inflammation in the airways of asthmatic patients leads to airway hyperresponsiveness and symptoms. SO2, sulfur dioxide.
 
 

Figure 254-3

 
 
 
The pathophysiology of asthma is complex with participation of several interacting inflammatory cells, which result in acute and chronic inflammatory effects on the airway.
 
 

Mast Cells

Mast cells are important in initiating the acute bronchoconstrictor responses to allergens and several other indirectly acting stimuli such as exercise and hyperventilation (via osmolality or thermal changes), as well as fog. Activated mast cells are found at the airway surface in asthma patients and also in the airway smooth-muscle layer, whereas this is not seen in normal subjects or patients with eosinophilic bronchitis. Mast cells are activated by allergens through an IgE-dependent mechanism, and binding of specific IgE to mast cells renders them more sensitive to activation. The importance of IgE in the pathophysiology of asthma has been highlighted by clinical studies with humanized anti-IgE antibodies, which inhibit IgE-mediated effects, reduce asthma symptoms, and reduce exacerbations. There are, however, uncertainties about the role of mast cells in more chronic allergic inflammatory events. Mast cells release several bronchoconstrictor mediators, including histamine, prostaglandin D2, and cysteinyl-leukotrienes, but also several cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and neurotrophins.

Macrophages and Dendritic Cells

Macrophages, which are derived from blood monocytes, may traffic into the airways in asthma and may be activated by allergens via low affinity IgE receptors (FcRII). Macrophages have the capacity to initiate a type of inflammatory response via the release of a certain pattern of cytokines, but these cells also release anti-inflammatory mediators (e.g., IL-10) and, thus, their roles in asthma are uncertain. Dendritic cells are specialized macrophage-like cells in the airway epithelium, which are the major antigen-presenting cells. Dendritic cells take up allergens, process them to peptides, and migrate to local lymph nodes where they present the allergenic peptides to uncommitted T-lymphocytes to program the production of allergen-specific T cells. Immature dendritic cells in the respiratory tract promote TH2 cell differentiation and require cytokines such as IL-12 and tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), to promote the normally preponderant TH1 response. The cytokine thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) released from epithelial cells in asthmatic patients instructs dendritic cells to release chemokines that attract TH2 cells into the airways.

Eosinophils

Eosinophil infiltration is a characteristic feature of asthmatic airways. Allergen inhalation results in a marked increase in activated eosinophils in the airways at the time of the late reaction. Eosinophils are linked to the development of AHR through the release of basic proteins and oxygen-derived free radicals. Eosinophil recruitment involves adhesion of eosinophils to vascular endothelial cells in the airway circulation due to interaction between adhesion molecules, migration into the submucosa under the direction of chemokines, and their subsequent activation and prolonged survival. Blocking antibodies to IL-5 causes a profound and prolonged reduction in circulating and sputum eosinophils, but is not associated with reduced AHR or asthma symptoms, although in selected patients with steroid-resistant airway eosinophils, there is a reduction in exacerbations. Eosinophilic inflammation is also found in patients with chronic cough (eosinophilic bronchitis) who do not have AHR or clinical features of asthma. Increasing evidence suggests that eosinophils may be important in release of growth factors involved in airway remodeling, in exacerbations but not in AHR.

Neutrophils

Increased numbers of activated neutrophils are found in sputum and airways of some patients with severe asthma and during exacerbations, although there is a proportion of patients even with mild or moderate asthma who have a predominance of neutrophils. The roles of neutrophils in asthma that are resistant to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids are currently unknown.

T Lymphocytes

T lymphocytes play a very important role in coordinating the inflammatory response in asthma through the release of specific patterns of cytokines, resulting in the recruitment and survival of eosinophils and in the maintenance of a mast cell population in the airways. The na?ve immune system and the immune system of asthmatics are skewed to express the TH2 phenotype, whereas in normal airways TH1 cells predominate. TH2 cells, through the release of IL-5, are associated with eosinophilic inflammation and, through the release of IL-4 and IL-13, are associated with increased IgE formation. Recently, bronchial biopsies have demonstrated a preponderance of natural killer CD4+ T lymphocytes that express high levels of IL-4. Regulatory T cells play an important role in determining the expression of other T cells, and there is evidence for a reduction in a certain subset of regulatory T cells (CD4+CD25+) in asthma that is associated with increased TH2 cells.

Structural Cells

Structural cells of the airways, including epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and airway smooth-muscle cells, are also important sources of inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and lipid mediators, in asthma. Indeed, because structural cells far outnumber inflammatory cells, they may become the major sources of mediators driving chronic inflammation in asthmatic airways. In addition, epithelial cells may have key roles in translating inhaled environmental signals into an airway inflammatory response, and are probably major target cells for ICS.

Inflammatory Mediators

Many different mediators have been implicated in asthma, and they may have a variety of effects on the airways that could account for the pathologic features of asthma (Fig. 254-4). Mediators such as histamine, prostaglandin D2, and cysteinyl-leukotrienes contract airway smooth muscle, increase microvascular leakage, increase airway mucus secretion, and attract other inflammatory cells. Because each mediator has many effects, the role of individual mediators in the pathophysiology of asthma is not yet clear. Although the multiplicity of mediators makes it unlikely that preventing the synthesis or action of a single mediator will have a major impact in clinical asthma, recent clinical studies with antileukotrienes suggest that cysteinyl-leukotrienes have clinically important effects.

Figure 254-4

 
 
 
Many cells and mediators are involved in asthma and lead to several effects on the airways.
 
 

Cytokines

Multiple cytokines regulate the chronic inflammation of asthma. The TH2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 mediate allergic inflammation, whereas proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF- and IL-1, amplify the inflammatory response and play a role in more severe disease. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is an upstream cytokine released from epithelial cells of asthmatics that orchestrates the release of chemokines that selectively attract TH2 cells. Some cytokines such as IL-10 and IL-12 are anti-inflammatory and may be deficient in asthma.

Chemokines

Chemokines are involved in attracting inflammatory cells from the bronchial circulation into the airways. Eotaxin (CCL11) is selectively attractant to eosinophils via CCR3 and is expressed by epithelial cells of asthmatics, whereas CCL17 (TARC) and CCL22 (MDC) from epithelial cells attract TH2 cells via CCR4 (Fig. 254-5).

Figure 254-5

 
 
 
Chemokines in asthma. Tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) and other triggers of airway epithelial cells release thymus and activationregulated chemokine (TARC, CCL17) and macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC, CCL22) from epithelial cells that attract TH2 cells via activation of their CCR4 receptors. These promote eosinophilic inflammation directly through the release of interleukin (IL)-5 and indirectly via the release of IL-4 and IL-13, which induce eotaxin (CCL11) formation in airway epithelial cells.
 
 

Oxidative Stress

There is increased oxidative stress in asthma as activated inflammatory cells such as macrophages and eosinophils that produce reactive oxygen species. Evidence for increased oxidative stress in asthma is provided by the increased concentrations of 8-isoprostane (a product of oxidized arachidonic acid) in exhaled breath condensates and increased ethane (a product of lipid peroxidation) in the expired air of asthmatic patients. Increased oxidative stress is related to disease severity, may amplify the inflammatory response, and may reduce responsiveness to corticosteroids.

Nitric Oxide

Nitric oxide (NO) is produced by several cells in the airway by NO synthases, particularly airway epithelial cells and macrophages. The level of NO in the expired air of patients with asthma is higher than normal and is related to the eosinophilic inflammation. Increased NO may contribute to the bronchial vasodilation observed in asthma. Exhaled NO is increasingly used in the diagnosis and monitoring of asthmatic inflammation, although it is not yet used routinely in clinical practice.

Transcription Factors

Proinflammatory transcription factors such as nuclear factor-B (NF-B) and activator protein-1, are activated in asthmatic airways and orchestrate the expression of multiple inflammatory genes. More specific transcription factors that are involved include nuclear factor of activated T cells and GATA-3, which regulate the expression of TH2 cytokines in T cells.

Effects of Inflammation

The chronic inflammatory response has several effects on the target cells of the airways, resulting in the characteristic pathophysiologic changes associated with asthma. Asthma may be regarded as a disease with continuous inflammation and repair proceeding simultaneously. Important advances continue to be made in our understanding of these changes, but, despite these new insights, the relationship between chronic inflammatory processes and asthma symptoms is often not clear.

Airway Epithelium

Airway epithelial shedding may be important in contributing to AHR and may explain how several mechanisms, such as ozone exposure, virus infections, chemical sensitizers, and allergen exposure, can lead to its development, as all of these stimuli may lead to epithelial disruption. Epithelial damage may contribute to AHR in a number of ways, including loss of its barrier function to allow penetration of allergens; loss of enzymes (such as neutral endopeptidase) that degrade certain peptide inflammatory mediators; loss of a relaxant factor (so called epithelial-derived relaxant factor); and exposure of sensory nerves, which may lead to reflex neural effects on the airway.

Fibrosis

In all asthmatic patients, the basement membrane is apparently thickened due to subepithelial fibrosis with deposition of types III and V collagen below the true basement membrane and is associated with eosinophil infiltration, presumably through the release of profibrotic mediators such as transforming growth factor-. Mechanical manipulations can alter the phenotype of airway epithelial cells in a profibrotic fashion. In more severe patients, there is also fibrosis within the airway wall, which may contribute to irreversible narrowing of the airways.

Airway Smooth Muscle

There is still debate about the role of abnormalities in airway smooth muscle in asthmatic airways. In vitro airway smooth muscle from asthmatic patients usually shows no increased responsiveness to constrictors. Reduced responsiveness to -agonists has also been reported in postmortem or surgically removed bronchi from asthmatics, although the number of -receptors is not reduced, suggesting that -receptors have been uncoupled. These abnormalities of airway smooth-muscle may be secondary to the chronic inflammatory process. Inflammatory mediators may modulate the ion channels that serve to regulate the resting membrane potential of airway smooth-muscle cells, thus altering the level of excitability of these cells. In asthmatic airways there is also a characteristic hypertrophy and hyperplasia of airway smooth muscle, which is presumably the result of stimulation of airway smooth-muscle cells by various growth factors such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) or endothelin-1 released from inflammatory or epithelial cells.

Vascular Responses

There is increased airway mucosal blood flow in asthma. The bronchial circulation may play an important role in regulating airway caliber, since an increase in the vascular volume may contribute to airway narrowing. Increased airway blood flow may be important in removing inflammatory mediators from the airway, and may play a role in the development of exercise-induced asthma. There is an increase in the number of blood vessels in asthmatic airways as a result of angiogenesis in response to growth factors, particularly vascular-endothelial growth factor. Microvascular leakage from postcapillary venules in response to inflammatory mediators is observed in asthma, resulting in airway edema and plasma exudation into the airway lumen.

Mucus Hypersecretion

Increased mucus secretion contributes to the viscid mucous plugs that occlude asthmatic airways, particularly in fatal asthma. There is evidence for hyperplasia of submucosal glands that are confined to large airways and of increased numbers of epithelial goblet cells. IL-4 and IL-13 induce mucus hypersecretion in experimental models of asthma.

Neural Effects

Various defects in autonomic neural control may contribute to AHR in asthma, but these are likely to be secondary to the disease, rather than primary defects. Cholinergic pathways, through the release of acetylcholine acting on muscarinic receptors, cause bronchoconstriction and may be activated reflexly in asthma. Inflammatory mediators may activate sensory nerves, resulting in reflex cholinergic bronchoconstriction or release of inflammatory neuropeptides. Inflammatory products may also sensitize sensory nerve endings in the airway epithelium such that the nerves become hyperalgesic. Neurotrophins, which may be released from various cell types in airways, including epithelial cells and mast cells, may cause proliferation and sensitization of airway sensory nerves. Airway nerves may also release neurotransmitters, such as substance P, which have inflammatory effects.

Airway Remodeling

Several changes in the structure of the airway are characteristically found in asthma, and these may lead to irreversible narrowing of the airways. Population studies have shown a greater decline in lung function over time than in normal subjects; however, most patients with asthma preserve normal or near-normal lung function throughout life if appropriately treated. This observation suggests that the accelerated decline in lung function occurs in a smaller proportion of asthmatics, and these are usually patients with more severe disease. There is some evidence that the early use of ICS may reduce the decline in lung function. The characteristic structural changes are increased airway smooth muscle, fibrosis, angiogenesis, and mucus hyperplasia.
 
Asthma Triggers

Several stimuli trigger airway narrowing, wheezing, and dyspnea in asthmatic patients. While the previous view held that these should be avoided, it is now seen as evidence for poor control and an indicator of the need to increase controller (preventive) therapy.

Allergens

Inhaled allergens activate mast cells with bound IgE directly leading to the immediate release of bronchoconstrictor mediators, resulting in the early response that is reversed by bronchodilators. Often, experimental allergen challenge is followed by a late response when there is airway edema and an acute inflammatory response with increased eosinophils and neutrophils that are not very reversible with bronchodilators. The most common allergens to trigger asthma are Dermatophagoides species, and environmental exposure leads to low-grade chronic symptoms that are perennial. Other perennial allergens are derived from cats and other domestic pets, as well as cockroaches. Other allergens, including grass pollen, ragweed, tree pollen, and fungal spores, are seasonal. Pollens usually cause allergic rhinitis rather than asthma, but in thunderstorms the pollen grains are disrupted and the particles that may be released can trigger severe asthma exacerbations (thunderstorm asthma).

Virus Infections

Upper respiratory tract virus infections such as rhinovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, and coronavirus are the most common triggers of acute severe exacerbations and may invade epithelial cells of the lower as well as the upper airways. The mechanism whereby these viruses cause exacerbations is poorly understood, but there is an increase in airway inflammation with increased numbers of eosinophils and neutrophils. There is evidence for reduced production of type I interferons by epithelial cells from asthmatic patients, resulting in increased susceptibility to these viral infections and a greater inflammatory response.

Pharmacologic Agents

Several drugs may trigger asthma. Beta-adrenergic blockers commonly acutely worsen asthma, and their use may be fatal. The mechanisms are not clear but are likely mediated through increased cholinergic bronchoconstriction. All beta blockers need to be avoided and even selective 2 blocker or topical application (e.g., timolol eye drops) may be dangerous. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are theoretically detrimental as they inhibit breakdown of kinins, which are bronchoconstrictors; however, they rarely worsen asthma, and the characteristic cough is no more frequent in asthmatics than in nonasthmatics. Aspirin may worsen asthma in some patients (aspirin-sensitive asthma is discussed below under "Special Considerations").

Exercise

Exercise is a common trigger of asthma, particularly in children. The mechanism is linked to hyperventilation, which results in increased osmolality in airway lining fluid and triggers mast cell mediator release, resulting in bronchoconstriction. Exercise-induced asthma (EIA) typically begins after exercise has ended, and recovers spontaneously within about 30 minutes. EIA is worse in cold, dry climates than in hot, humid conditions. It is, therefore, more common in sports such as cross-country running in cold weather, overland skiing, and ice hockey than in swimming. It may be prevented by prior administration of 2-agonists and antileukotrienes, but is best prevented by regular treatment with ICS, which reduce the population of surface mast cells required for this response.

Physical Factors

Cold air and hyperventilation may trigger asthma through the same mechanisms as exercise. Laughter may also be a trigger. Many patients report worsening of asthma in hot weather and when the weather changes. Some asthmatics become worse when exposed to strong smells or perfumes, but the mechanism of this response is uncertain.

Food

There is little evidence that allergic reactions to food lead to increased asthma symptoms, despite the belief of many patients that their symptoms are triggered by particular food constituents. Exclusion diets are usually unsuccessful at reducing the frequency of episodes. Some foods such as shellfish and nuts may induce anaphylactic reactions that may include wheezing. Patients with aspirin-induced asthma may benefit from a salicylate-free diet, but these are difficult to maintain. Certain food additives may trigger asthma. Metabisulfite, which is used as a food preservative, may trigger asthma through the release of sulfur dioxide gas in the stomach. Tartrazine, a yellow food-coloring agent, was believed to be a trigger for asthma, but there is little convincing evidence for this.

Air Pollution

Increased ambient levels of sulfur dioxide, ozone, and nitrogen oxides are associated with increased asthma symptoms.

Occupational Factors

Several substances found in the workplace may act as sensitizing agents, as discussed above, but may also act as triggers of asthma symptoms. Occupational asthma is characteristically associated with symptoms at work with relief on weekends and holidays. If removed from exposure within the first 6 months of symptoms, there is usually complete recovery. More persistent symptoms lead to irreversible airway changes, and, thus, early detection and avoidance are important.

Hormonal Factors

Some women show premenstrual worsening of asthma, which can occasionally be very severe. The mechanisms are not completely understood, but are related to a fall in progesterone and in severe cases may be improved by treatment with high doses of progesterone or gonadotropin-releasing factors. Thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism can both worsen asthma, although the mechanisms are uncertain.

Gastroesophageal Reflux

Gastroesophageal reflux is common in asthmatic patients as it is increased by bronchodilators. Although acid reflux might trigger reflex bronchoconstriction, it rarely causes asthma symptoms, and antireflux therapy fails to reduce asthma symptoms in most patients.

Stress

Many asthmatics report worsening of symptoms with stress. There is no doubt that psychological factors can induce bronchoconstriction through cholinergic reflex pathways. Paradoxically, very severe stress such as bereavement usually does not worsen, and may even improve, asthma symptoms.
 
Pathophysiology

Limitation of airflow is due mainly to bronchoconstriction, but airway edema, vascular congestion, and luminal occlusion with exudate may also contribute. This results in a reduction in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio, and peak expiratory flow (PEF), as well as an increase in airway resistance. Early closure of peripheral airway results in lung hyperinflation, (air trapping) and increased residual volume, particularly during acute exacerbations and in severe persistent asthma. In more severe asthma, reduced ventilation and increased pulmonary blood flow result in mismatching of ventilation and perfusion and in bronchial hyperemia. Ventilatory failure is very uncommon, even in patients with severe asthma, and arterial Pco2 tends to be low due to increased ventilation.

Airway Hyperresponsiveness

AHR is the characteristic physiologic abnormality of asthma and describes the excessive bronchoconstrictor response to multiple inhaled triggers that would have no effect on normal airways. The increase in AHR is linked to the frequency of asthma symptoms, and, thus, an important aim of therapy is to reduce AHR. Increased bronchoconstrictor responsiveness is seen with direct broncho constrictors such as histamine and methacholine, which contract airway smooth muscle, but is characteristically also seen with many indirect stimuli, which release bronchoconstrictors from mast cells or activate sensory nerves. Most of the triggers for asthma symptoms appear to act indirectly, including allergens, exercise, hyperventilation, fog (via mast cell activation), irritant dusts, and sulfur dioxide (via a cholinergic reflex).
 
Clinical Features and Diagnosis

The characteristic symptoms of asthma are wheezing, dyspnea, and coughing, which are variable, both spontaneously and with therapy. Symptoms may be worse at night and patients typically awake in the early morning hours. Patients may report difficulty in filling their lungs with air. There is increased mucus production in some patients, with typically tenacious mucus that is difficult to expectorate. There may be increased ventilation and use of accessory muscles of ventilation. Prodromal symptoms may precede an attack, with itching under the chin, discomfort between the scapulae, or inexplicable fear (impending doom).

Typical physical signs are inspiratory, and to a greater extent expiratory, rhonchi throughout the chest, and there may be hyperinflation. Some patients, particularly children, may present with a predominant nonproductive cough (cough-variant asthma). There may be no abnormal physical findings when asthma is under control.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of asthma is usually apparent from the symptoms of variable and intermittent airways obstruction, but is usually confirmed by objective measurements of lung function.

Lung Function Tests

Simple spirometry confirms airflow limitation with a reduced FEV1, FEV1/FVC ratio, and PEF. Reversibility is demonstrated by a >12% and 200-mL increase in FEV1 15 minutes after an inhaled short-acting 2-agonist or in some patients by a 2 to 4 week trial of oral corticosteroids (OCS) (prednisone or prednisolone 30每40 mg daily). Measurements of PEF twice daily may confirm the diurnal variations in airflow obstruction. Flow-volume loops show reduced peak flow and reduced maximum expiratory flow. Further lung function tests are rarely necessary, but whole body plethysmography shows increased airway resistance and may show increased total lung capacity and residual volume. Gas diffusion is usually normal, but there may be a small increase in gas transfer in some patients.

Airway Responsiveness

The increased AHR is normally measured by methacholine or histamine challenge with calculation of the provocative concentration that reduces FEV1 by 20% (PC20). This is rarely useful in clinical practice, but can be used in the differential diagnosis of chronic cough and when the diagnosis is in doubt in the setting of normal pulmonary function tests. Occasionally exercise testing is done to demonstrate the postexercise bronchoconstriction if there is a predominant history of EIA. Allergen challenge is rarely necessary and should only be undertaken by a specialist if specific occupational agents are to be identified.

Hematologic Tests

Blood tests are not usually helpful. Total serum IgE and specific IgE to inhaled allergens [radioallergosorbent test (RAST)] may be measured in some patients.

Imaging

Chest roentgenography is usually normal but in more severe patients may show hyperinflated lungs. In exacerbations, there may be evidence of a pneumothorax. Lung shadowing usually indicates pneumonia or eosinophilic infiltrates in patients with bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. High-resolution CT may show areas of bronchiectasis in patients with severe asthma, and there may be thickening of the bronchial walls, but these changes are not diagnostic of asthma.

Skin Tests

Skin prick tests to common inhalant allergens are positive in allergic asthma and negative in intrinsic asthma, but are not helpful in diagnosis. Positive skin responses may be useful in persuading patients to undertake allergen avoidance measures.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide

Exhaled NO is now being used as a noninvasive test to measure eosinophilic airway inflammation. The typically elevated levels in asthma are reduced by ICS, so this may be a test of compliance with therapy. It may also be useful in demonstrating insufficient anti-inflammatory therapy.

Differential Diagnosis

It is usually not difficult to differentiate asthma from other conditions that cause wheezing and dyspnea. Upper airway obstruction by a tumor or laryngeal edema can mimic severe asthma, but patients typically present with stridor localized to large airways. The diagnosis is confirmed by a flow-volume loop that shows a reduction in inspiratory as well as expiratory flow, and bronchoscopy to demonstrate the site of upper airway narrowing. Persistent wheezing in a specific area of the chest may indicate endobronchial obstruction with a foreign body. Left ventricular failure may mimic the wheezing of asthma but basilar crackles are present in contrast to asthma.

Eosinophilic pneumonias and systemic vasculitis, including Churg-Strauss syndrome and polyarteritis nodosa, may be associated with wheezing. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is usually easy to differentiate from asthma as symptoms show less variability, never completely remit, and show much less (or no) reversibility to bronchodilators. Approximately 10% of COPD patients have features of asthma, with increased sputum eosinophils and a response to oral corticosteroids; these patients probably have both diseases concomitantly.

Treatment: Asthma

The treatment of asthma is straightforward and the majority of patients are now managed by internists and family doctors with effective and safe therapies. There are several aims of therapy (Table 254-2). Most emphasis has been placed on drug therapy, but several nonpharmacologic approaches have also been used. The main drugs for asthma can be divided into bronchodilators, which give rapid relief of symptoms mainly through relaxation of airway smooth muscle, and controllers, which inhibit the underlying inflammatory process.

Table 254-2 Aims of Asthma Therapy

 
 
 Minimal (ideally no) chronic symptoms, including nocturnal 
 Minimal (infrequent) exacerbations 
 No emergency visits 
 Minimal (ideally no) use of a required 2-agonist
  
 No limitations on activities, including exercise 
 Peak expiratory flow circadian variation <20% 
 (Near) normal PEF 
 Minimal (or no) adverse effects from medicine 
 


Abbreviation: PEF, peak expiratory flow.
 

Bronchodilator Therapies

Bronchodilators act primarily on airway smooth muscle to reverse the bronchoconstriction of asthma. This gives rapid relief of symptoms but has little or no effect on the underlying inflammatory process. Thus, bronchodilators are not sufficient to control asthma in patients with persistent symptoms. There are three classes of bronchodilators in current use: 2-adrenergic agonists, anticholinergics, and theophylline; of these, 2-agonists are by far the most effective.

2-Agonists

2-Agonists activate 2-adrenergic receptors, which are widely expressed in the airways. 2-Receptors are coupled through a stimulatory G protein to adenylyl cyclase, resulting in increased intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP), which relaxes smooth muscle cells and inhibits certain inflammatory cells, particularly mast cells.

Mode of Action

The primary action of 2-agonists is to relax airway smooth-muscle cells of all airways, where they act as functional antagonists, reversing and preventing contraction of airway smooth-muscle cells by all known bronchoconstrictors. This generalized action is likely to account for their great efficacy as bronchodilators in asthma. There are also additional nonbronchodilator effects that may be clinically useful, including inhibition of mast cell mediator release, reduction in plasma exudation, and inhibition of sensory nerve activation (Table 254-3). Inflammatory cells express small numbers of 2-receptors, but these are rapidly downregulated with 2-agonist activation so that, in contrast to corticosteroids, there are no effects on inflammatory cells in the airways and there is no reduction in AHR.

Table 254-3 Effects of -Adrenergic Agonists on Airways

 
 
 Relaxation of airway smooth muscle (proximal and distal airways) 
 Inhibition of mast cell mediator release 
 Inhibition of plasma exudation and airway edema 
 Increased mucociliary clearance 
 Increased mucus secretion 
 Decreased cough 
 No effect on chronic inflammation 
 

 

Clinical Use

2-Agonists are usually given by inhalation to reduce side effects. Short-acting 2-agonists (SABAs) such as albuterol and terbutaline have a duration of action of 3每6 hours. They have a rapid onset of bronchodilation and are, therefore, used as needed for symptom relief. Increased use of SABAs indicates that asthma is not controlled. They are also useful in preventing EIA if taken prior to exercise. SABAs are used in high doses by nebulizer or via a metered-dose inhaler with a spacer. Long-acting 2-agonists (LABAs) include salmeterol and formoterol, both of which have a duration of action over 12 hours and are given twice daily by inhalation. LABAs have replaced the regular use of SABAs, but LABAs should not be given in the absence of ICS therapy as they do not control the underlying inflammation. They do, however, improve asthma control and reduce exacerbations when added to ICS, which allows asthma to be controlled at lower doses of corticosteroids. This observation has led to the widespread use of fixed combination inhalers that contain a corticosteroid and a LABA, which have proved to be highly effective in the control of asthma.

Side Effects

Adverse effects are not usually a problem with 2-agonists when given by inhalation. The most common side effects are muscle tremor and palpitations, which are seen more commonly in elderly patients. There is a small fall in plasma potassium due to increased uptake by skeletal muscle cells, but this effect does not usually cause any clinical problem.

Tolerance

Tolerance is a potential problem with any agonist given chronically, but while there is down-regulation of 2-receptors, this does not reduce the bronchodilator response as there is a large receptor reserve in airway smooth-muscle cells. By contrast, mast cells become rapidly tolerant, but their tolerance may be prevented by concomitant administration of ICS.

Safety

The safety of 2-agonists has been an important issue. There is an association between asthma mortality and the amount of SABA used, but careful analysis demonstrates that the increased use of rescue SABAs reflects poor asthma control, which is a risk factor for asthma death. The slight excess in mortality that has been associated with the use of LABAs is related to the lack of use of concomitant ICS, as the LABA therapy fails to suppress the underlying inflammation. This highlights the importance of always using an ICS when LABAs are given, which is most conveniently achieved by using a combination inhaler.

Anticholinergics

Muscarinic receptor antagonists such as ipratropium bromide, prevent cholinergic nerve-induced bronchoconstriction and mucus secretion. They are much less effective than 2-agonists in asthma therapy as they inhibit only the cholinergic reflex component of bronchoconstriction, whereas 2-agonists prevent all bronchoconstrictor mechanisms. Anticholinergics are, therefore, only used as an additional bronchodilator in patients with asthma that is not controlled by other inhaled medications. High doses may be given by nebulizer in treating acute severe asthma but should only be given following 2-agonists, as they have a slower onset of bronchodilation.

Side effects are not usually a problem as there is little or no systemic absorption. The most common side effect is dry mouth; in elderly patients, urinary retention and glaucoma may also be observed.

Theophylline

Theophylline was widely prescribed as an oral bronchodilator several years ago, especially as it was inexpensive. It has now fallen out of favor as side effects are common and inhaled 2-agonists are much more effective as bronchodilators. The bronchodilator effect is due to inhibition of phosphodiesterases in airway smooth-muscle cells, which increases cyclic AMP, but doses required for bronchodilation commonly cause side effects that are mediated mainly by phosphodiesterase inhibition. There is increasing evidence that theophylline at lower doses has anti-inflammatory effects, and these are likely to be mediated through different molecular mechanisms. There is evidence that theophylline activates the key nuclear enzyme histone deacetylase-2, which is a critical mechanism for switching off activated inflammatory genes.

Clinical Use

Oral theophylline is usually given as a slow-release preparation once or twice daily as this gives more stable plasma concentrations than normal theophylline tablets. It may be used as an additional bronchodilator in patients with severe asthma when plasma concentrations of 10每20 mg/L are required, although these concentrations are often associated with side effects. Low doses of theophylline, giving plasma concentrations of 5每10 mg/L, have additive effects to ICS and are particularly useful in patients with severe asthma. Indeed, withdrawal of theophylline from these patients may result in marked deterioration in asthma control. At low doses, the drug is well tolerated. IV aminophylline (a soluble salt of theophylline) was used for the treatment of severe asthma but has now been largely replaced by high doses of inhaled SABAs, which are more effective and have fewer side effects. Aminophylline is occasionally used (via slow IV infusion) in patients with severe exacerbations that are refractory to SABAs.

Side Effects

Oral theophylline is well absorbed and is largely inactivated in the liver. Side effects are related to plasma concentrations; measurement of plasma theophylline may be useful in determining the correct dose. The most common side effects are nausea, vomiting, and headaches and are due to phosphodiesterase inhibition. Diuresis and palpitations may also occur, and at high concentrations cardiac arrhythmias, epileptic seizures, and death may occur due to adenosine A1-receptor antagonism. Theophylline side effects are related to plasma concentration and are rarely observed at plasma concentrations below 10 mg/L. Theophylline is metabolized by CYP450 in the liver, and, thus, plasma concentrations may be elevated by drugs that block CYP450 such as erythromycin and allopurinol. Other drugs may also reduce clearance by other mechanisms leading to increased plasma concentrations (Table 254-4).

Table 254-4 Factors Affecting Clearance of Theophylline

 
 
Increased Clearance  
 Enzyme induction (rifampicin, phenobarbitone, ethanol) 
 Smoking (tobacco, marijuana) 
 High-protein, low-carbohydrate diet 
 Barbecued meat 
 Childhood 
Decreased Clearance  
 Enzyme inhibition (cimetidine, erythromycin, ciprofloxacin, allopurinol, zileuton, zafirlukast) 
 Congestive heart failure 
 Liver disease 
 Pneumonia 
 Viral infection and vaccination 
 High carbohydrate diet 
 Old age 
 

 

Controller Therapies

Inhaled Corticosteroids

ICS are by far the most effective controllers for asthma, and their early use has revolutionized asthma therapy.

Mode of Action

ICS are the most effective anti-inflammatory agents used in asthma therapy, reducing inflammatory cell numbers and their activation in the airways. ICS reduce eosinophils in the airways and sputum, and numbers of activated T lymphocytes and surface mast cells in the airway mucosa. These effects may account for the reduction in AHR that is seen with chronic ICS therapy.

The molecular mechanism of action of corticosteroids involves several effects on the inflammatory process. The major effect of corticosteroids is to switch off the transcription of multiple activated genes that encode inflammatory proteins such as cytokines, chemokines, adhesion molecules, and inflammatory enzymes. This effect involves several mechanisms, including inhibition of the transcription factors NF-B and activator protein (AP)-1, but an important mechanism is recruitment of histone deacetylase-2 to the inflammatory gene complex, which reverses the histone acetylation associated with increased gene transcription. Corticosteroids also activate anti-inflammatory genes such as mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase-1, and increase the expression of 2-receptors. Most of the metabolic and endocrine side effects of corticosteroids are also mediated through transcriptional activation.

Clinical Use

ICS are by far the most effective controllers in the management of asthma and are beneficial in treating asthma of any severity and age. ICS are usually given twice daily, but some may be effective once daily in mildly symptomatic patients. ICS rapidly improve the symptoms of asthma, and lung function improves over several days. They are effective in preventing asthma symptoms, such as EIA and nocturnal exacerbations, but also prevent severe exacerbations. ICS reduce AHR, but maximal improvement may take several months of therapy. Early treatment with ICS appears to prevent irreversible changes in airway function that occur with chronic asthma. Withdrawal of ICS results in slow deterioration of asthma control, indicating that they suppress inflammation and symptoms, but do not cure the underlying condition. ICS are now given as first-line therapy for patients with persistent asthma, but if they do not control symptoms at low doses, it is usual to add a LABA as the next step.

Side Effects

Local side effects include hoarseness (dysphonia) and oral candidiasis, which may be reduced with the use of a large-volume spacer device. There has been concern about systemic side effects from lung absorption, but many studies have demonstrated that ICS have minimal systemic effects (Fig. 254-6). At the highest recommended doses, there may be some suppression of plasma and urinary cortisol concentrations, but there is no convincing evidence that long-term treatment leads to impaired growth in children or to osteoporosis in adults. Indeed effective control of asthma with ICS reduces the number of courses of OCS that are needed and, thus, reduces systemic exposure to ICS.

Figure 254-6

 
 
 
Pharmacokinetics of inhaled corticosteroids.
 
 

Systemic Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids are used intravenously (hydrocortisone or methylprednisolone) for the treatment of acute severe asthma, although several studies now show that OCS are as effective and easier to administer. A course of OCS (usually prednisone or prednisolone 30每45 mg once daily for 5每10 days) is used to treat acute exacerbations of asthma; no tapering of the dose is needed. Approximately 1% of asthma patients may require maintenance treatment with OCS; the lowest dose necessary to maintain control needs to be determined. Systemic side effects, including truncal obesity, bruising, osteoporosis, diabetes, hypertension, gastric ulceration, proximal myopathy, depression, and cataracts, may be a major problem, and steroid每sparing therapies may be considered if side effects are a significant problem. If patients require maintenance treatment with OCS, it is important to monitor bone density so that preventive treatment with bisphosphonates or estrogen in postmenopausal women may be initiated if bone density is low. Intramuscular triamcinolone acetonide is a depot preparation that is occasionally used in noncompliant patients, but proximal myopathy is a major problem with this therapy.

Antileukotrienes

Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are potent bronchoconstrictors, cause microvascular leakage, and increase eosinophilic inflammation through the activation of cys-LT1-receptors. These inflammatory mediators are produced predominantly by mast cells and, to a lesser extent, eosinophils in asthma. Antileukotrienes such as montelukast and zafirlukast, block cys-LT1-receptors and provide modest clinical benefit in asthma. They are less effective than ICS in controlling asthma and have less effect on airway inflammation, but are useful as an add-on therapy in some patients not controlled with low doses of ICS, although they are less effective than LABAs. They are given orally once or twice daily and are well tolerated. Some patients show a better response than others to antileukotrienes, but this has not been convincingly linked to any genomic differences in the leukotriene pathway.

Cromones

Cromolyn sodium and nedocromil sodium are asthma controller drugs that appear to inhibit mast cell and sensory nerve activation and are, therefore, effective in blocking trigger-induced asthma such as EIA and allergen- and sulfur dioxide每induced symptoms. Cromones have relatively little benefit in the long-term control of asthma due to their short duration of action (at least four times daily by inhalation). They are very safe and were popular in the treatment of childhood asthma, although now low doses of ICS are preferred as they are more effective and have a proven safety profile.

Steroid-Sparing Therapies

Various immunomodulatory treatments have been used to reduce the requirement for OCS in patients with severe asthma, who have serious side effects with this therapy. Methotrexate, cyclosporin A, azathioprine, gold, and IV gamma globulin have all been used as steroid-sparing therapies, but none of these treatments has any long-term benefit and each is associated with a relatively high risk of side effects.

Anti-IgE

Omalizumab is a blocking antibody that neutralizes circulating IgE without binding to cell-bound IgE and, thus, inhibits IgE-mediated reactions. This treatment has been shown to reduce the number of exacerbations in patients with severe asthma and may improve asthma control. However, the treatment is very expensive and is only suitable for highly selected patients who are not controlled on maximal doses of inhaler therapy and have a circulating IgE within a specified range. Patients should be given a 3 to 4-month trial of therapy to show objective benefit. Omalizumab is usually given as a subcutaneous injection every 2每4 weeks and appears not to have significant side effects, although anaphylaxis is very occasionally seen.

Immunotherapy

Specific immunotherapy using injected extracts of pollens or house dust mites has not been very effective in controlling asthma and may cause anaphylaxis. Side effects may be reduced by sublingual dosing. It is not recommended in most asthma treatment guidelines because of lack of evidence of clinical efficacy.

Alternative Therapies

Nonpharmacologic treatments, including hypnosis, acupuncture, chiropraxis, breathing control, yoga, and speleotherapy, may be popular with some patients. However, placebo-controlled studies have shown that each of these treatments lacks efficacy and cannot be recommended. However, they are not detrimental and may be used as long as conventional pharmacologic therapy is continued.

Future Therapies

It has proved very difficult to discover novel pharmaceutical therapies, particularly as current therapy with corticosteroids and 2-agonists is so effective in the majority of patients. There is, however, a need for the development of new therapies for patients with refractory asthma who have side effects with systemic corticosteroids. Antagonists of specific mediators have little or no benefit in asthma, apart from antileukotrienes, which have rather weak effects, presumably reflecting the fact that multiple mediators are involved. Blocking antibodies against IL-5 may reduce exacerbations in highly selected patients who have sputum eosinophils despite high doses of corticosteroids, whereas anti-TNF- antibodies are not effective in severe asthma. Novel anti-inflammatory treatments that are in clinical development include inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-4, NF-B and p38 MAP kinase. However, these drugs, which act on signal transduction pathways common to many cells, are likely to have troublesome side effects, necessitating their delivery by inhalation. Safer and more effective immunotherapy using T-cell peptide fragments of allergens or DNA vaccination are also being investigated. Bacterial products, such as CpG oligonucleotides that stimulate TH1 immunity or regulatory T cells, are also currently under evaluation.

Management of Chronic Asthma

There are several aims of chronic therapy in asthma (Table 254-2). It is important to establish the diagnosis objectively using spirometry or PEF measurements at home. Triggers that worsen asthma control, such as allergens or occupational agents, should be avoided, whereas triggers, such as exercise and fog, which result in transient symptoms, provide an indication that more controller therapy is needed.

Stepwise Therapy

For patients with mild, intermittent asthma, a short-acting 2-agonist is all that is required (Fig. 254-7). However, use of a reliever medication more than three times a week indicates the need for regular controller therapy. The treatment of choice for all patients is an ICS given twice daily. It is usual to start with an intermediate dose [e.g., 200 (g) bid of (beclomethasone dipropionate) BDP] or equivalent and to decrease the dose if symptoms are controlled after three months. If symptoms are not controlled, a LABA should be added, which is most conveniently given by switching to a combination inhaler. The dose of controller should be adjusted accordingly, as judged by the need for a rescue inhaler. Low doses of theophylline or an antileukotriene may also be considered as an add-on therapy, but these are less effective than LABAs. In patients with severe asthma, low-dose oral theophylline is also helpful, and when there is irreversible airway narrowing, the long-acting anticholinergic tiotropium bromide may be tried. If asthma is not controlled despite the maximal recommended dose of inhaled therapy, it is important to check compliance and inhaler technique. In these patients, maintenance treatment with an OCS may be needed and the lowest dose that maintains control should be used. Occasionally omalizumab may be tried in steroid-dependent asthmatics who are not well controlled. Once asthma is controlled, it is important to slowly decrease therapy in order to find the optimal dose to control symptoms.

Figure 254-7

 
 
 
Stepwise approach to asthma therapy according to the severity of asthma and ability to control symptoms. ICS, inhaled corticosteroids; LABA, long-acting 2-agonist; OCS, oral corticosteroid.
 
 

Education

Patients with asthma need to understand how to use their medications and the difference between reliever and controller therapies. Education may improve compliance, particularly with ICS. All patients should be taught how to use their inhalers correctly. In particular, they need to understand how to recognize worsening of asthma and how to step up therapy. Written action plans have been shown to reduce hospital admissions and morbidity rates in adults and children, and are recommended particularly in patients with unstable disease who have frequent exacerbations.
 
Acute Severe Asthma

Exacerbations of asthma are feared by patients and may be life threatening. One of the main aims of controller therapy is to prevent exacerbations; in this respect, ICS and combination inhalers are very effective.

Clinical Features

Patients are aware of increasing chest tightness, wheezing, and dyspnea that are often not or poorly relieved by their usual reliever inhaler. In severe exacerbations patients may be so breathless that they are unable to complete sentences and may become cyanotic. Examination usually shows increased ventilation, hyperinflation, and tachycardia. Pulsus paradoxus may be present, but this is rarely a useful clinical sign. There is a marked fall in spirometric values and PEF. Arterial blood gases on air show hypoxemia and PCO2 is usually low due to hyperventilation. A normal or rising PCO2 is an indication of impending respiratory failure and requires immediate monitoring and therapy. A chest roentgenogram is not usually informative, but may show pneumonia or pneumothorax.

Treatment: Acute Severe Asthma

A high concentration of oxygen should be given by face mask to achieve oxygen saturation of >90%. The mainstay of treatment are high doses of SABAs given either by nebulizer or via a metered-dose inhaler with a spacer. In severely ill patients with impending respiratory failure, IV 2-agonists may be given. An inhaled anticholinergic may be added if there is not a satisfactory response to 2-agonists alone, as there are additive effects. In patients who are refractory to inhaled therapies, a slow infusion of aminophylline may be effective, but it is important to monitor blood levels, especially if patients have already been treated with oral theophylline. Magnesium sulfate given intravenously or by nebulizer has also been shown to be effective when added to inhaled 2-agonists, and is relatively well tolerated but is not routinely recommended. Prophylactic intubation may be indicated for impending respiratory failure, when the PCO2 is normal or rises. For patients with respiratory failure, it is necessary to intubate and institute ventilation. These patients may benefit from an anesthetic such as halothane if they have not responded to conventional bronchodilators. Sedatives should never be given as they may depress ventilation. Antibiotics should not be used routinely unless there are signs of pneumonia.
 
Refractory Asthma

Although most patients with asthma are easily controlled with appropriate medication, a small proportion of patients (approximately 5% of asthmatics) are difficult to control despite maximal inhaled therapy. Some of these patients will require maintenance treatment with OCS. In managing these patients, it is important to investigate and correct any mechanisms that may be aggravating asthma. There are two major patterns of difficult asthma: some patients have persistent symptoms and poor lung function, despite appropriate therapy, whereas others may have normal or near normal lung function but intermittent, severe (sometimes life-threatening) exacerbations.

Mechanisms

The most common reason for poor control of asthma is noncompliance with medication, particularly ICS. Compliance with ICS may be low because patients do not feel any immediate clinical benefit or may be concerned about side effects. Compliance with ICS is difficult to monitor as there are no useful plasma measurements that can be made. Compliance may be improved by giving the ICS as a combination with a LABA that gives symptom relief. Compliance with OCS may be measured by suppression of plasma cortisol and the expected concentration of prednisone/prednisolone in the plasma. There are several factors that may make asthma more difficult to control, including exposure to high, ambient levels of allergens or unidentified occupational agents. Severe rhinosinusitis may make asthma more difficult to control; upper airway disease should be vigorously treated. Gastroesophageal reflux is common among asthmatics due to bronchodilator therapy, but there is little evidence that it is a significant factor in worsening asthma, and treatment of the reflux is not usually effective at improving asthma symptoms. Some patients may have chronic infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Chlamydophila pneumoniae and benefit from treatment with a macrolide antibiotic. Drugs such as beta-adrenergic blockers, aspirin, and other cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors may worsen asthma. Some women develop severe premenstrual worsening of asthma, which is unresponsive to corticosteroids and requires treatment with progesterone or gonadotropin-releasing factors. Few systemic diseases make asthma more difficult to control, but hyper- and hypothyroidism may increase asthma symptoms and should be investigated if suspected.

Relatively little is known about the pathology of refractory asthma, as biopsy studies are more difficult in these patients. Some patients show the typical eosinophilic pattern of inflammation, whereas others have a predominantly neutrophilic pattern. There may be an increase in TH1 cells and CD8 lymphocytes compared to mild asthma and increased expression of TNF-. Structural changes in the airway, including fibrosis, angiogenesis, and airway smoothmuscle thickening, are more commonly seen in these patients.

Differential Diagnosis

Some patients who apparently have difficult-to-control asthma have vocal cord dysfunction, resulting in wheezing or stridor. This symptom is thought to be an attention-seeking hysterical conversion syndrome and may lead to escalating doses of asthma therapy with some patients taking high doses of oral corticosteroids. It may be recognized by the characteristic discrepancy between tests of forced expiration, such as FEV1 and PEF, and relatively normal airway resistance. Direct inspection by laryngoscopy may confirm adduction of the vocal cords at the time of symptoms. This condition is usually difficult to manage, but it is important that patients be weaned off ocs and Ics. Speech therapy is sometimes beneficial. Some patients with COPD may be diagnosed as asthmatic and may show the characteristic poor response to corticosteroids and bronchodilators, but this situation is complicated by the fact that some patients with COPD also have concomitant asthma.

Corticosteroid-Resistant Asthma

A few patients with asthma show a poor response to corticosteroid therapy and may have various molecular abnormalities that impair the anti-inflammatory action of corticosteroids. Complete resistance to corticosteroids is extremely uncommon and affects less than 1 in 1000 patients. It is defined by a failure to respond to a high dose of oral prednisone/prednisolone (40 mg once daily over 2 weeks), ideally with a 2-week run-in with matched placebo. More common is reduced responsiveness to corticosteroids where control of asthma requires OCS (corticosteroid-dependent asthma). In all patients with poor responsiveness to corticosteroids, there is a reduction in the response of circulating monocytes and lymphocytes to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids in vitro and reduced skin blanching in response to topical corticosteroids. There are several mechanisms that have been described, including an excess of the transcription factor AP-1, an increase in the alternatively spliced form of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-, an abnormal pattern of histone acetylation in response to corticosteroids, a defect in IL-10 production, and a reduction in histone deacetylase activity (as in COPD). These observations suggest that there are likely to be heterogeneous mechanisms for corticosteroid resistance; whether these mechanisms are genetically determined has yet to be decided.

Brittle Asthma

Some patients show chaotic variations in lung function despite taking appropriate therapy. Some show a persistent pattern of variability and may require oral corticosteroids or, at times, continuous infusion of 2-agonists (type I brittle asthma), whereas others have generally normal or near-normal lung function but precipitous, unpredictable falls in lung function that may result in death (type 2 brittle asthma). These latter patients are difficult to manage as they do not respond well to corticosteroids, and the worsening of asthma does not reverse well with inhaled bronchodilators. The most effective therapy is subcutaneous epinephrine, which suggests that the worsening is likely to be a localized airway anaphylactic reaction with edema. In some of these patients, there may be allergy to specific foods. These patients should be taught to self-administer epinephrine and should carry a medical warning accordingly.

Treatment: Refractory Asthma

Refractory asthma is difficult to control, by definition. It is important to check compliance and the correct use of inhalers and to identify and eliminate any underlying triggers. Low doses of theophylline may be helpful in some patients, and theophylline withdrawal has been found to worsen in many patients. Most of these patients will require maintenance treatment with oral corticosteroids, and the minimal dose that achieves satisfactory control should be determined by careful dose titration. Steroid-sparing therapies are rarely effective. In some patients with allergic asthma, omalizumab is effective, particularly when there are frequent exacerbations. Anti-TNF therapy is not effective in severe asthma and should not be used. A few patients may benefit from infusions of 2-agonists. New therapies are needed for these patients, who currently consume a disproportionate amount of health care spending.
 
Special Considerations

Although asthma is usually straightforward to manage, there are some situations that may require additional investigation and different therapy.

Aspirin-Sensitive Asthma

A small proportion (1每5%) of asthmatics become worse with aspirin and other COX inhibitors, although this is much more commonly seen in severe cases and in those patients with frequent hospital admission. Aspirin-sensitive asthma is a well defined subtype of asthma that is usually preceded by perennial rhinitis and nasal polyps in nonatopic patients with a late onset of the disease. Aspirin, even in small doses, characteristically provokes rhinorrhea, conjunctival irritation, facial flushing, and wheezing. There is a genetic predisposition to increased production of cysteinyl-leukotrienes with functional polymorphism of cys-leukotriene C synthase. Asthma is triggered by COX inhibitors, but is persistent even in their absence. All nonselective COX inhibitors should be avoided, but selective COX2 inhibitors are safe to use when an anti-inflammatory analgesic is needed. Aspirin-sensitive asthma responds to usual therapy with ICS. Although antileukotrienes should be effective in these patients, they are no more effective than in allergic asthma. Occasionally, aspirin desensitization is necessary, but this should only be undertaken in specialized centers.

Asthma in the Elderly

Asthma may start at any age, including in elderly patients. The principles of management are the same as in other asthmatics, but side effects of therapy may be a problem, including muscle tremor with 2-agonists and more systemic side effects with ICS. Comorbidities are more frequent in this age group, and interactions with drugs such as 2-blockers, COX inhibitors, and agents that may affect theophylline metabolism need to be considered. COPD is more likely in elderly patients and may coexist with asthma. A trial of OCS may be very useful in documenting the steroid responsiveness of asthma.

Pregnancy

Approximately one-third of asthmatic patients who are pregnant improve during the course of a pregnancy, one-third deteriorate, and one-third are unchanged. It is important to maintain good control of asthma as poor control may have adverse effects on fetal development. Compliance may be a problem as there is often concern about the effects of antiasthma medications on fetal development. The drugs that have been used for many years in asthma therapy have now been shown to be safe and without teratogenic potential. These drugs include short-acting 2-agonists, ICS, and theophylline; there is less safety information about newer classes of drugs such as LABAs, antileukotrienes, and anti-IgE. If an OCS is needed, it is better to use prednisone rather than prednisolone as it cannot be converted to the active prednisolone by the fetal liver, thus protecting the fetus from systemic effects of the corticosteroid. There is no contraindication to breast-feeding when patients are using these drugs.

Cigarette Smoking

Approximately 20% of asthmatics smoke, which may adversely affect asthma in several ways. Smoking asthmatics have more severe disease, more frequent hospital admissions, a faster decline in lung function, and a higher risk of death from asthma than nonsmoking asthmatics. There is evidence that smoking interferes with the anti-inflammatory actions of corticosteroids, necessitating higher doses for asthma control. Smoking cessation improves lung function and reduces the steroid resistance, and, thus, vigorous smoking cessation strategies should be used. Some patients report a temporary worsening of asthma when they first stop smoking, which could be due to the loss of the bronchodilating effect of no in cigarette smoke.

Surgery

If asthma is well controlled, there is no contraindication to general anesthesia and intubation. Patients who are treated with OCS will have adrenal suppression and should be treated with an increased dose of OCS immediately prior to surgery. Patients with FEV1 <80% of their normal levels should also be given a boost of OCS prior to surgery. High-maintenance doses of corticosteroids may be a contraindication to surgery because of increased risks of infection and delayed wound healing.

Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis

Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (BPA) is uncommon and results from an allergic pulmonary reaction to inhaled spores of Aspergillus fumigatus and, occasionally, other Aspergillus species. A skin prick test to A. fumigatus is always positive, whereas serum Aspergillus precipitins are low or undetectable. Characteristically, there are fleeting eosinophilic infiltrates in the lungs, particularly in the upper lobes. Airways become blocked with mucoid plugs rich in eosinophils, and patients may cough up brown plugs and have hemoptysis. BPA may result in bronchiectasis, particularly affecting central airways, if not suppressed by corticosteroids. Asthma is controlled in the usual way by ICS, but it is necessary to give a course of OCS if any sign of worsening or pulmonary shadowing is found. Treatment with the oral antifungal itraconazole is beneficial in preventing exacerbations.
 
Further Readings

Barnes PJ: How corticosteroids control inflammation. Br J Pharmacol 148:245, 2006.[PMID: 16604091]  [Full Text]

 
_____: Cytokine networks in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Clin Invest 118:3546, 2008 

 
_____: Immunology of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Nat Immunol Rev 8:183, 2008 

 
_____ et al: Asthma and COPD, 2nd ed. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2009 

 
Bateman ED et al: Global strategy for asthma management and prevention: GINA executive summary. Eur Respir J 31:143, 2008[PMID: 18166595]  [Full Text]

 
Eder W et al: The asthma epidemic. N Engl J Med 355:2226, 2006[PMID: 17124020]  [Full Text]

 
Fanta CH: Asthma. N Engl J Med 360:1002, 2009[PMID: 19264689]  [Full Text]

 
Farooque SP, Lee TH: Aspirin-sensitive respiratory disease. Annu Rev Physiol 71:465, 2009[PMID: 19575683]  [Full Text]

 
Hamid Q, Tulic M: Immunobiology of asthma. Annu Rev Physiol 71:489, 2009[PMID: 19575684]  [Full Text]

 
_____: New therapies for asthma: Is there any progress? Trends Pharmacol Sci 31:355, 2010 

 
Lazarus SC: Emergency treatment of asthma. N Engl J Med 363:755, 2010[PMID: 20818877]  [Full Text]

 
Wenzel SE, Busse WW: Severe asthma: Lessons from the Severe Asthma Research Program. J Allergy Clin Immunol 119:14, 2007[PMID: 17208583]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

First described in 1874, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), or extrinsic allergic alveolitis, is an inflammatory disorder of the lung involving alveolar walls and terminal airways that is induced by repeated inhalation of a variety of organic agents in a susceptible host. The expression of HP depends on factors related to the host susceptibility and the inciting agent. The frequency of HP varies with the environmental exposure and the specific antigen involved, which often depends on season, geographic location, or presence of certain industries.

Etiology

Agents implicated as causes of HP are diverse and include those listed in Table 255-1. The common name of each disease often reflects the occupational or avocational risk associated with that disease. In the United States, the most common types of HP are farmer's lung, bird fancier's lung, and chemical worker's lung. In farmer's lung, inhalation of proteins, such as thermophilic bacteria and fungal spores that are present in moldy bedding and feed, are most commonly responsible for the development of HP. These antigens are probably also responsible for the etiology of mushroom worker's disease (moldy composted growth medium), bagassosis (moldy sugar cane), and water-related exposure (molds in air conditioners or humidifiers). Hot tub lung refers to a hypersensitivity reaction to Mycobacterium avium complex, which is present in hot tubs or whirlpools and is differentiated from actual infection. Bird fancier's lung (and the related disorders of duck fever, turkey handler's lung, and dove pillow's lung) is a response to inhalation of proteins from feathers and droppings. Chemical worker's lung is an example of how simple chemicals, such as isocyanates, may also cause immune-mediated diseases. Interestingly, cigarette smoking has been associated with decreased incidence of HP; however, smoking may lead to a more progressive or severe course of HP once the disease is present.

Table 255-1 Selected Examples of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis (HP)

 
 
Disease Antigen Source of Antigen 
Bagassosis Thermophilic actinomycetesa
  "Moldy" bagasse (sugar cane) 
Bird fancier's, breeder's, or handler's lungb
  Parakeet, pigeon, chicken, turkey proteins Avian droppings or feathers 
Cephalosporium HP Contaminated basement (sewage) Cephalosporium  
Cheese washer's lung Penicillium casei  Moldy cheese 
Chemical worker's lungb
  Isocyanates Polyurethane foam, varnishes, lacquer 
Coffee worker's lung Coffee bean dust Coffee beans 
Compost lung Aspergillus  Compost 
Detergent worker's disease Bacillus subtilis enzymes (subtilisins)  Detergent 
Familial HP Bacillus subtilis  Contaminated wood dust in walls 
Farmer's lungb
  Thermophilic actinomycetesa
  "Moldy" hay, grain, silage 
Fish food lung Unknown Fish food 
Fish meal worker's lung Fish meal dust Fish meal 
Furrier's lung Animal fur dust Animal pelts 
Hot tub lung Cladosporium spp., Mycobacterium avium complex  Mold on ceiling; contaminated water 
Humidifier or air conditioner lung (ventilation pneumonitis) Aureobasidium pullulans, Candida albicans, Thermophilic actinomycetes,amycobacterium spp., other microorganisms 
  Contaminated water in humidification or forced-air air conditioning systems 
Japanese summer-type HP Trichosporon cutaneum, T. asahii, and T. mucoides  House dust, bird droppings 
Laboratory worker's HP Male rat urine Laboratory rat 
Lycoperdonosis Lycoperdon puffballs  Puffball spores 
Malt worker's lung Aspergillus fumigatus or A. clavatus  Moldy barley 
Maple bark disease Cryptostroma corticale  Maple bark 
Metalworking fluid lung Mycobacterium spp., Pseudomonas spp.  Contaminated metalworking fluid 
Miller's lung Sitophilus granarius (wheat weevil)  Infested wheat flour 
Miscellaneous medication Amiodarone, bleomycin, efavirenz, gemcitabine, hydralazine, hydroxyurea, isoniazid, methotrexate, paclitaxel, penicillin, procarbazine, propranolol, riluzole, sirolimus, sulfasalazine Medication 
Mushroom worker's lung Thermophilic actinomycetes,aHypsizygus marmoreus, Bunashimeji, and other exotic mushrooms 
  Mushroom compost; mushrooms 
Pituitary snuff taker's lung Animal proteins Heterologous pituitary snuff 
Potato riddler's lung Thermophilic actinomycetes,aAspergillus 
  "Moldy" hay around potatoes 
Sauna taker's lung Aureobasidium spp., other  Contaminated sauna water 
Sausage worker's lung Penicillium nalgiovense  Dry sausage mold 
Sequoiosis Aureobasidium, Graphium spp.  Redwood sawdust 
Streptomyces albus HP Streptomyces albus  Contaminated fertilizer 
Suberosis Penicillium glabrum and Chrysonilia sitophila  Cork dust 
Tap water lung Mycobacteria spp.  Contaminated tap water 
Thatched roof disease Saccharomonospora viridis  Dried grasses and leaves 
Tobacco worker's disease Aspergillus spp.  Mold on tobacco 
Winegrower's lung Botrytis cinerea  Mold on grapes 
Wood trimmer's disease Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp.  Contaminated wood trimmings 
Woodman's disease Penicillium spp.  Oak and maple trees 
Woodworker's lung Wood dust, Alternaria Oak, cedar, pine, and mahogany dusts 
 


aThermophilic actinomycetes species include Micropolyspora faeni, Thermoactinomyces vulgaris, T. saccharri, T. viridis, and T. candidus.

bMost common causes of hypersensitivity pneumonitis in the United States.
 

Pathogenesis

The finding that precipitating antibodies against extracts of moldy hay were demonstrable in most patients with farmer's lung led to the early conclusion that HP was an immune complex每mediated reaction. Subsequent investigations of HP in human beings and animal models provided evidence for the importance of cell-mediated hypersensitivity. The very early (acute) reaction is characterized by an increase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the alveoli and small airways. This early lesion is followed by an influx of mononuclear cells into the lung and the formation of granulomas that appear to be the result of a classic delayed (T cell每mediated) hypersensitivity reaction to repeated inhalation of antigen and adjuvant-active materials. Studies in animal models suggest that the disease is a TH1-mediated immune response to antigen, with interferon , interleukin (IL)-12, and possibly IL-18 contributing to disease expression. Most likely, multiple cytokines [including also IL-1, transforming growth factor  (TGF-), tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) and others] interact to promote HP; their source includes both alveolar macrophages and T lymphocytes in the lung. Data support a genetic predisposition to the development of HP; certain polymorphisms of the TNF- promoter region and major histocompatibility complex reportedly confer an enhanced susceptibility to pigeon breeder's disease.

After inhalation of an antigenic particle, the attraction and accumulation of inflammatory cells in the lung may be due to one or more of the following mechanisms: induction of the adhesion molecules L-selectin and E-selectin, elaboration by dendritic cells of CC chemokine 1 (DC-CK-1/CCL18), or increased expression of CXCR3/CXCL10 by CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes. Increased levels of Fas protein and FasL in the lung (which would be expected to suppress inflammation by induction of T cell apoptosis) is counterbalanced by increased expression of the inducible antiapoptotic gene Bcl-xL, resulting in a lower overall level of pulmonary lymphocyte apoptosis in HP patients.

Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in patients with HP consistently demonstrates an increase in T lymphocytes in lavage fluid (a finding that is also observed in patients with other granulomatous lung disorders). Patients with recent or continual exposure to antigen may have an increase in polymorphonuclear leukocytes in lavage fluid, which has been associated with lung fibrosis. A role for oxidant injury has been proposed in HP. Several markers of oxidative stress are reported to be increased during exacerbation of HP and are reduced by treatment with glucocorticoids.

Clinical Presentation

The clinical picture is that of an interstitial pneumonitis, which varies from patient to patient and seems related to the frequency and intensity of exposure to the causative antigen and, perhaps, other host factors. The presentation can be acute, subacute, or chronic. In the acute form, symptoms such as cough, fever, chills, malaise, and dyspnea may occur 6 to 8 h after exposure to the antigen and usually clear within a few days if there is no further exposure to antigen; it often closely resembles an influenza-like illness. The subacute form often appears insidiously over a period of weeks marked by cough and dyspnea and may progress to cyanosis and severe dyspnea, requiring hospitalization. In some patients, a subacute form of the disease may persist after an acute presentation of the disorder, especially if there is continued exposure to antigen. In most patients with the acute or subacute form of HP, the symptoms, signs, and other manifestations of HP disappear within days, weeks, or months if the causative agent is no longer inhaled. Transformation to a chronic form of the disease may occur, but the frequency of such progression is uncertain.

Continuous low-level antigen exposure or repeated episodes can also lead to chronic disease with more subtle symptoms, accounting for delayed or uncertain diagnosis over a long period of time. This may occur without a prior history of acute or subacute manifestations. The chronic form of HP may be clinically indistinguishable from pulmonary fibrosis in its later stages. Symptoms include cough, weight loss, malaise, and gradual increase in dyspnea. Physical examination may reveal inspiratory crackles and digital clubbing. Imaging shows interstitial fibrosis or emphysema. Progressive worsening may result in dependence on supplemental oxygen, pulmonary hypertension, or respiratory failure. Pulmonary fibrosis is the clinical manifestation of HP with the greatest predictive value for mortality. Fibrosis appears most prominent in hypersensitivity pneumonitis associated with birds, while emphysema is often more common in farmer's lung.

Diagnosis

All forms of the disease may be associated with elevations in erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, lactate dehydrogenase, or serum immunoglobulins. Following acute exposure to an antigen, neutrophilia and lymphopenia are frequently present. Eosinophilia is not a feature. Examination for serum precipitins against suspected antigens, such as those listed in Table 255-1, is an important part of the diagnostic workup and should be performed on any patient with interstitial lung disease, especially if a suggestive exposure history is elicited. The occurrence of precipitins indicates sufficient exposure to the causative agent for generation of an immunologic response and is one of the major diagnostic criteria; however, the diagnosis of HP is not established solely by the presence of precipitins, as they are found in sera of many individuals exposed to appropriate antigens who demonstrate no other evidence of HP. False-negative results may occur because of unreliable testing techniques or an inappropriate choice of antigens. Extraction of antigens from the suspected source may at times be helpful.

Chest x-ray shows no specific or distinctive changes in HP. It can be normal even in symptomatic patients. The acute or subacute phases may be associated with poorly defined, patchy, or diffuse infiltrates; with discrete, nodular infiltrates; or with air-space consolidation. In the chronic phase, the chest x-ray usually shows a diffuse reticulonodular infiltrate. Honeycombing may eventually develop as the condition progresses. Apical sparing is common, suggesting that disease severity correlates with inhaled antigen load, but no particular distribution or pattern is classic for HP. Abnormalities rarely seen in HP include pleural effusion or thickening and significant hilar adenopathy.

High-resolution chest CT has become the procedure of choice for imaging of HP. Although pathognomonic features have not been identified, acute HP may appear with diffuse "ground-glass" infiltrates, a reticulonodular pattern, or confluent alveolar opacification. In subacute disease, centrilobularnodules and "ground-glass" changes predominate, and expiratory views may demonstrate air trapping or mosaic perfusion (Fig. 255-1). This pattern is more common in individuals whose exposure to antigen continues rather than in those in whom removal from antigen exposure has occurred. In chronic HP, diffuse changes include patchy emphysema and interstitial fibrosis; subpleural linear opacities and honeycombing are also common. The findings are often similar (but not identical) to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Figure 255-1

 
 
 
Chest CT scan of a patient with subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis in which scattered regions of ground-glass infiltrates in a mosaic pattern consistent with air trapping are seen bilaterally. This patient had bird fancier's lung.(Courtesy of TJ Gross; with permission.)
 
 


Pulmonary function studies in all forms of HP may show a restrictive or an obstructive pattern with loss of lung volumes, impaired diffusing capacity, and decreased compliance. Resting or exercise-induced hypoxemia may be seen. Bronchospasm and bronchial hyperreactivity are sometimes found in acute HP. With antigen avoidance, the pulmonary function abnormalities are usually reversible in acute and subacute disease.

BAL is used in some centers to aid in diagnostic evaluation. A marked lymphocytic alveolitis on BAL is almost universal, although not pathognomonic. Lymphocytes are typically activated and show a decreased helper/suppressor ratio, although this ratio can be variable depending on dose and duration of exposure. Alveolar neutrophilia is also prominent acutely, but tends to fade in the absence of recurrent exposure. Bronchoalveolar mastocytosis may correlate with disease activity.

Lung biopsy, obtained through flexible bronchoscopy, open-lung procedures, or thoracoscopy, may be diagnostic. Although the histopathology is distinctive, it may not be pathognomonic of HP (Fig. 255-2). When the biopsy is taken during the active phase of disease, typical findings include an interstitial alveolar infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and occasional eosinophils and neutrophils, usually accompanied by loose, noncaseating peribronchial granulomas. Some degree of bronchiolitis is found in about one-half the cases. Rarely, bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia (BOOP) (Chap. 261) may be present. In subacute disease, the triad of mononuclear bronchiolitis; interstitial infiltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells; and single, nonnecrotizing, randomly scattered parenchymal granulomas without mural vascular involvement is consistent with HP. Interstitial fibrosis may be present, but most often is mild in earlier stages of the disease. Chronic HP has variable pathology and may resemble nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, organizing pneumonia, or usual interstitial pneumonia; granulomas may or may not be present. Centrilobular fibrosis, peribronchial inflammation with fibrosis, bridging fibrosis, and emphysema are common.

Figure 255-2

 
 
 
Open-lung biopsy from a patient with subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis demonstrating a loose, nonnecrotizing granuloma made up of histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells. Peribronchial inflammatory infiltrate made up of lymphocytes and plasma cells is also seen. (Courtesy of TJ Gross; with permission.)
 
 

A prediction rule for the clinical diagnosis of HP has been developed by the International HP Study Group. Six significant predictors of HP (exposure to a known antigen, positive predictive antibodies to the antigen, recurrent episodes of symptoms, inspiratory crackles, symptoms developing 4每8 h after exposure, and weight loss) were retrospectively developed then validated in a separate cohort. This diagnostic paradigm has a high predictive value in the diagnosis of HP, without the need for invasive testing. In cases where only a subset of the criteria is fulfilled, the diagnosis is less certain. It is clear, however, that the diagnosis of HP is established by (1) consistent symptoms, physical findings, pulmonary function tests, and radiographic tests; (2) a history of exposure to a recognized antigen; and (3) ideally, identification of an antibody to that antigen. Symptoms upon re-exposure to the suspected antigen also support the diagnosis. In some circumstances, BAL and/or lung biopsy may be needed. The most important tool in diagnosing HP continues to be a high index of suspicion.

Differential Diagnosis

Chronic HP may often be difficult to distinguish from a number of other interstitial lung disorders (Chap. 261). A negative history for use of relevant drugs and no evidence of a systemic disorder usually exclude the presence of drug-induced lung disease or a collagen vascular disorder. BAL often shows predominance of neutrophils in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and a predominance of CD4+ lymphocytes in sarcoidosis. Hilar/paratracheal lymphadenopathy or evidence of multisystem involvement also favors the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. In some patients, a lung biopsy may be required to differentiate chronic HP from other interstitial diseases. The lung disease associated with acute or subacute HP may clinically resemble other disorders that present with systemic symptoms and recurrent pulmonary infiltrates, including the allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses and other eosinophilic pneumonias. Eosinophilic pneumonia is often associated with asthma and is typified by peripheral eosinophilia; neither of these is a feature of HP. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is the most common example of the allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses and is sometimes confused with HP because of the presence of precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus fumigatus. ABPA is associated with allergic (atopic) asthma. Acute HP may be confused with organic dust toxic syndrome (ODTS), a condition that is more common than HP. ODTS follows heavy exposure to organic dusts and is characterized by transient fever and muscle aches, with or without dyspnea and cough. Serum precipitins are absent, and the chest x-ray is usually normal. This distinction is important, as ODTS is a self-limited disorder without significant long-term sequelae, whereas continued antigen exposure in HP can result in permanent disability. Massive exposure to moldy silage may result in a syndrome termed pulmonary mycotoxicosis, with fever, chills, and cough and the presence of pulmonary infiltrates within a few hours of exposure. No previous sensitization is required, and precipitins are absent to Aspergillus, the suspected causative agent.

Treatment: Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Because effective treatment depends largely on avoiding the antigen, identification of the causative agent and its source is essential. This is usually possible if the physician takes a detailed environmental and occupational history or, if necessary, visits the patient's environment. The simplest way to avoid the incriminated agent is to remove the patient from the environment or remove the source of the agent from the patient's environment. This recommendation cannot be taken lightly when it completely changes the lifestyle or livelihood of the patient. In many cases, the source of exposure (birds, humidifiers, molds, etc.) can be removed. Pollen masks, personal dust respirators, airstream helmets, and ventilated helmets with a supply of fresh air are increasingly efficient means of purifying inhaled air. If symptoms recur or physiologic abnormalities progress in spite of these measures, more effective measures to avoid antigen exposure must be pursued. The chronic form of HP typically results from low-grade or recurrent exposure over many months to years, and the lung disease may already be partially or completely irreversible. These patients are usually advised to avoid all possible contact with the offending agent.

Patients with the acute, recurrent form of HP usually recover without need for glucocorticoids. Subacute HP may be associated with severe symptoms and marked physiologic impairment and may continue to progress for several days despite hospitalization. Urgent establishment of the diagnosis and prompt institution of glucocorticoid treatment are indicated in such patients. Prednisone at a dosage of 1 mg/kg per d or its equivalent is continued for 7 to 14 days and then tapered over the ensuing 2 to 6 weeks at a rate that depends on the patient's clinical status. Patients with chronic HP may gradually recover without therapy following environmental control. In many patients, however, a trial of prednisone may be useful to obtain maximal reversibility of the lung disease. Following initial prednisone therapy (1 mg/kg per d for 2 to 4 weeks), the drug is tapered to the lowest dosage that will maintain the functional status of the patient. Many patients will not require or benefit from long-term therapy if there is no further exposure to antigen. Although a short course of corticosteroids has been shown to accelerate recovery from the acute stage, glucocorticoid therapy does not appear to have an effect on long-term prognosis of farmer's lung. Improvement of lung function may continue over a few months to years.
 
Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia

Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia (PIE, eosinophilic pneumonias) include distinct individual syndromes characterized by eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates and, commonly, peripheral blood eosinophilia. Since Loeffler's initial description of a transient, benign syndrome of migratory pulmonary infiltrates and peripheral blood eosinophilia of unknown cause, this group of disorders has been enlarged to include several diseases of both known and unknown etiology (Table 255-2). These diseases may be considered as immunologically mediated lung diseases, but are not to be confused with HP, in which eosinophilia is not a feature. In differentiating the etiologies of this heterogeneous group of lung disorders, an extensive history and full examination of all organ systems are essential.

Table 255-2 Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia

 
 
Etiology known  
Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses 
Parasitic infestations 
Drug reactions 
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome 
Idiopathic  
Loeffler's syndrome 
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia 
Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia 
Allergic granulomatosis of Churg and Strauss 
Hypereosinophilic syndrome 
 

 

When an eosinophilic pneumonia is associated with bronchial asthma, it is important to determine if the patient has atopic asthma and has wheal-and-flare skin reactivity to Aspergillus or other relevant fungal antigens. If so, other criteria should be sought for the diagnosis of ABPA (Table 255-3) or other, rarer examples of allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis such as those caused by Penicillium, Candida, Curvularia, or Helminthosporium spp. A. fumigatus is the most common cause of ABPA. The chest roentgenogram in ABPA may show transient, recurrent infiltrates or may suggest the presence of proximal bronchiectasis. High-resolution chest CT is a sensitive, noninvasive technique for the recognition of proximal bronchiectasis. The bronchial asthma of ABPA likely involves an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity, whereas the bronchiectasis associated with this disorder is thought to result from a deposition of immune complexes in proximal airways. Adequate treatment usually requires the long-term use of systemic glucocorticoids. Another eosinophilic process associated with asthma is Churg-Strauss syndrome, or allergic angiitis granulomatosis, which presents with necrotizing eosinophilic vasculitis and eosinophilic infiltration of multiple organs, including the lung.

Table 255-3 Diagnostic Features of Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis (ABPA)

 
 
Main diagnostic criteria  
Bronchial asthma 
Pulmonary infiltrates 
Peripheral eosinophilia (>1000/L) 
Immediate wheal-and-flare response to Aspergillus fumigatus  
Serum precipitins to A. fumigatus  
Elevated serum IgE 
Central bronchiectasis 
Other diagnostic features  
History of brownish plugs in sputum 
Culture of A. fumigatus from sputum  
Elevated IgE (and IgG) class antibodies specific for A. fumigatus  
 

 

A travel history or evidence of recent immigration should prompt the consideration of parasite-associated disorders. Tropical eosinophilia is usually caused by filarial infection; however, eosinophilic pneumonias also occur with other parasites such as Ascaris spp., Ancyclostoma spp., Toxocara spp., and Strongyloides stercoralis. Tropical eosinophilia due to Wuchereria bancrofti or W. malayi occurs most commonly in southern Asia, Africa, and South America and is treated successfully with diethylcarbamazine. In the United States, Strongyloides is endemic to the Southeastern and Appalachian regions. Even in cases of known foreign travel, identification of the causative agent is not always possible, as exemplified by 18 cases (2 fatal) of acute eosinophilic pneumonia reported amongst U.S. military personnel deployed in Iraq.

In the United States, drug-induced eosinophilic pneumonias are the most common cause of eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates. These are exemplified by acute reactions to nitrofurantoin, which may begin 2 h to 10 days after nitrofurantoin is started, with symptoms of dry cough, fever, chills, and dyspnea; an eosinophilic pleural effusion accompanying patchy or diffuse pulmonary infiltrates may also occur. Other drugs associated with eosinophilic pneumonias include sulfonamides, penicillin, chlorpropamide, thiazides, tricyclic antidepressants, hydralazine, gold salts, isoniazid, indomethacin, and others. One report has identified anti-TNF- monoclonal antibody therapy as a cause of eosinophilic pneumonitis. Treatment consists of withdrawal of the incriminated drugs or toxins and the use of glucocorticoids, if necessary.

The group of primary (idiopathic) eosinophilic pneumonias consists of diseases of varying severity. Loeffler's syndrome was originally reported as a benign, acute eosinophilic pneumonia of unknown cause characterized by migrating pulmonary infiltrates and minimal clinical manifestations. In some patients, these clinical characteristics prove to be secondary to parasites or drugs. Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is an idiopathic acute febrile illness of <7 days' duration with severe hypoxemia, pulmonary infiltrates, pleural effusions, and no history of asthma. BAL fluid reveals greater than 25% eosinophils (normally less than 2% in nonsmokers); however, the peripheral eosinophilia tends to develop later in the course and may not be apparent on initial presentation. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia presents with significant systemic symptoms including fever, chills, night sweats, cough, anorexia, and weight loss of several weeks' to months' duration. The chest x-ray classically shows peripheral infiltrates, and pulmonary function testing reveals obstruction. Peripheral blood and BAL eosinophilia is more pronounced than in the acute form. Some patients also have bronchial asthma of the intrinsic or nonallergic type. For both acute and chronic disease, dramatic clearing of symptoms and chest x-ray is often noted after initiation of glucocorticoid therapy In contrast to acute eosinophilic pneumonia, chronic eosinophilic pneumonia tends to recur and may require repeated treatment.

The hypereosinophilic syndrome is characterized by presence of >1500 eosinophils per microliter of peripheral blood for 6 months or longer; lack of evidence for parasitic, allergic, or other known causes of eosinophilia; and signs or symptoms of multisystem organ dysfunction. Consistent features are blood and bone marrow eosinophilia with tissue infiltration by relatively mature eosinophils. The heart may be involved with tricuspid valve abnormalities or endomyocardial fibrosis and a restrictive, biventricular cardiomyopathy (Chap. 238). Other organs affected typically include the lungs, liver, spleen, skin, and nervous system. Therapy of the disorder consists of glucocorticoids and/or hydroxyurea, plus therapy as needed for cardiac dysfunction, which is frequently responsible for much of the morbidity and mortality in this syndrome. Pulmonary eosinophilia has also been associated with T cell lymphoma and has been reported following lung and bone marrow transplantation.
 
Global Picture of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia

HP is more prevalent outside of the United States than within, and the range of antigen responses is somewhat different. Internationally, bird breeder's lung is the most common form of HP. Rather than being associated with avocational exposures, bird-raising practices, highlighted by the emerging threat of avian influenza, lead to substantial exposure to workers involved in poultry husbandry and processing. This increases antigen exposure enormously, in comparison to U.S. workers, and enhances the risk of HP. Importantly, it is the most common cause of pediatric HP and has been reported in individuals as young as 4 years, presenting as a chronic cough.

Farmer's lung, one of the earliest reported causes of HP, appears to be waning worldwide. This is likely in response to changing agricultural practices; increased use of masks and impermeable barriers in hay storage has reduced the exposure and proliferation of thermophilic bacteria, and thus HP.

The international manifestations of HP resemble those of the U.S. disease. Many industrialized nations have increasingly reported HP due to mycobacteria and pseudomonads in contaminated metalworking fluids. The prevalence of these environmental contaminants greatly depends on workplace hygiene practices. Some forms of HP are almost exclusively geographically limited, such as summer-type hypersensitivity pneumonitis in Japan from exposure to Trichosporon cutaneum associated with birds. Likewise, cork worker's pneumonitis (suberosis), caused by exposure to contaminated corks, is almost exclusively seen in Spain and southern Europe because of the regional cork industry. However, one of the causative antigens (Chrysonilia sitophila) is also reported to be an antigen in lung diseases associated with logging in Canada. In Spain, esparto, a member of the grass family, is used as a fiber for the weaving of mats, baskets, and ropes; it is also incorporated into traditional plaster construction. In both of its uses, it has been associated with HP (most likely due to contamination with A. fumigatus), again geographically limited because of the utility of the product, though not of the underlying fungal antigen. Exposure to exotic mushrooms is greater in Asia than in the United States, and this has recently been linked to cases of HP.

Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia are also a greater international than U.S. health burden. In this case, parasitic infestation is far more common than drug-induced lung disease, but the manifestations are similar.
 
Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Joel N. Kline to this chapter in the previous edition.
 
Further Readings

Allen JN: Drug-induced eosinophilic lung disease. Clin Chest Med 25:77, 2004[PMID: 15062599]  [Full Text]

 
Cooray JH, Ismail MM: Re-examination of the diagnostic criteria of tropical pulmonary eosinophilia. Respir Med 93:655, 1999[PMID: 10542980]  [Full Text]

 
Cormier Y et al: High-resolution computed tomographic characteristics in acute farmer's lung and in its follow-up. Eur Resp J 16:56, 2000[PMID: 10933085]  [Full Text]

 
Fink JN et al: Needs and opportunities for research in hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:792, 2005[PMID: 15657460]  [Full Text]

 
Lacasse Y et al: Clinical diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 168:962, 2003 

 
Miyazaki Y et al: Clinical predictors and histologic appearance of acute exacerbations in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Chest 134(6):1265, 2008[PMID: 18689595]  [Full Text]

 
Selman M> et al: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by fungi. Proc Am Thorac Soc 7:229, 2010[PMID: 20463253]  [Full Text]

 
Shorr AF et al: Acute eosinophilic pneumonia among U.S. military personnel deployed in or near Iraq. JAMA 292:2997, 2004[PMID: 15613668]  [Full Text]

 
Silva CI et al: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: Spectrum of high-resolution CT and pathologic findings. Am J Roentgenol 188:334, 2007[PMID: 17242239]  [Full Text]

 
Zacharisen MC et al: The long-term outcome in acute, subacute, and chronic forms of pigeon breeder's disease hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 88:175, 2002[PMID: 11868922]  [Full Text]
 
 
^^
Occupational and Environmental Lung Disease: Introduction

Occupational and environmental lung diseases are difficult to distinguish from those of nonenvironmental origin. Virtually all major categories of pulmonary disease can be caused by environmental agents, and environmentally related disease usually presents clinically in a manner indistinguishable from that of disease not caused by such agents. In addition, the etiology of many diseases may be multifactorial; occupational and environmental factors may interact with other factors (such as smoking and genetic risk). It is often only after a careful exposure history is taken that the underlying workplace or general environmental exposure is uncovered.

Why is knowledge of occupational or environmental etiology so important? Patient management and prognosis are affected significantly by such knowledge. For example, patients with occupational asthma or hypersensitivity pneumonitis often cannot be managed adequately without cessation of exposure to the offending agent. Establishment of cause may have significant legal and financial implications for a patient who no longer can work in his or her usual job. Other exposed people may be identified as having the disease or prevented from getting it. In addition, new associations between exposure and disease may be identified (e.g., nylon flock worker's lung disease and diacetyl-induced bronchiolitis obliterans).

Although the exact proportion of lung disease due to occupational and environmental factors is unknown, a large number of individuals are at risk. For example, 15每20% of the burden of adult asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been estimated to be due to occupational factors.

History and Physical Examination

The patient's history is of paramount importance in assessing any potential occupational or environmental exposure. Inquiry into specific work practices should include questions about the specific contaminants involved, the presence of visible dusts, chemical odors, the size and ventilation of workspaces, the use of respiratory protective equipment, and whether co-workers have similar complaints. The temporal association of exposure at work and symptoms may provide clues to occupation-related disease. In addition, the patient must be questioned about alternative sources of exposure to potentially toxic agents, including hobbies, home characteristics, exposure to secondhand smoke, and proximity to traffic or industrial facilities. Short-term and long-term exposures to potential toxic agents in the distant past also must be considered.

Workers in the United States have the right to know about potential hazards in their workplaces under federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations. Employers must provide specific information about potential hazardous agents in products being used through Material Safety Data Sheets as well as training in personal protective equipment and environmental control procedures. Reminders posted in the workplace may warn workers about hazardous substances. However, the introduction of new processes and/or new chemical compounds may change exposure significantly, and often only the employee on the production line is aware of the change. For the physician caring for a patient with a suspected work-related illness, a visit to the work site can be very instructive. Alternatively, an affected worker can request an inspection by OSHA.

The physical examination of patients with environmentally related lung diseases may help determine the nature and severity of the pulmonary condition but usually does not contribute information that points to a specific etiology.

Pulmonary Function Tests and Chest Imaging

Exposures to inorganic and organic dusts can cause interstitial lung disease that presents with a restrictive pattern and a decreased diffusing capacity (Chap. 252). Similarly, exposures to a number of organic dusts or chemical agents may result in occupational asthma or COPD that is characterized by airway obstruction. Measurement of change in forced expiratory volume (FEV1) before and after a working shift can be used to detect an acute bronchoconstrictive response. For example, an acute decrement of FEV1 over the first work shift of the week is a characteristic feature of cotton textile workers with byssinosis (an obstructive airway disorder with features of both asthma and chronic bronchitis).

The chest radiograph is useful in detecting and monitoring the pulmonary response to mineral dusts, certain metals, and organic dusts capable of inducing hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) International Classification of Radiographs of Pneumoconioses classifies chest radiographs by the nature and size of opacities seen and the extent of involvement of the parenchyma. In general, small rounded opacities are seen in silicosis or coal worker's pneumoconiosis and small linear opacities are seen in asbestosis. The profusion of such opacities is rated by using a 12-point scheme. Although useful for epidemiologic studies and screening large numbers of workers, the ILO system can be problematic when applied to an individual worker's chest radiograph. With dusts causing rounded opacities, the degree of involvement on the chest radiograph may be extensive, whereas pulmonary function may be only minimally impaired. In contrast, in pneumoconiosis causing linear, irregular opacities like those seen in asbestosis, the radiograph may lead to underestimation of the severity of the impairment until relatively late in the disease. For patients with a history of asbestos exposure, conventional computed tomography (CT) is more sensitive for the detection of pleural thickening and high-resolution CT (HRCT) improves the detection of asbestosis.

Other procedures that may be of use in identifying the role of environmental exposures in causing lung disease include evaluation of heavy metal concentrations in urine (cadmium in battery plant workers), skin prick testing or specific IgE antibody titers for evidence of immediate hypersensitivity to agents capable of inducing occupational asthma (flour antigens in bakers), specific IgG precipitating antibody titers for agents capable of causing hypersensitivity pneumonitis (pigeon antigen in bird handlers), and assays for specific cell-mediated immune responses (beryllium lymphocyte proliferation testing in nuclear workers or tuberculin skin testing in health care workers). Sometimes a bronchoscopy to obtain transbronchial biopsies of lung tissue may be required for histologic diagnosis (chronic beryllium disease). Rarely, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to obtain a larger sample of lung tissue may be required to determine the specific diagnosis of environmentally induced lung disease (hypersensitivity pneumonitis or giant cell interstitial pneumonitis due to cobalt exposure).

Exposure Assessment

If reliable environmental sampling data are available, that information should be used in assessing a patient's exposure. Since many of the chronic diseases result from exposure over many years, current environmental measurements should be combined with work histories to arrive at estimates of past exposure.

In situations in which individual exposure to specific agents〞either in a work setting or via ambient air pollutants〞has been determined, the chemical and physical characteristics of those agents affect both the inhaled dose and the site of deposition in the respiratory tract. Water-soluble gases such as ammonia and sulfur dioxide are absorbed in the lining fluid of the upper and proximal airways and thus tend to produce irritative and bronchoconstrictive responses. In contrast, nitrogen dioxide and phosgene, which are less soluble, may penetrate to the bronchioles and alveoli in sufficient quantities to produce acute chemical pneumonitis that can be life-threatening.

Particle size of air contaminants must also be considered. Because of their settling velocities in air, particles >10每15 m in diameter do not penetrate beyond the nose and throat. Particles <10 m in size are deposited below the larynx. These particles are divided into three size fractions on the basis of their size characteristics and sources. Particles ~2.5每10 m (coarse-mode fraction) contain crustal elements such as silica, aluminum, and iron. These particles mostly deposit relatively high in the tracheobronchial tree. Although the total mass of an ambient sample is dominated by these larger respirable particles, the number of particles, and therefore the surface area on which potential toxic agents can deposit and be carried to the lower airways, is dominated by particles <2.5 m (fine-mode fraction). These fine particles are created primarily by the burning of fossil fuels or high-temperature industrial processes resulting in condensation products from gases, fumes, or vapors. The smallest particles, those <0.1 m in size, represent the ultrafine fraction and make up the largest number of particles; they tend to remain in the airstream and deposit in the lung only on a random basis as they come into contact with the alveolar walls. If they do deposit, however, particles of this size range may penetrate into the circulation and be carried to extrapulmonary sites. New technologies create particles of this size ("nanoparticles") for use in many commercial applications. Besides the size characteristics of particles and the solubility of gases, the actual chemical composition, mechanical properties, and immunogenicity or infectivity of inhaled material determine in large part the nature of the diseases found among exposed persons.
 
Occupational Exposures and Pulmonary Disease

Table 256-1 provides broad categories of exposure in the workplace and diseases associated with chronic exposure in those industries.

Table 256-1 Categories of Occupational Exposure and Associated Respiratory Conditions

 
 
Occupational Exposures Nature of Respiratory Responses Comment 
Inorganic Dusts      
Asbestos: mining, processing, construction, ship repair Fibrosis (asbestosis), pleural disease, cancer, mesothelioma Virtually all new mining and construction with asbestos done in developing countries 
Silica: mining, stone cutting, sandblasting, quarrying Fibrosis (silicosis), progressive massive fibrosis (PMF), cancer, tuberculosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Improved protection in United States, persistent risk in developing countries 
Coal dust: mining Fibrosis (coal worker's pneumoconiosis), PMF, COPD Risk persists in certain areas of United States, increasing in countries where new mines open 
Beryllium: processing alloys for high-tech industries Acute pneumonitis (rare), chronic granulomatous disease, lung cancer (highly suspect) Risk in high-tech industries persists 
Other metals: aluminum, chromium, cobalt, nickel, titanium, tungsten carbide, or "hard metal" (contains cobalt) Wide variety of conditions from acute pneumonitis to lung cancer and asthma New diseases appear with new process development 
Organic Dusts      
Cotton dust: milling, processing Byssinosis (an asthma-like syndrome), chronic bronchitis, COPD Increasing risk in developing countries with drop in United States as jobs shift overseas 
Grain dust: elevator agents, dock workers, milling, bakers Asthma, chronic bronchitis, COPD Risk shifting more to migrant labor pool 
Other agricultural dusts: fungal spores, vegetable products, insect fragments, animal dander, bird and rodent feces, endotoxins, microorganisms, pollens Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (farmer's lung), asthma, chronic bronchitis Important in migrant labor pool but also resulting from in-home exposures 
Toxic chemicals: wide variety of industries, see Table 256-2 Asthma, chronic bronchitis, COPD, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, pneumoconiosis, and cancer Reduced risk with recognized hazards; increasing risk for developing countries where controlled labor practices are less stringent 
Other respiratory environmental agents: uranium and radon daughters, secondhand tobacco smoke, polycyclic hydrocarbons, biomass smoke, diesel exhaust, welding fumes, wood finishing Occupational exposures estimated to contribute to up to 10% of all lung cancers; chronic bronchitis, COPD, and fibrosis In-home exposures important; in developing countries biomass smoke is a major risk factor for COPD among women 
 

 

Asbestos-Related Diseases

Asbestos is a generic term for several different mineral silicates, including chrysolite, amosite, anthophyllite, and crocidolite. In addition to workers involved in the production of asbestos products (mining, milling, and manufacturing), many workers in the shipbuilding and construction trades, including pipe fitters and boilermakers, were occupationally exposed because asbestos was widely used during the twentieth century for its thermal and electrical insulation properties. Asbestos also was used in the manufacture of fire-resistant textiles, in cement and floor tiles, and in friction materials such as brake and clutch linings.

Exposure to asbestos is not limited to persons who directly handle the material. Cases of asbestos-related diseases have been encountered in individuals with only bystander exposure, such as painters and electricians who worked alongside insulation workers in a shipyard. Community exposure resulted from the use of asbestos-containing mine and mill tailings as landfill, road surface, and playground material (e.g., Libby, MT, the site of a vermiculite mine in which the ore was contaminated with asbestos). Finally, exposure can occur from the disturbance of naturally occurring asbestos (e.g., from increasing residential development in the foothills of the Sierra Mountains in California).

Asbestos has largely been replaced in the developed world with synthetic mineral fibers such as fiberglass and refractory ceramic fibers, but it continues to be used increasingly in the developing world. Despite current OSHA regulations mandating adequate training for any worker potentially exposed to asbestos, exposure continues among inadequately trained and protected demolition workers. The major health effects from exposure to asbestos are pleural and pulmonary fibrosis, cancers of the respiratory tract, and pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma.

Asbestosis is a diffuse interstitial fibrosing disease of the lung that is directly related to the intensity and duration of exposure. The disease resembles other forms of diffuse interstitial fibrosis (Chap. 261). Usually, moderate to severe exposure has taken place for at least 10 years before the disease becomes manifest, and it may occur after exposure to any of the asbestiform fiber types. The mechanisms by which asbestos fibers induce lung fibrosis are not completely understood but are known to involve oxidative injury due to the generation of reactive oxygen species by the transition metals on the surface of the fibers as well as from cells engaged in phagocytosis.

The chest radiograph can be used to detect the pulmonary manifestations of asbestos exposure. Past exposure is specifically indicated by pleural plaques, which are characterized by either thickening or calcification along the parietal pleura, particularly along the lower lung fields, the diaphragm, and the cardiac border. Without additional manifestations, pleural plaques imply only exposure, not pulmonary impairment. Benign pleural effusions also may occur. The fluid is typically a serous or bloody exudate. The effusion may be slowly progressive or may resolve spontaneously. Irregular or linear opacities, evidence of asbestosis that usually are first noted in the lower lung fields and spreading into the middle and upper lung fields, occur as the disease progresses. An indistinct heart border or a "ground-glass" appearance in the lung fields is seen in some cases. In cases in which the x-ray changes are less obvious, HRCT may show distinct changes of subpleural curvilinear lines 5每10 mm in length that appear to be parallel to the pleural surface (Fig. 256-1).

Figure 256-1

 
 
 
 
Asbestosis: A. Frontal chest radiograph shows bilateral calcified pleural plaques consistent with asbestos-related pleural disease. Poorly defined linear and reticular abnormalities are seen in the lower lobes bilaterally. B. Axial high-resolution computed tomography of the thorax obtained through the lung bases shows bilateral, subpleural reticulation (black arrows), representing fibrotic lung disease due to asbestosis. Subpleural lines are also present (arrowheads), characteristic of, though not specific for, asbestosis. Calcified pleural plaques representing asbestos-related pleural disease (white arrows) are also evident.
 
 

Pulmonary function testing in asbestosis reveals a restrictive pattern with a decrease in both lung volumes and diffusing capacity. There may also be evidence of mild airflow obstruction (due to peribronchiolar fibrosis).

No specific therapy is available for the management of patients with asbestosis. The supportive care is the same as that given to any patient with diffuse interstitial fibrosis of any cause. In general, newly diagnosed cases will have resulted from exposures that occurred many years before.

Lung cancer (Chap. 89) is the most common cancer associated with asbestos exposure. The excess frequency of lung cancer (all histologic types) in asbestos workers is associated with a minimum latency of 15每19 years between first exposure and development of the disease. Persons with more exposure are at greater risk of disease. In addition, there is a significant interactive effect of smoking and asbestos exposure that results in greater risk than what would be expected from the additive effect of each factor.

Mesotheliomas (Chap. 263), both pleural and peritoneal, are also associated with asbestos exposure. In contrast to lung cancers, these tumors do not appear to be associated with smoking. Relatively short-term asbestos exposures of 1每2 years or less, occurring up to 40 years in the past, have been associated with the development of mesotheliomas (an observation that emphasizes the importance of obtaining a complete environmental exposure history). Although the risk of mesothelioma is much less than that of lung cancer among asbestos-exposed workers, over 2000 cases were reported in the United States per year at the start of the twenty-first century.

Although ~50% of mesotheliomas metastasize, the tumor generally is locally invasive, and death usually results from local extension. Most patients present with effusions that may obscure the underlying pleural tumor. In contrast to the findings in effusion due to other causes, because of the restriction placed on the chest wall, no shift of mediastinal structures toward the opposite side of the chest will be seen. The major diagnostic problem is differentiation from peripherally spreading pulmonary adenocarcinoma or adenocarcinoma that has metastasized to pleura from an extrathoracic primary site. Although cytologic examination of pleural fluid may suggest the diagnosis, biopsy of pleural tissue, generally with video-assisted thoracic surgery, and special immunohistochemical staining usually are required. There is no effective therapy.

Since epidemiologic studies have shown that >80% of mesotheliomas may be associated with asbestos exposure, documented mesothelioma in a patient with occupational or environmental exposure to asbestos may be compensable.

Silicosis

In spite of being one of the oldest known occupational pulmonary hazards, free silica (SiO2), or crystalline quartz, is still a major cause of disease. The major occupational exposures include mining; stonecutting; employment in abrasive industries such as stone, clay, glass, and cement manufacturing; foundry work; packing of silica flour; and quarrying, particularly of granite. Most often, pulmonary fibrosis due to silica exposure (silicosis) occurs in a dose-response fashion after many years of exposure.

Workers heavily exposed through sandblasting in confined spaces, tunneling through rock with a high quartz content (15每25%), or the manufacture of abrasive soaps may develop acute silicosis with as little as 10 months of exposure. The clinical and pathologic features of acute silicosis are similar to those of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (Chap. 261). The chest radiograph may show profuse miliary infiltration or consolidation, and there is a characteristic HRCT pattern known as "crazy paving" (Fig. 256-2). The disease may be quite severe and progressive despite the discontinuation of exposure. Whole-lung lavage may provide symptomatic relief and slow the progression.

Figure 256-2

 
 
 
Acute silicosis. This high-resolution computed tomography scan shows multiple small nodules consistent with silicosis but also diffuse ground-glass densities with thickened intralobular and interlobular septa producing polygonal shapes. This has been referred to as "crazy paving."
 
 


With long-term, less intense exposure, small rounded opacities in the upper lobes may appear on the chest radiograph after 15每20 years of exposure (simple silicosis). Calcification of hilar nodes may occur in as many as 20% of cases and produces a characteristic "eggshell" pattern. Silicotic nodules may be identified more readily by HRCT (Fig. 256-3). The nodular fibrosis may be progressive in the absence of further exposure, with coalescence and formation of nonsegmental conglomerates of irregular masses >1 cm in diameter (complicated silicosis). These masses can become quite large, and when this occurs, the term progressive massive fibrosis (PMF) is applied. Significant functional impairment with both restrictive and obstructive components may be associated with this form of silicosis.

Figure 256-3

 
 
 
 
Chronic silicosis. A. Frontal chest radiograph in a patient with silicosis shows variably sized, poorly defined nodules (arrows) predominating in the upper lobes, B. Axial thoracic computed tomography image through the lung apices shows numerous small nodules, more pronounced in the right upper lobe. A number of the nodules are subpleural in location (arrows).
 
 

Because silica is cytotoxic to alveolar macrophages, patients with silicosis are at greater risk of acquiring lung infections that involve these cells as a primary defense (Mycobacterium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria and fungi). Because of the increased risk of active tuberculosis, the recommended treatment of latent tuberculosis in these patients is longer. Another potential clinical complication of silicosis is autoimmune connective tissue disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and scleroderma. In addition, there are sufficient epidemiologic data that the International Agency for Research on Cancer lists silica as a probable lung carcinogen.

Other, less hazardous silicates include fuller's earth, kaolin, mica, diatomaceous earths, silica gel, soapstone, carbonate dusts, and cement dusts. The production of fibrosis in workers exposed to these agents is believed to be related either to the free silica content of these dusts or, for substances that contain no free silica, to the potentially large dust loads to which these workers may be exposed.

Other silicates, including talc dusts, may be contaminated with asbestos and/or free silica. Fibrosis and/or pleural or lung cancer have been associated with chronic exposure to commercial talc.

Coal Worker's Pneumoconiosis (CWP)

Occupational exposure to coal dust can lead to CWP, which has enormous social, economic, and medical significance in every nation in which coal mining is an important industry. Simple radiographically identified CWP is seen in ~10% of all coal miners and in as many as 50% of anthracite miners with more than 20 years' work on the coal face. The prevalence of disease is lower in workers in bituminous coal mines.

With prolonged exposure to coal dust (i.e., 15每20 years), small, rounded opacities similar to those of silicosis may develop. As in silicosis, the presence of these nodules (simple CWP) usually is not associated with pulmonary impairment. Much of the symptomatology associated with simple CWP appears to be due to the effects of coal dust on the development of chronic bronchitis and COPD (Chap. 260). The effects of coal dust are additive to those of cigarette smoking.

Complicated CWP is manifested by the appearance on the chest radiograph of nodules ranging from 1 cm in diameter to the size of an entire lobe, generally confined to the upper half of the lungs. As in silicosis, this condition can progress to PMF that is accompanied by severe lung function deficits and associated with premature mortality. Despite improvements in technology to protect coal miners, cases of PMF still occur in the United States at a disturbing rate.

Caplan's syndrome (Chap. 321), first described in coal miners but subsequently found in patients with silicosis, includes seropositiverheumatoid arthritis with characteristic pneumoconiotic nodules. Silica has immunoadjuvant properties and is often present in anthracitic coal dust.

Chronic Beryllium Disease

Beryllium is a lightweight metal with tensile strength that has good electrical conductivity and is valuable in the control of nuclear reactions through its ability to quench neutrons. Although beryllium may produce an acute pneumonitis, it is far more commonly associated with a chronic granulomatous inflammatory disease that is similar to sarcoidosis (Chap. 329). Unless one inquires specifically about occupational exposures to beryllium in the manufacture of alloys, ceramics, or high-technology electronics in a patient with sarcoidosis, one may miss entirely the etiologic relationship to the occupational exposure. What distinguishes chronic beryllium disease (CBD) from sarcoidosis is evidence of a specific cell-mediated immune response (i.e., delayed hypersensitivity) to beryllium.

The test that usually provides this evidence is the beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (BeLPT). The BeLPT compares the in vitro proliferation of lymphocytes from blood or bronchoalveolar lavage in the presence of beryllium salts with that of unstimulated cells. Proliferation is usually measured by lymphocyte uptake of radiolabeled thymidine.

Chest imaging findings are similar to those of sarcoidosis (nodules along septal lines) except that hilar adenopathy is somewhat less common. As with sarcoidosis, pulmonary function test results may show restrictive and/or obstructive ventilatory deficits and decreased diffusing capacity. With early disease, both chest imaging studies and pulmonary function tests may be normal. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy usually is required to make the diagnosis of CBD. In a beryllium-sensitized individual, the presence of noncaseating granulomas or monocytic infiltration in lung tissue establishes the diagnosis. Accumulation of beryllium-specific CD4+ T cells occurs in the granulomatous inflammation seen on lung biopsy. CBD is one of the best studied examples of gene-environment interaction. Susceptibility to CBD is highly associated with human leukocyte antigen DP (HLA-DP) alleles that have a glutamic acid in position 69 of the  chain.

Other metals, including aluminum and titanium dioxide, have been rarely associated with a sarcoid-like reaction in lung tissue. Exposure to dust containing tungsten carbide, also known as "hard metal," may produce giant cell interstitial pneumonitis. Cobalt is a constituent of tungsten carbide and is the likely etiologic agent of both the interstitial pneumonitis and the occupational asthma that may occur. The most common exposures to tungsten carbide occur in tool and dye, saw blade, and drill bit manufacture. Diamond polishing may also involve exposure to cobalt dust. The same Glu69 polymorphism of the HLA-DP  chain that confers increased risk of CBD also appears to increase the risk of cobalt-induced giant cell interstitial pneumonitis.

In patients with interstitial lung disease, one should always inquire about exposure to metal fumes and/or dusts. Especially when sarcoidosis appears to be the diagnosis, one should always consider possible CBD.

Other Inorganic Dusts

Most of the inorganic dusts discussed thus far are associated with the production of either dust macules or interstitial fibrotic changes in the lung. Other inorganic and organic dusts (see categories in Table 256-1), along with some of the dusts previously discussed, are associated with chronic mucus hypersecretion (chronic bronchitis), with or without reduction of expiratory flow rates. Cigarette smoking is the major cause of these conditions, and any effort to attribute some component of the disease to occupational and environmental exposures must take cigarette smoking into account. Most studies suggest an additive effect of dust exposure and smoking. The pattern of the irritant dust effect is similar to that of cigarette smoking, suggesting that small airway inflammation may be the initial site of pathologic response in those cases and continued exposure may lead to chronic bronchitis and COPD.

Organic Dusts

Some of the specific diseases associated with organic dusts are discussed in detail in the chapters on asthma (Chap. 254) and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 255). Many of these diseases are named for the specific setting in which they are found, e.g., farmer's lung, malt worker's disease, and mushroom worker's disease. Often the temporal relation of symptoms to exposure furnishes the best evidence for the diagnosis. Three occupational exposures are singled out for discussion here because they affect the largest proportions of workers.

Cotton Dust (Byssinosis)

Workers occupationally exposed to cotton dust (but also to flax, hemp, or jute dust) in the production of yarns for textiles and rope making are at risk for an asthma-like syndrome known as byssinosis. Exposure occurs throughout the manufacturing process but is most pronounced in the portions of the factory involved with the treatment of the cotton before spinning, i.e., blowing, mixing, and carding (straightening of fibers). The risk of byssinosis is associated with both cotton dust and endotoxin levels in the workplace environment.

Byssinosis is characterized clinically as occasional (early-stage) and then regular (late-stage) chest tightness toward the end of the first day of the workweek ("Monday chest tightness"). In epidemiologic studies, depending on the level of exposure via the carding room air, up to 80% of employees may show a significant drop in FEV1 over the course of a Monday shift.

Initially the symptoms do not recur on subsequent days of the week. However, in 10每25% of workers, the disease may be progressive, with chest tightness recurring or persisting throughout the workweek. After >10 years of exposure, workers with recurrent symptoms are more likely to have an obstructive pattern on pulmonary function testing. The highest grades of impairment generally are seen in smokers.

Reduction of dust exposure is of primary importance to the management of byssinosis. Dust levels can be controlled by the use of exhaust hoods, general increases in ventilation, and wetting procedures, but respiratory protective equipment appears to be required during certain operations to prevent workers from being exposed to levels of cotton dust that exceed the current OSHA-permissible exposure level. Regular surveillance of pulmonary function in cotton dust每exposed workers using spirometry before and after the workshift is required by OSHA. All workers with persistent symptoms or significantly reduced levels of pulmonary function should be moved to areas of lower risk of exposure.

Grain Dust

Worldwide, many farmers and workers in grain storage facilities are exposed to grain dust. The presentation of obstructive airway disease in grain dust每exposed workers is virtually identical to the characteristic findings in cigarette smokers, i.e., persistent cough, mucus hypersecretion, wheeze and dyspnea on exertion, and reduced FEV1 and FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity) ratio (Chap. 252).

Dust concentrations in grain elevators vary greatly but can be >10,000 g/m3; approximately one-third of the particles, by weight, are in the respirable range. The effect of grain dust exposure is additive to that of cigarette smoking, with ~50% of workers who smoke having symptoms. Among nonsmoking grain elevator operators, approximately one-quarter have mucus hypersecretion, about five times the number that would be expected in unexposed nonsmokers. Smoking grain dust每exposed workers are more likely to have obstructive ventilatory deficits on pulmonary function testing. As in byssinosis, endotoxin may play a role in grain dust每induced chronic bronchitis and COPD.

Farmer's Lung

This condition results from exposure to moldy hay containing spores of thermophilic actinomycetes that produce a hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 255). A patient with acute farmer's lung presents 4每8 h after exposure with fever, chills, malaise, cough, and dyspnea without wheezing. The history of exposure is obviously essential to distinguish this disease from influenza or pneumonia with similar symptoms. In the chronic form of the disease, the history of repeated attacks after similar exposure is important in differentiating this syndrome from other causes of patchy fibrosis (e.g., sarcoidosis).

A wide variety of other organic dusts are associated with the occurrence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 255). For patients who present with hypersensitivity pneumonitis, specific and careful inquiry about occupations, hobbies, and other home environmental exposures is necessary to uncover the source of the etiologic agent.

Toxic Chemicals

Exposure to toxic chemicals affecting the lung generally involves gases and vapors. A common accident is one in which the victim is trapped in a confined space where the chemicals have accumulated to toxic levels. In addition to the specific toxic effects of the chemical, the victim often sustains considerable anoxia, which can play a dominant role in determining whether the individual survives.

Table 256-2 lists a variety of toxic agents that can produce acute and sometimes life-threatening reactions in the lung. All these agents in sufficient concentrations have been demonstrated, at least in animal studies, to affect the lower airways and disrupt alveolar architecture, either acutely or as a result of chronic exposure. Some of these agents may be generated acutely in the environment (see below).

Table 256-2 Selected Common Toxic Chemical Agents that Affect the Lung

 
 
Agent(s) Selected Exposures Acute Effects from High or Accidental Exposure Chronic Effects from Relatively Low Exposure 
Acid anhydrides Manufacture of resin esters, polyester resins, thermoactivated adhesives Nasal irritation, cough Asthma, chronic bronchitis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
Acid fumes: H2SO4, HNO3
  Manufacture of fertilizers, chlorinated organic compounds, dyes, explosives, rubber products, metal etching, plastics Mucous membrane irritation, followed by chemical pneumonitis 2每3 days later Bronchitis and suggestion of mildly reduced pulmonary function in children with lifelong residential exposure to high levels 
Acrolein and other aldehydes By-product of burning plastics, woods, tobacco smoke Mucous membrane irritant, decrease in lung function Upper respiratory tract irritation 
Ammonia Refrigeration; petroleum refining; manufacture of fertilizers, explosives, plastics, and other chemicals Same as for acid fumes, but bronchiectasis also has been reported Upper respiratory tract irritation, chronic bronchitis 
Cadmium fumes Smelting, soldering, battery production Mucous membrane irritant, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
Formaldehyde Manufacture of resins, leathers, rubber, metals, and woods; laboratory workers, embalmers; emission from urethane foam insulation Same as for acid fumes Nasopharyngeal cancer 
Halides and acid salts (Cl, Br, F) Bleaching in pulp, paper, textile industry; manufacture of chemical compounds; synthetic rubber, plastics, disinfectant, rocket fuel, gasoline Mucous membrane irritation, pulmonary edema; possible reduced FVC 1每2 yrs after exposure Upper respiratory tract irritation, epistaxis, tracheobronchitis 
Hydrogen sulfide By-product of many industrial processes, oil, other petroleum processes and storage Increase in respiratory rate followed by respiratory arrest, lactic acidosis, pulmonary edema, death Conjunctival irritation, chronic bronchitis, recurrent pneumonitis 
Isocyanates (TDI, HDI, MDI) Production of polyurethane foams, plastics, adhesives, surface coatings Mucous membrane irritation, dyspnea, cough, wheeze, pulmonary edema Upper respiratory tract irritation, cough, asthma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, reduced lung function 
Nitrogen dioxide Silage, metal etching, explosives, rocket fuels, welding, by-product of burning fossil fuels Cough, dyspnea, pulmonary edema may be delayed 4每12 h; possible result from acute exposure: bronchiolitis obliterans in 2每6 wks Emphysema in animals, ?chronic bronchitis, associated with reduced lung function in children with lifelong residential exposure 
Ozone Arc welding, flour bleaching, deodorizing, emissions from copying equipment, photochemical air pollutant Mucous membrane irritant, pulmonary hemorrhage and edema, reduced pulmonary function transiently in children and adults, and increased hospitalization with exposure to summer haze Excess cardiopulmonary mortality rates 
Phosgene Organic compound, metallurgy, volatilization of chlorine-containing compounds Delayed onset of bronchiolitis and pulmonary edema Chronic bronchitis 
Sulfur dioxide Manufacture of sulfuric acid, bleaches, coating of nonferrous metals, food processing, refrigerant, burning of fossil fuels, wood pulp industry Mucous membrane irritant, epistaxis, bronchospasm (especially in people with asthma) Chronic bronchitis 
 

 

Firefighters and fire victims are at risk of smoke inhalation, an important cause of acute cardiorespiratory failure. Smoke inhalation kills more fire victims than does thermal injury. Carbon monoxide poisoning with resulting significant hypoxemia can be life-threatening (Chap. e50). Synthetic materials (plastic, polyurethanes), when burned, may release a variety of other toxic agents (such as cyanide and hydrochloric acid), and this must be considered in evaluating smoke inhalation victims. Exposed victims may have some degree of lower respiratory tract inflammation and/or pulmonary edema.

Exposure to certain highly reactive, low-molecular-weight agents used in the manufacture of synthetic polymers, paints, and coatings (diisocyanates in polyurethanes, aromatic amines and acid anhydrides in epoxies) are associated with a high risk of occupational asthma. Although this occupational asthma manifests clinically as if sensitization has occurred, an IgE antibody每mediated mechanism is not necessarily involved. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis每like reactions also have been described in diisocyanate and acid anhydride每exposed workers.

Fluoropolymers such as Teflon, which at normal temperatures produce no reaction, become volatilized upon heating. The inhaled agents cause a characteristic syndrome of fever, chills, malaise, and occasionally mild wheezing, leading to the diagnosis of polymer fume fever. A similar self-limited, influenza-like syndrome〞 metal fume fever〞results from acute exposure to fumes or smoke containing zinc oxide. The syndrome may begin several hours after work and resolves within 24 h, only to return on repeated exposure. Welding of galvanized steel is the most common exposure leading to metal fume fever.

Two other agents have been recently associated with potentially severe interstitial lung disease. Occupational exposure to nylon flock has been shown to induce a lymphocytic bronchiolitis, and workers exposed to diacetyl used to provide "butter" flavor in the manufacture of microwave popcorn and other foods have developed bronchiolitis obliterans (Chap. 261).

World Trade Center Disaster

A consequence of the attack on the World Trade Center (WTC) on September 11, 2001, was relatively heavy exposure of a large number of firefighters and other rescue workers to the dust generated by the collapse of the buildings. Environmental monitoring and chemical characterization of WTC dust has revealed a wide variety of potentially toxic constituents, although much of the dust was pulverized cement. Possibly because of the high alkalinity of WTC dust, significant cough, wheeze, and phlegm production occurred among firefighters and cleanup crews. New cough and wheeze syndromes also occurred among local residents. Initial longitudinal follow-up of New York firefighters suggests that heavier exposure to WTC dust is associated with accelerated decline of lung function. Ongoing follow-up will provide data on whether massive exposure to this irritant dust has led to the development of chronic respiratory disease.

Occupational Respiratory Carcinogens

Exposures at work have been estimated to contribute to 10% of all lung cancer cases. In addition to asbestos, other agents either proven or suspected to be respiratory carcinogens include acrylonitrile, arsenic compounds, beryllium, bis(chloromethyl) ether, chromium (hexavalent), formaldehyde (nasal), isopropanol (nasal sinuses), mustard gas, nickel carbonyl (nickel smelting), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (coke oven emissions and diesel exhaust), secondhand tobacco smoke, silica (both mining and processing), talc (possible asbestos contamination in both mining and milling), vinyl chloride (sarcomas), wood (nasal cancer only), and uranium. Workers at risk of radiation-related lung cancer include not only those involved in mining or processing uranium but also those exposed in underground mining operations of other ores where radon daughters may be emitted from rock formations.

Assessment of Disability

Patients who have lung disease may not be able to continue to work in their usual jobs because of respiratory symptoms. Disability is the term used to describe the decreased ability to work due to the effects of a medical condition. Physicians are generally able to assess physiologic dysfunction, or impairment, but the rating of disability for compensation of loss of income also involves nonmedical factors such as the education and employability of the individual. The disability rating scheme differs with the compensation-granting agency. For example, the U.S. Social Security Administration requires that an individual be unable to do any work (i.e., total disability) before he or she will receive income replacement payments. Many state workers' compensation systems allow for payments for partial disability. In the Social Security scheme no determination of cause is done, whereas work-relatedness must be established in workers' compensation systems.

For respiratory impairment rating, resting pulmonary function tests (spirometry and diffusing capacity) are used as the initial assessment tool, with cardiopulmonary exercise testing (to assess maximal oxygen consumption) used if the results of the resting tests do not correlate with the patient's symptoms. Methacholine challenge (to assess airway reactivity) can also be useful in patients with asthma who have normal spirometry when evaluated. Some compensation agencies (e.g., Social Security) have proscribed disability classification schemes based on pulmonary function test results. When no specific scheme is proscribed, the Guidelines of the American Medical Association should be used.

Evaluating relation to work exposure requires a detailed work history, as previously discussed in this chapter. Occasionally, as with some cases of suspected occupational asthma, challenge to the putative agent in the work environment with repeated pulmonary function measures may be required.
 
General Environmental Exposures

Outdoor Air Pollution

In 1971, the U.S. government established national air quality standards for several pollutants believed to be responsible for excess cardiorespiratory diseases. Primary standards regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) designed to protect the public health with an adequate margin of safety exist for sulfur dioxide, particulates matter, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, lead, and carbon monoxide. Standards for each of these pollutants are updated regularly through an extensive review process conducted by the EPA. (For details on current standards, go to http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html.)

Pollutants are generated from both stationary sources (power plants and industrial complexes) and mobile sources (automobiles), and none of the regulated pollutants occurs in isolation. Furthermore, pollutants may be changed by chemical reactions after being emitted. For example, sulfur dioxide and particulate matter emissions from a coal-fired power plant may react in air to produce acid sulfates and aerosols, which can be transported long distances in the atmosphere. Oxidizing substances such as oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds from automobile exhaust may react with sunlight to produce ozone. Although originally thought to be confined to Los Angeles, photochemically derived pollution ("smog") is now known to be a problem throughout the United States and in many other countries. Both acute and chronic effects of these exposures have been documented in large population studies.

The symptoms and diseases associated with air pollution are the same as conditions commonly associated with cigarette smoking. In addition, decreased growth of lung function and asthma have been associated with chronic exposure to only modestly elevated levels of traffic-related gases and respirable particles. Multiple population-based time-series studies within cities have demonstrated excess health care utilization for asthma and other cardiopulmonary conditions and mortality rates. Cohort studies comparing cities that have relatively high levels of particulate exposures with less polluted communities suggest excess morbidity and mortality rates from cardiopulmonary conditions in long-term residents of the former. The strong epidemiologic evidence that fine particulate matter is a risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has prompted toxicologic investigations into the underlying mechanisms. The inhalation of fine particles from combustion sources probably generates oxidative stress followed by local injury and inflammation in the lungs that in turn lead to autonomic and systemic inflammatory responses that can induce endothelial dysfunction and/or injury. Recent research findings on the health effects of air pollutants have led to stricter U.S. ambient air quality standards for ozone, oxides of nitrogen, and particulate matter as well as greater emphasis on publicizing pollution alerts to encourage individuals with significant cardiopulmonary impairment to stay indoors during high-pollution episodes.

Indoor Exposures

Secondhand tobacco smoke (Chap. 395), radon gas, wood smoke, and other biologic agents generated indoors must be considered. Several studies have shown that the respirable particulate load in any household is directly proportional to the number of cigarette smokers living in that home. Increases in prevalence of respiratory illnesses, especially asthma, and reduced levels of pulmonary function measured with simple spirometry have been found in the children of smoking parents in a number of studies. Recent meta-analyses for lung cancer and cardiopulmonary diseases, combining data from multiple secondhand tobacco smoke epidemiologic studies, suggest an ~25% increase in relative risk for each condition, even after adjustment for major potential confounders.

Exposure to radon gas in homes is a risk factor for lung cancer. The main radon product (radon 222) is a gas that results from the decay series of uranium 238, with the immediate precursor being radium 226. The amount of radium in earth materials determines how much radon gas will be emitted. Outdoors, the concentrations are trivial. Indoors, levels are dependent on the sources, the ventilation rate of the space, and the size of the space into which the gas is emitted. Levels associated with excess lung cancer risk may be present in as many as 10% of the houses in the United States. When smokers reside in the home, the problem is potentially greater, since the molecular size of radon particles allows them to attach readily to smoke particles that are inhaled. Fortunately, technology is available for assessing and reducing the level of exposure.

Other indoor exposures of concern are bioaerosols that contain antigenic material (fungi, cockroaches, dust mites, and pet danders) associated with an increased risk of atopy and asthma. Indoor chemical agents include strong cleaning agents (bleach, ammonia), formaldehyde, perfumes, pesticides, and oxides of nitrogen from gas appliances. Nonspecific responses associated with "tight-building syndrome," perhaps better termed "building-associated illness," in which no particular agent has been implicated, have included a wide variety of complaints, among them respiratory symptoms that are relieved only by avoiding exposure in the building in question. The degree to which "smells" and other sensory stimuli are involved in the triggering of potentially incapacitating psychological or physical responses has yet to be determined, and the long-term consequences of such environmental exposures are unknown.

Portal of Entry

The lung is a primary point of entry into the body for a number of toxic agents that affect other organ systems. For example, the lung is a route of entry for benzene (bone marrow), carbon disulfide (cardiovascular and nervous systems), cadmium (kidney), and metallic mercury (kidney, central nervous system). Thus, in any disease state of obscure origin, it is important to consider the possibility of inhaled environmental agents. Such consideration can sometimes furnish the clue needed to identify a specific external cause for a disorder that might otherwise be labeled "idiopathic."

Global Considerations

Indoor exposure to biomass smoke (wood, dung, crop residues, charcoal) is estimated to be responsible for ~3% of worldwide disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) lost, due to acute lower respiratory infections in children and COPD and lung cancer in women. This burden of disease places indoor exposure to biomass smoke as the second leading environmental hazard for poor health, just behind unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene, and is 3.5 times larger than the burden attributed to outdoor air pollution.

More than one-half of the world's population uses biomass fuel for cooking, heating, or baking. This occurs predominantly in the rural areas of developing countries. Because many families burn biomass fuels in open stoves, which are highly inefficient, and inside homes with poor ventilation, women and young children are exposed on a daily basis to high levels of smoke. In these homes, 24-h mean levels of fine particulate matter, a component of biomass smoke, have been reported to be 2每30 times higher than the National Ambient Air Quality Standards set by the U.S. EPA.

Epidemiologic studies have consistently shown associations between exposure to biomass smoke and both chronic bronchitis and COPD, with odds ratios ranging between 3 and 10 and increasing with longer exposures. In addition to the common occupational exposure to biomass smoke of women in developing countries, men from such countries may be occupationally exposed. Because of increased migration to the United States from developing countries, clinicians need to be aware of the chronic respiratory effects of exposure to biomass smoke, which can include interstitial lung disease (Fig. 256-4). Evidence is beginning to emerge that improved stoves with chimneys can reduce biomass smoke每induced respiratory illness in both children and women.

Figure 256-4

 
 
 
 
Histopathologic features of biomass smoke每induced interstitial lung disease. A. Anthracitic pigment is seen accumulating along alveolar septae (arrowheads) and within a pigmented dust macule (single arrow). B. A high-power photomicrograph contains a mixture of fibroblasts and carbon-laden macrophages.
 
 
 
Further Readings

Aldrich TK et al: Lung function in rescue workers at the World Trade Center after 7 years. N Engl J Med 362:1263, 2010[PMID: 20375403]  [Full Text]

 
Balmes JR: When smoke gets in your lungs. Proc Am Thorac Soc 7:98, 2010[PMID: 20427578]  [Full Text]

 
Chen TM et al: Outdoor air pollution: Overview and historical perspective. Am J Med Sci 333:230, 2007[PMID: 17435417]  [Full Text]

 
Cummings KJ et al: A reconsideration of acute beryllium disease. Environ Health Perspect 117:1250, 2009[PMID: 19672405]  [Full Text]

 
Currie GP et al: An overview of how asbestos exposure affects the lung. BMJ 339:b3209, 2009 

 
Jerrett M et al: Long-term ozone exposure and mortality. N Engl J Med 360:1085, 2009[PMID: 19279340]  [Full Text]

 
Rees D, Murray J: Silica, silicosis and tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 11:474, 2007[PMID: 17439668]  [Full Text]

 
Romieu I et al: Improved biomass stove intervention in rural Mexico: Impact on the respiratory health of women. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 180:649, 2009[PMID: 19556519]  [Full Text]

 
Samuel G, Maier LA: Immunology of chronic beryllium disease. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 8:126, 2008[PMID: 18317020]  [Full Text]

 
Suganuma N et al: Reliability of the proposed international classification of high-resolution computed tomography for occupational and environmental respiratory diseases. J Occup Health 51:210, 2009[PMID: 19372629]  [Full Text]

 
Tor谷n K, Blanc PD: Asthma caused by occupational exposures is common〞a systematic analysis of estimates of the population-attributable fraction. BMC Pulm Med 9:7, 2009[PMID: 21698743]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Definition

Pneumonia is an infection of the pulmonary parenchyma. Despite being the cause of significant morbidity and mortality, pneumonia is often misdiagnosed, mistreated, and underestimated. In the past, pneumonia was typically classified as community-acquired (CAP), hospital-acquired (HAP), or ventilator-associated (VAP). Over the past two decades, however, some persons presenting as outpatients with onset of pneumonia have been found to be infected with the multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens previously associated with HAP. Factors responsible for this phenomenon include the development and widespread use of potent oral antibiotics, earlier transfer of patients out of acute-care hospitals to their homes or various lower-acuity facilities, increased use of outpatient IV antibiotic therapy, general aging of the population, and more extensive immunomodulatory therapies. The potential involvement of these MDR pathogens has led to a new category of pneumonia〞termed health care每associated pneumonia (HCAP)〞distinct from CAP. Conditions associated with HCAP and the likely pathogens are listed in Table 257-1.

Table 257-1 Clinical Conditions Associated with and Likely Pathogens in Health Care每Associated Pneumonia

 
 
  Pathogen 
Condition MRSA Pseudomonas aeruginosa  Acinetobacter spp.  MDR Enterobacteriaceae 
Hospitalization for 48 h X X X X 
Hospitalization for 2 days in prior 3 months X X X X 
Nursing home or extended-care-facility residence X X X X 
Antibiotic therapy in preceding 3 months   X   X 
Chronic dialysis X       
Home infusion therapy X       
Home wound care X       
Family member with MDR infection X     X 
 


Abbreviations: MDR, multidrug-resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
 

Although the new classification system has been helpful in designing empirical antibiotic strategies, it is not without disadvantages. Not all MDR pathogens are associated with all risk factors (Table 257-1). Moreover, HCAP is a distillation of multiple risk factors, and each patient must be considered individually. For example, the risk of infection with MDR pathogens for a nursing home resident who has dementia but can independently dress, ambulate, and eat is quite different from the risk for a patient who is in a chronic vegetative state with a tracheostomy and a percutaneous feeding tube in place. In addition, risk factors for MDR infection do not preclude the development of pneumonia caused by the usual CAP pathogens.

This chapter deals with pneumonia in patients who are not considered to be immunocompromised. Pneumonia in severely immunocompromised patients, some of whom overlap with the groups of patients considered in this chapter, warrants separate discussion (see Chaps. 86, 132, and 189).
 
Pathophysiology

Pneumonia results from the proliferation of microbial pathogens at the alveolar level and the host's response to those pathogens. Microorganisms gain access to the lower respiratory tract in several ways. The most common is by aspiration from the oropharynx. Small-volume aspiration occurs frequently during sleep (especially in the elderly) and in patients with decreased levels of consciousness. Many pathogens are inhaled as contaminated droplets. Rarely, pneumonia occurs via hematogenous spread (e.g., from tricuspid endocarditis) or by contiguous extension from an infected pleural or mediastinal space.

Mechanical factors are critically important in host defense. The hairs and turbinates of the nares capture larger inhaled particles before they reach the lower respiratory tract. The branching architecture of the tracheobronchial tree traps particles on the airway lining, where mucociliary clearance and local antibacterial factors either clear or kill the potential pathogen. The gag reflex and the cough mechanism offer critical protection from aspiration. In addition, the normal flora adhering to mucosal cells of the oropharynx, whose components are remarkably constant, prevents pathogenic bacteria from binding and thereby decreases the risk of pneumonia caused by these more virulent bacteria.

When these barriers are overcome or when the microorganisms are small enough to be inhaled to the alveolar level, resident alveolar macrophages are extremely efficient at clearing and killing pathogens. Macrophages are assisted by local proteins (e.g., surfactant proteins A and D) that have intrinsic opsonizing properties or antibacterial or antiviral activity. Once engulfed by the macrophage, the pathogens〞even if they are not killed〞are eliminated via either the mucociliary elevator or the lymphatics and no longer represent an infectious challenge. Only when the capacity of the alveolar macrophages to ingest or kill the microorganisms is exceeded does clinical pneumonia become manifest. In that situation, the alveolar macrophages initiate the inflammatory response to bolster lower respiratory tract defenses. The host inflammatory response, rather than the proliferation of microorganisms, triggers the clinical syndrome of pneumonia. The release of inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin (IL)-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), results in fever. Chemokines, such as IL-8 and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, stimulate the release of neutrophils and their attraction to the lung, producing both peripheral leukocytosis and increased purulent secretions. Inflammatory mediators released by macrophages and the newly recruited neutrophils create an alveolar capillary leak equivalent to that seen in the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), although in pneumonia this leak is localized (at least initially). Even erythrocytes can cross the alveolar-capillary membrane, with consequent hemoptysis. The capillary leak results in a radiographic infiltrate and rales detectable on auscultation, and hypoxemia results from alveolar filling. Moreover, some bacterial pathogens appear to interfere with the hypoxemic vasoconstriction that would normally occur with fluid-filled alveoli, and this interference can result in severe hypoxemia. Increased respiratory drive in the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS; Chap. 271) leads to respiratory alkalosis. Decreased compliance due to capillary leak, hypoxemia, increased respiratory drive, increased secretions, and occasionally infection-related bronchospasm all lead to dyspnea. If severe enough, the changes in lung mechanics secondary to reductions in lung volume and compliance and the intrapulmonary shunting of blood may cause the patient's death.
 
Pathology

Classic pneumonia evolves through a series of pathologic changes. The initial phase is one of edema, with the presence of a proteinaceous exudate〞and often of bacteria〞in the alveoli. This phase is rarely evident in clinical or autopsy specimens because it is so rapidly followed by a red hepatization phase. The presence of erythrocytes in the cellular intraalveolar exudate gives this second stage its name, but neutrophil influx is more important from the standpoint of host defense. Bacteria are occasionally seen in pathologic specimens collected during this phase. In the third phase, gray hepatization, no new erythrocytes are extravasating, and those already present have been lysed and degraded. The neutrophil is the predominant cell, fibrin deposition is abundant, and bacteria have disappeared. This phase corresponds with successful containment of the infection and improvement in gas exchange. In the final phase, resolution, the macrophage reappears as the dominant cell type in the alveolar space, and the debris of neutrophils, bacteria, and fibrin has been cleared, as has the inflammatory response.

This pattern has been described best for lobar pneumococcal pneumonia and may not apply to pneumonias of all etiologies, especially viral or Pneumocystis pneumonia. In VAP, respiratory bronchiolitis may precede the development of a radiologically apparent infiltrate. Because of the microaspiration mechanism, a bronchopneumonia pattern is most common in nosocomial pneumonias, whereas a lobar pattern is more common in bacterial CAP. Despite the radiographic appearance, viral and Pneumocystis pneumonias represent alveolar rather than interstitial processes.
 
Community-Acquired Pneumonia

Etiology

The extensive list of potential etiologic agents in CAP includes bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa. Newly identified pathogens include hantaviruses, metapneumoviruses, the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and community-acquired strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Most cases of CAP, however, are caused by relatively few pathogens (Table 257-2). Although Streptococcus pneumoniae is most common, other organisms must also be considered in light of the patient's risk factors and severity of illness. In most cases, it is most useful to think of the potential causes as either "typical" bacterial pathogens or "atypical" organisms. The former category includes S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and (in selected patients) S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The "atypical" organisms include Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae (in outpatients) and Legionella spp. (in inpatients) as well as respiratory viruses such as influenza viruses, adenoviruses, and respiratory syncytial viruses. Data suggest that a virus may be responsible for up to 18% of cases of CAP that require admission to the hospital. The atypical organisms cannot be cultured on standard media, nor can they be seen on Gram's stain. The frequency and importance of atypical pathogens have significant implications for therapy. These organisms are intrinsically resistant to all -lactam agents and must be treated with a macrolide, a fluoroquinolone, or a tetracycline. In the ~10每15% of CAP cases that are polymicrobial, the etiology often includes a combination of typical and atypical pathogens.

Table 257-2 Microbial Causes of Community-Acquired Pneumonia, by Site of Care

 
 
  Hospitalized Patients 
Outpatients Non-ICU ICU 
Streptococcus pneumoniae  S. pneumoniae  S. pneumoniae  
Mycoplasma pneumoniae  M. pneumoniae  Staphylococcus aureus  
Haemophilus influenzae  Chlamydia pneumoniae  Legionella spp.  
C. pneumoniae  H. influenzae  Gram-negative bacilli 
Respiratory virusesa  Legionella spp.  H. influenzae  
  Respiratory virusesa    
 


aInfluenza A and B viruses, adenoviruses, respiratory syncytial viruses, parainfluenza viruses.

Note: Pathogens are listed in descending order of frequency. ICU, intensive care unit.
 

Anaerobes play a significant role only when an episode of aspiration has occurred days to weeks before presentation for pneumonia. The combination of an unprotected airway (e.g., in patients with alcohol or drug overdose or a seizure disorder) and significant gingivitis constitutes the major risk factor. Anaerobic pneumonias are often complicated by abscess formation and significant empyemas or parapneumonic effusions.

S. aureus pneumonia is well known to complicate influenza infection. However, MRSA has been reported as the primary etiologic agent of CAP. While this entity is still relatively uncommon, clinicians must be aware of its potentially serious consequences such as necrotizing pneumonia. Two important developments have led to this problem: the spread of MRSA from the hospital setting to the community and the emergence of genetically distinct strains of MRSA in the community. The former circumstance is more likely to result in HCAP, whereas the novel community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA) strains have infected healthy individuals who have had no association with health care.

Unfortunately, despite a careful history and physical examination as well as routine radiographic studies, the causative pathogen in a case of CAP is difficult to predict with any degree of certainty; in more than one-half of cases, a specific etiology is never determined. Nevertheless, epidemiologic and risk factors may suggest the involvement of certain pathogens (Table 257-3).

Table 257-3 Epidemiologic Factors Suggesting Possible Causes of Community-Acquired Pneumonia

 
 
Factor Possible Pathogen(s) 
Alcoholism Streptococcus pneumoniae, oral anaerobes, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp., Mycobacterium tuberculosis  
COPD and/or smoking Haemophilus influenzae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Legionella spp.,

S. pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Chlamydia pneumoniae
 
Structural lung disease (e.g., bronchiectasis) P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia, Staphylococcus aureus  
Dementia, stroke, decreased level of consciousness Oral anaerobes, gram-negative enteric bacteria 
Lung abscess CA-MRSA, oral anaerobes, endemic fungi, M. tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria  
Travel to Ohio or St. Lawrence river valleys Histoplasma capsulatum  
Travel to southwestern United States Hantavirus, Coccidioides spp.  
Travel to Southeast Asia Burkholderia pseudomallei, avian influenza virus  
Stay in hotel or on cruise ship in previous 2 weeks Legionella spp.  
Local influenza activity Influenza virus, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus  
Exposure to bats or birds H. capsulatum  
Exposure to birds Chlamydia psittaci  
Exposure to rabbits Francisella tularensis  
Exposure to sheep, goats, parturient cats Coxiella burnetii  
 


Abbreviations: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
 

Epidemiology

In the United States, ~80% of the 4 million CAP cases that occur annually are treated on an outpatient basis, and ~20% are treated in the hospital. CAP results in more than 600,000 hospitalizations, 64 million days of restricted activity, and 45,000 deaths annually. The overall yearly cost associated with CAP is estimated at $9每10 billion. The incidence rates are highest at the extremes of age. The overall annual rate in the United States is 12 cases per 1000 persons, but the figure increases to 12每18 per 1000 among children <4 years of age and to 20 per 1000 among persons >60 years of age.

The risk factors for CAP in general and for pneumococcal pneumonia in particular have implications for treatment regimens. Risk factors for CAP include alcoholism, asthma, immunosuppression, institutionalization, and an age of 70 years versus 60每69 years. Risk factors for pneumococcal pneumonia include dementia, seizure disorders, heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, alcoholism, tobacco smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and HIV infection. CA-MRSA pneumonia is more likely in patients with skin colonization or infection with CA-MRSA. Enterobacteriaceae tend to infect patients who have recently been hospitalized and/or received antibiotic therapy or who have comorbidities such as alcoholism, heart failure, or renal failure. P. aeruginosa is a particular problem in patients with severe structural lung disease, such as bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, or severe COPD. Risk factors for Legionella infection include diabetes, hematologicmalignancy, cancer, severe renal disease, HIV infection, smoking, male gender, and a recent hotel stay or ship cruise. (Many of these risk factors would now reclassify as HCAP some cases that were previously designated CAP.)

Clinical Manifestations

CAP can vary from indolent to fulminant in presentation and from mild to fatal in severity. The various signs and symptoms that depend on the progression and severity of the infection include both constitutional findings and manifestations limited to the lung and associated structures. In light of the pathobiology of the disease, many of the findings are to be expected.

The patient is frequently febrile with tachycardia or may have a history of chills and/or sweats. Cough may be either nonproductive or productive of mucoid, purulent, or blood-tinged sputum. Depending on severity, the patient may be able to speak in full sentences or may be very short of breath. If the pleura is involved, the patient may experience pleuritic chest pain. Up to 20% of patients may have gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea. Other symptoms may include fatigue, headache, myalgias, and arthralgias.

Findings on physical examination vary with the degree of pulmonary consolidation and the presence or absence of a significant pleural effusion. An increased respiratory rate and use of accessory muscles of respiration are common. Palpation may reveal increased or decreased tactile fremitus, and the percussion note can vary from dull to flat, reflecting underlying consolidated lung and pleural fluid, respectively. Crackles, bronchial breath sounds, and possibly a pleural friction rub may be heard on auscultation. The clinical presentation may not be so obvious in the elderly, who may initially display new-onset or worsening confusion and few other manifestations. Severely ill patients may have septic shock and evidence of organ failure.

Diagnosis

When confronted with possible CAP, the physician must ask two questions: Is this pneumonia, and, if so, what is the likely etiology? The former question is typically answered by clinical and radiographic methods, whereas the latter requires the aid of laboratory techniques.

Clinical Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes both infectious and noninfectious entities such as acute bronchitis, acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, heart failure, pulmonary embolism, and radiation pneumonitis. The importance of a careful history cannot be overemphasized. For example, known cardiac disease may suggest worsening pulmonary edema, while underlying carcinoma may suggest lung injury secondary to irradiation. Epidemiologic clues, such as recent travel to areas with known endemic pathogens (e.g., the U.S. southwest), may alert the physician to specific possibilities (Table 257-3).

Unfortunately, the sensitivity and specificity of the findings on physical examination are less than ideal, averaging 58% and 67%, respectively. Therefore, chest radiography is often necessary to differentiate CAP from other conditions. Radiographic findings may include risk factors for increased severity (e.g., cavitation or multilobar involvement). Occasionally, radiographic results suggest an etiologic diagnosis. For example, pneumatoceles suggest infection with S. aureus, and an upper-lobe cavitating lesion suggests tuberculosis. CT is rarely necessary but may be of value in a patient with suspected postobstructive pneumonia caused by a tumor or foreign body. For outpatients, the clinical and radiologic assessments are usually all that is done before treatment for CAP is started since most laboratory results are not available soon enough to influence initial management significantly. In certain cases, the availability of rapid point-of-care outpatient diagnostic tests can be very important (e.g., rapid diagnosis of influenza virus infection can prompt specific anti-influenza drug treatment and secondary prevention).

Etiologic Diagnosis

The etiology of pneumonia usually cannot be determined solely on the basis of clinical presentation; instead, the physician must rely upon the laboratory for support. Except for the 2% of CAP patients who are admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), no data exist to show that treatment directed at a specific pathogen is statistically superior to empirical therapy. The benefit of establishing a microbial etiology can therefore be questioned, particularly in light of the cost of diagnostic testing. However, a number of reasons can be advanced for attempting an etiologic diagnosis. Identification of an unexpected pathogen allows narrowing of the initial empirical regimen that decreases antibiotic selection pressure, lessening the risk of resistance. Pathogens with important public safety implications such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and influenza virus, may be found in some cases. Finally, without culture and susceptibility data, trends in resistance cannot be followed accurately, and appropriate empirical therapeutic regimens are harder to devise.

Gram's Stain and Culture of Sputum

The main purpose of the sputum Gram's stain is to ensure that a sample is suitable for culture. However, Gram's staining may also identify certain pathogens (e.g., S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and gram-negative bacteria) by their characteristic appearance. To be adequate for culture, a sputum sample must have >25 neutrophils and <10 squamous epithelial cells per low-power field. The sensitivity and specificity of the sputum Gram's stain and culture are highly variable. Even in cases of proven bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia, the yield of positive cultures from sputum samples is 50%.

Some patients, particularly elderly individuals, may not be able to produce an appropriate expectorated sputum sample. Others may already have started a course of antibiotics that can interfere with culture results at the time a sample is obtained. Inability to produce sputum can be a consequence of dehydration, and the correction of this condition may result in increased sputum production and a more obvious infiltrate on chest radiography. For patients admitted to the ICU and intubated, a deep-suction aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage sample (obtained either via bronchoscopy or non-bronchoscopically) has a high yield on culture when sent to the microbiology laboratory as soon as possible. Since the etiologies in severe CAP are somewhat different from those in milder disease (Table 257-2), the greatest benefit of staining and culturing respiratory secretions is to alert the physician of unsuspected and/or resistant pathogens and to permit appropriate modification of therapy. Other stains and cultures (e.g., specific stains for M. tuberculosis or fungi) may be useful as well.

Blood Cultures

The yield from blood cultures, even when samples are collected before antibiotic therapy, is disappointingly low. Only ~5每14% of cultures of blood from patients hospitalized with CAP are positive, and the most frequently isolated pathogen is S. pneumoniae. Since recommended empirical regimens all provide pneumococcal coverage, a blood culture positive for this pathogen has little, if any, effect on clinical outcome. However, susceptibility data may allow narrowing of antibiotic therapy in appropriate cases. Because of the low yield and the lack of significant impact on outcome, blood cultures are no longer considered de rigueur for all hospitalized CAP patients. Certain high-risk patients〞including those with neutropenia secondary to pneumonia, asplenia, or complement deficiencies; chronic liver disease; or severe CAP〞should have blood cultured.

Antigen Tests

Two commercially available tests detect pneumococcal and certain Legionella antigens in urine. The test for L. pneumophila detects only serogroup 1, but this serogroup accounts for most community-acquired cases of Legionnaires' disease. The sensitivity and specificity of the Legionella urine antigen test are as high as 90% and 99%, respectively. The pneumococcal urine antigen test is also quite sensitive and specific (80% and >90%, respectively). Although false-positive results can be obtained with samples from pneumococcus-colonized children, the test is generally reliable. Both tests can detect antigen even after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy. Other antigen tests include a rapid test for influenza virus and direct fluorescent antibody tests for influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus; the latter tests are only poorly sensitive.

Polymerase Chain Reaction

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests, which amplify a microorganism's DNA or RNA, are available for a number of pathogens, including L. pneumophila and mycobacteria. In addition, a multiplex PCR can detect the nucleic acid of Legionella spp., M. pneumoniae, and C. pneumoniae. However, the use of these PCR assays is generally limited to research studies. In patients with pneumococcal pneumonia, an increased bacterial load documented by PCR is associated with an increased risk of septic shock, need for mechanical ventilation, and death. Such a test could conceivably help identify patients suitable for ICU admission.

Serology

A fourfold rise in specific IgM antibody titer between acute- and convalescent-phase serum samples is generally considered diagnostic of infection with the pathogen in question. In the past, serologic tests were used to help identify atypical pathogens as well as selected unusual organisms such as Coxiella burnetii. Recently, however, they have fallen out of favor because of the time required to obtain a final result for the convalescent-phase sample.

Treatment: Community-Acquired Pneumonia

Site of Care

The cost of inpatient management exceeds that of outpatient treatment by a factor of 20, and hospitalization accounts for most CAP-related expenditures. Thus the decision to admit a patient with CAP to the hospital has considerable implications. Certain patients clearly can be managed at home, and others clearly require treatment in the hospital, but the choice is sometimes difficult. Tools that objectively assess the risk of adverse outcomes, including severe illness and death, can minimize unnecessary hospital admissions. There are currently two sets of criteria: the Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), a prognostic model used to identify patients at low risk of dying; and the CURB-65 criteria, a severity-of-illness score.

To determine the PSI, points are given for 20 variables, including age, coexisting illness, and abnormal physical and laboratory findings. On the basis of the resulting score, patients are assigned to one of five classes with the following mortality rates: class 1, 0.1%; class 2, 0.6%; class 3, 2.8%; class 4, 8.2%; and class 5, 29.2%. Clinical trials demonstrate that routine use of the PSI results in lower admission rates for class 1 and class 2 patients. Patients in classes 4 and 5 should be admitted to the hospital, while those in class 3 should ideally be admitted to an observation unit until a further decision can be made.

The CURB-65 criteria include five variables: confusion (C); urea >7 mmol/L (U); respiratory rate 30/min (R); blood pressure, systolic 90 mmHg or diastolic 60 mmHg (B); and age 65 years (65). Patients with a score of 0, among whom the 30-day mortality rate is 1.5%, can be treated outside the hospital. With a score of 2, the 30-day mortality rate is 9.2%, and patients should be admitted to the hospital. Among patients with scores of 3, mortality rates are 22% overall; these patients may require admission to an ICU.

It is not clear which assessment tool is superior. The PSI is less practical in a busy emergency room setting because of the need to assess 20 variables. While the CURB-65 criteria are easily remembered, they have not been studied as extensively. Whichever system is used, these objective criteria must always be tempered by careful consideration of factors relevant to individual patients, including the ability to comply reliably with an oral antibiotic regimen and the resources available to the patient outside the hospital. In fact, neither the PSI nor CURB-65 is ideal for determining the need for ICU care. The severity criteria proposed by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the American Thoracic Society (ATS) in their guidelines for the management of CAP are better suited to this purpose.

Antibiotic Resistance

Antimicrobial resistance is a significant problem that threatens to diminish our therapeutic armamentarium. Misuse of antibiotics results in increased antibiotic selection pressure that can affect resistance locally or even globally by clonal dissemination. For CAP, the main resistance issues currently involve S. pneumoniae and CA-MRSA.

S. Pneumoniae

In general, pneumococcal resistance is acquired (1) by direct DNA incorporation and remodeling resulting from contact with closely related oral commensal bacteria, (2) by the process of natural transformation, or (3) by mutation of certain genes.

The cutoff for penicillin susceptibility in pneumonia has recently been raised from a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 0.6 g/mL to an MIC of 2 g/mL. Cutoffs for intermediate resistance have been raised to 4 g/mL (from 0.1每1 g/mL) and 8 g/mL (from 2 g/mL), respectively. These changes in susceptibility thresholds have resulted in a dramatic decrease in the proportion of pneumococcal isolates considered nonsusceptible. For meningitis, MIC thresholds remain at the former levels. Fortunately, resistance to penicillin appeared to plateau even before the change in MIC thresholds. Pneumococcal resistance to -lactam drugs is due solely to low-affinity penicillin-binding proteins. Risk factors for penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infection include recent antimicrobial therapy, an age of <2 years or >65 years, attendance at day-care centers, recent hospitalization, and HIV infection.

In contrast to penicillin resistance, resistance to macrolides is increasing through several mechanisms. Target-site modification is caused by ribosomal methylation in 23S rRNA encoded by the ermB gene, resulting in resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and streptogramin B每type antibiotics. This MLSB phenotype is associated with high-level resistance, with typical MICs of 64 g/mL. The efflux mechanism encoded by the mef gene (M phenotype) is usually associated with low-level resistance (MICs, 1每32 g/mL). These two mechanisms account for ~45% and ~65%, respectively, of resistant pneumococcal isolates in the United States. High-level resistance to macrolides is more common in Europe, whereas lower-level resistance seems to predominate in North America. Although clinical failures with macrolides have been reported, many experts think that these drugs still have a role to play in the management of pneumococcal pneumonia in North America.

Pneumococcal resistance to fluoroquinolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin) has been reported. Changes can occur in one or both target sites (topoisomerases II and IV); changes in these two sites usually result from mutations in the gyrA and parC genes, respectively. The increasing number of pneumococcal isolates that, although still testing susceptible to fluoroquinolones, already have a mutation in one target site is of concern. Such organisms may be more likely to undergo a second step mutation that will render them fully resistant to fluoroquinolones. In addition, an efflux pump may play a role in pneumococcal resistance to fluoroquinolones.

Isolates resistant to drugs from three or more antimicrobial classes with different mechanisms of action are considered MDR. The propensity for an association of pneumococcal resistance to penicillin with reduced susceptibility to other drugs such as macrolides, tetracyclines, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, is also of concern. In the United States, 58.9% of penicillin-resistant pneumococcal isolates from blood are also resistant to macrolides.

The most important risk factor for antibiotic-resistant pneumococcal infection is use of a specific antibiotic within the previous 3 months. Therefore, a patient's history of prior antibiotic treatment is a critical factor in avoiding the use of an inappropriate antibiotic.

Ca-Mrsa

CAP due to MRSA may be caused by infection with the classic hospital-acquired strains or with the more recently identified, genotypically and phenotypically distinct community-acquired strains. Most infections with the former strains have been acquired either directly or indirectly by contact with the health care environment and would now be classified as HCAP. In some hospitals, CA-MRSA strains are displacing the classic hospital-acquired strains〞a trend suggesting that the newer strains may be more robust.

Methicillin resistance in S. aureus is determined by the mecA gene, which encodes for resistance to all -lactam drugs. At least five staphylococcal chromosomal cassette mec (SCCmec) types have been described. The typical hospital-acquired strain usually has type II or III, whereas CA-MRSA has a type IV SCCmec element. CA-MRSA isolates tend to be less resistant than the older hospital-acquired strains and are often susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, clindamycin, and tetracycline in addition to vancomycin and linezolid. However, CA-MRSA strains may also carry genes for superantigens, such as enterotoxins B and C and Panton-Valentine leukocidin, a membrane-tropic toxin that can create cytolytic pores in polymorphonuclear neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages.

Gram-Negative Bacilli

A detailed discussion of resistance among gram-negative bacilli is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Chap. 149). Fluoroquinolone resistance among isolates of Escherichia coli from the community appears to be increasing. Enterobacter spp. are typically resistant to cephalosporins; the drugs of choice for use against these bacteria are usually fluoroquinolones or carbapenems. Similarly, when infections due to bacteria producing extended-spectrum -lactamases are documented or suspected, a fluoroquinolone or a carbapenem should be used; these MDR strains are more likely to be involved in HCAP.

Initial Antibiotic Management

Since the physician rarely knows the etiology of CAP at the outset of treatment, initial therapy is usually empirical and is designed to cover the most likely pathogens (Table 257-4). In all cases, antibiotic treatment should be initiated as expeditiously as possible. The CAP treatment guidelines in the United States (summarized in Table 257-4) represent joint statements from the IDSA and the ATS; the Canadian guidelines come from the Canadian Infectious Disease Society and the Canadian Thoracic Society. In these guidelines, coverage is always provided for the pneumococcus and the atypical pathogens. In contrast, guidelines from some European countries do not always include atypical coverage based on local epidemiologic data. The U.S.每Canadian approach is supported by retrospective data from several studies of administrative databases including thousands of patients. Atypical pathogen coverage provided by the addition of a macrolide to a cephalosporin or by the use of a fluoroquinolone alone has been consistently associated with a significant reduction in mortality rates compared with those for -lactam coverage alone.

Table 257-4 Empirical Antibiotic Treatment of Community-Acquired Pneumonia

 
 
Outpatients  
Previously healthy and no antibiotics in past 3 months 
 A macrolide [clarithromycin (500 mg PO bid) or azithromycin (500 mg PO once, then 250 mg qd)] or  
 Doxycycline (100 mg PO bid) 
Comorbidities or antibiotics in past 3 months: select an alternative from a different class 
 A respiratory fluoroquinolone [moxifloxacin (400 mg PO qd), gemifloxacin (320 mg PO qd), levofloxacin (750 mg PO qd)] or  
 A -lactam [preferred: high-dose amoxicillin (1 g tid) or amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g bid); alternatives: ceftriaxone (1每2 g IV qd), cefpodoxime (200 mg PO bid), cefuroxime (500 mg PO bid)] plus a macrolidea  
In regions with a high rate of "high-level" pneumococcal macrolide resistance,b consider alternatives listed above for patients with comorbidities.  
Inpatients, Non-ICU  
 A respiratory fluoroquinolone [moxifloxacin (400 mg PO or IV qd), gemifloxacin (320 mg PO qd), levofloxacin (750 mg PO or IV qd)] 
 A -lactamc [cefotaxime (1每2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone (1每2 g IV qd), ampicillin (1每2 g IV q4每6h), ertapenem (1 g IV qd in selected patients)] plus a macrolided [oral clarithromycin or azithromycin (as listed above for previously healthy patients) or IV azithromycin (1 g once, then 500 mg qd)] 
Inpatients, ICU  
 A -lactame [cefotaxime (1每2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone (2 g IV qd), ampicillin-sulbactam (2 g IV q8h)] plus  
 Azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone (as listed above for inpatients, non-ICU) 
Special Concerns  
If Pseudomonas is a consideration  
 An antipneumococcal, antipseudomonal -lactam [piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV q6h), cefepime (1每2 g IV q12h), imipenem (500 mg IV q6h), meropenem (1 g IV q8h)] plus either ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q12h) or levofloxacin (750 mg IV qd) 
 The above -lactams plus an aminoglycoside [amikacin (15 mg/kg qd) or tobramycin (1.7 mg/kg qd) and azithromycin] 
 The above -lactamsfplus an aminoglycoside plus an antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone 
If CA-MRSA is a consideration 
 Add linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or vancomycin (1 g IV q12h). 
 


aDoxycycline (100 mg PO bid) is an alternative to the macrolide.

bMICs of >16 g/mL in 25% of isolates.

cA respiratory fluoroquinolone should be used for penicillin-allergic patients.

dDoxycycline (100 mg IV q12h) is an alternative to the macrolide.

eFor penicillin-allergic patients, use a respiratory fluoroquinolone and aztreonam (2 g IV q8h).

fFor penicillin-allergic patients, substitute aztreonam.

Abbreviations: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; ICU, intensive care unit.
 

Therapy with a macrolide or a fluoroquinolone within the previous 3 months is associated with an increased likelihood of infection with a resistant strain of S. pneumoniae. For this reason, a fluoroquinolone-based regimen should be used for patients recently given a macrolide, and vice versa (Table 257-4).

Once the etiologic agent(s) and susceptibilities are known, therapy may be altered to target the specific pathogen(s). However, this decision is not always straightforward. If blood cultures yield S. pneumoniae sensitive to penicillin after 2 days of treatment with a macrolide plus a -lactam or with a fluoroquinolone alone, should therapy be switched to penicillin alone? The concern here is that a -lactam alone would not be effective in the potential 15% of cases with atypical co-infection. No standard approach exists. In all cases, the individual patient and the various risk factors must be considered.

Management of bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia is also controversial. Data from nonrandomized studies suggest that combination therapy (especially with a macrolide and a -lactam) is associated with a lower mortality rate than monotherapy, particularly in severely ill patients. The exact reason is unknown, but possible explanations include an additive or synergistic antibacterial effect, antimicrobial tolerance, atypical co-infection, or the immunomodulatory effects of the macrolides.

For patients with CAP who are admitted to the ICU, the risk of infection with P. aeruginosa or CA-MRSA is increased, and coverage should be considered when a patient has risk factors or a Gram's stain suggestive of these pathogens (Table 257-4). If CA-MRSA infection is suspected, either linezolid or vancomycin should be added to the initial empirical regimen. There is concern about vancomycin's loss of potency against MRSA; in addition, vancomycin does not reach significant concentrations in epithelial lining fluid, whereas concentrations of linezolid at this site exceed the MIC for MRSA during the entire dosing interval.

Although hospitalized patients have traditionally received initial therapy by the IV route, some drugs〞particularly the fluoroquinolones〞are very well absorbed and can be given orally from the outset to select patients. For patients initially treated IV, a switch to oral treatment is appropriate as long as the patient can ingest and absorb the drugs, is hemodynamically stable, and is showing clinical improvement.

The duration of treatment for CAP has generated considerable interest. Patients were previously treated for 10每14 days, but studies with fluoroquinolones and telithromycin suggest that a 5-day course is sufficient for otherwise uncomplicated CAP. Even a single dose of ceftriaxone has been associated with a significant cure rate. A longer course is required for patients with bacteremia, metastatic infection, or infection with a virulent pathogen such as P. aeruginosa or CA-MRSA.

General Considerations

In addition to appropriate antimicrobial therapy, certain general considerations apply in dealing with CAP, HCAP, or HAP/VAP. Adequate hydration, oxygen therapy for hypoxemia, and assisted ventilation when necessary are critical to the success of therapy. Patients with severe CAP who remain hypotensive despite fluid resuscitation may have adrenal insufficiency and may respond to glucocorticoid treatment. Immunomodulatory therapy in the form of drotrecogin alfa (activated) should be considered for CAP patients with persistent septic shock and APACHE II scores of 25, particularly if the infection is caused by S. pneumoniae. The value of other forms of adjunctive therapy, including glucocorticoids, statins, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, remains unproven in the management of CAP.

Failure to Improve

Patients who are slow to respond to therapy should be reevaluated at about day 3 (sooner if their condition is worsening rather than simply not improving), and a number of possible scenarios should be considered. A number of noninfectious conditions can mimic pneumonia, including pulmonary edema, pulmonary embolism, lung carcinoma, radiation and hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and connective tissue disease involving the lungs. If the patient has CAP and treatment is aimed at the correct pathogen, the lack of response may be explained in a number of ways. The pathogen may be resistant to the drug selected, or a sequestered focus (e.g., a lung abscess or empyema) may be blocking access of the antibiotic(s) to the pathogen. The patient may be getting either the wrong drug or the correct drug at the wrong dose or frequency of administration. It is also possible that CAP is the correct diagnosis but that an unsuspected pathogen (e.g., CA-MRSA, M. tuberculosis, or a fungus) is the cause. Nosocomial superinfections〞both pulmonary and extrapulmonary〞are possible explanations for failure to improve or worsening. In all cases of delayed response or deteriorating condition, the patient must be carefully reassessed and appropriate studies initiated. These studies may include such diverse procedures as CT and bronchoscopy.

Complications

As in other severe infections, common complications of severe CAP include respiratory failure, shock and multiorgan failure, coagulopathy, and exacerbation of comorbid illnesses. Three particularly noteworthy conditions are metastatic infection, lung abscess, and complicated pleural effusion. Metastatic infection (e.g., brain abscess or endocarditis), although unusual, deserves immediate attention by the physician, with a detailed workup and proper treatment. Lung abscess may occur in association with aspiration or with infection caused by a single CAP pathogen such as CA-MRSA, P. aeruginosa, or (rarely) S. pneumoniae. Aspiration pneumonia is typically a mixed polymicrobial infection involving both aerobes and anaerobes. In either scenario, drainage should be established, and antibiotics that cover the known or suspected pathogens should be administered. A significant pleural effusion should be tapped for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. If the fluid has a pH of <7, a glucose level of <2.2 mmol/L, and a lactate dehydrogenase concentration of >1000 U/L or if bacteria are seen or cultured, then the fluid should be drained; a chest tube is usually required.

Follow-Up

Fever and leukocytosis usually resolve within 2每4 days in otherwise healthy patients with CAP, but physical findings may persist longer. Chest radiographic abnormalities are slowest to resolve and may require 4每12 weeks to clear, with the speed of clearance depending on the patient's age and underlying lung disease. Patients may be discharged from the hospital once their clinical conditions are stable, with no active medical problems requiring hospital care. The site of residence after discharge (nursing home, home with family, home alone) is an important consideration, particularly for elderly patients. For a patient whose condition is improving and who (if hospitalized) has been discharged, a follow-up radiograph can be done ~4每6 weeks later. If relapse or recurrence is documented, particularly in the same lung segment, the possibility of an underlying neoplasm must be considered.

Prognosis

The prognosis of CAP depends on the patient's age, comorbidities, and site of treatment (inpatient or outpatient). Young patients without comorbidity do well and usually recover fully after ~2 weeks. Older patients and those with comorbid conditions can take several weeks longer to recover fully. The overall mortality rate for the outpatient group is <1%. For patients requiring hospitalization, the overall mortality rate is estimated at 10%, with ~50% of deaths directly attributable to pneumonia.

Prevention

The main preventive measure is vaccination. The recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices should be followed for influenza and pneumococcal vaccines. In the event of an influenza outbreak, unprotected patients at risk from complications should be vaccinated immediately and given chemoprophylaxis with either oseltamivir or zanamivir for 2 weeks〞i.e., until vaccine-induced antibody levels are sufficiently high. Because of an increased risk of pneumococcal infection, even among patients without obstructive lung disease, smokers should be strongly encouraged to stop smoking.

An available 7-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine produces T cell每dependent antigens that result in long-term immunologic memory. Administration of this vaccine to children has led to an overall decrease in the prevalence of antimicrobial-resistant pneumococci and in the incidence of invasive pneumococcal disease among both children and adults. However, vaccination can be followed by the replacement of vaccine serotypes with nonvaccine serotypes (e.g., 19A and 35B).
 
Health Care每Associated Pneumonia

HCAP represents a transition between classic CAP and typical HAP. The definition of HCAP is still in some degree of flux because of a lack of large-scale studies. Several of the studies that are available have been limited to patients with culture-positive pneumonia. In these studies, the incidence of MDR pathogens in HCAP was as high as or higher than in HAP/VAP. MRSA in particular was more common in HCAP than in traditional HAP/VAP. Conversely, prospective studies in nontertiary-care centers have found a low incidence of MDR pathogens in HCAP.

The patients at greatest risk for HCAP are not well defined. Patients from nursing homes are not always at elevated risk for infection with MDR pathogens. Careful evaluation of nursing home residents with pneumonia suggests that their risk of MDR infection is low if they have not recently received antibiotics and are independent in most activities of daily living. Conversely, nursing home patients are at increased risk of infection with influenza virus and other atypical pneumonia pathogens. Undue concern about MDR pathogens occasionally results in a failure to cover atypical pathogens in treating nursing home patients. In addition, patients receiving home infusion therapy or undergoing chronic dialysis are probably at particular risk for MRSA pneumonia but may not be at greater risk for infection with Pseudomonas or Acinetobacter than are other patients who develop CAP.

In general, the management of HCAP due to MDR pathogens is similar to that of MDR HAP/VAP. This topic will therefore be covered in subsequent sections on HAP and VAP. The prognosis of HCAP is intermediate between that of CAP and VAP and is closer to that of HAP.

Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia

Most research on VAP has focused on illness in the hospital setting. However, the information and principles based on this research can be applied to non-ICU HAP and HCAP as well. The greatest difference between VAP and HCAP/HAP is the return to dependence on expectorated sputum for a microbiologic diagnosis of VAP (as for that of CAP), which is further complicated by frequent colonization by pathogens in patients with HAP or HCAP.

Etiology

Potential etiologic agents of VAP include both MDR and non-MDR bacterial pathogens (Table 257-5). The non-MDR group is nearly identical to the pathogens found in severe CAP (Table 257-2); it is not surprising that such pathogens predominate if VAP develops in the first 5每7 days of the hospital stay. However, if patients have other risk factors for HCAP, MDR pathogens are a consideration, even early in the hospital course. The relative frequency of individual MDR pathogens can vary significantly from hospital to hospital and even between different critical care units within the same institution. Most hospitals have problems with P. aeruginosa and MRSA, but other MDR pathogens are often institution-specific. Less commonly, fungal and viral pathogens cause VAP, usually affecting severely immunocompromised patients. Rarely, community-associated viruses cause mini-epidemics, usually when introduced by ill health care workers.

Table 257-5 Microbiologic Causes of Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia

 
 
Non-MDR Pathogens MDR Pathogens 
Streptococcus pneumoniae  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
Other Streptococcus spp.  MRSA 
Haemophilus influenzae  Acinetobacter spp.  
MSSA Antibiotic-resistant Enterobacteriaceae 
Antibiotic-sensitive Enterobacteriaceae Enterobacter spp.  
Escherichia coli  ESBL-positive strains 
Klebsiella pneumoniae   Klebsiella spp.  
Proteus spp.  Legionella pneumophila  
Enterobacter spp.  Burkholderia cepacia 
Serratia marcescens  Aspergillus spp.  
 


Abbreviations: ESBL, extended-spectrum -lactamase; MDR, multidrug-resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA, methicillin-sensitive S. aureus.
 

Epidemiology

Pneumonia is a common complication among patients requiring mechanical ventilation. Prevalence estimates vary between 6 and 52 cases per 100 patients, depending on the population studied. On any given day in the ICU, an average of 10% of patients will have pneumonia〞VAP in the overwhelming majority of cases. The frequency of diagnosis is not static but changes with the duration of mechanical ventilation, with the highest hazard ratio in the first 5 days and a plateau in additional cases (1% per day) after ~2 weeks. However, the cumulative rate among patients who remain ventilated for as long as 30 days is as high as 70%. These rates often do not reflect the recurrence of VAP in the same patient. Once a ventilated patient is transferred to a chronic-care facility or to home, the incidence of pneumonia drops significantly, especially in the absence of other risk factors for pneumonia. However, in chronic ventilator units, purulent tracheobronchitis becomes a significant issue, often interfering with efforts to wean patients off mechanical ventilation.

Three factors are critical in the pathogenesis of VAP: colonization of the oropharynx with pathogenic microorganisms, aspiration of these organisms from the oropharynx into the lower respiratory tract, and compromise of the normal host defense mechanisms. Most risk factors and their corresponding prevention strategies pertain to one of these three factors (Table 257-6).

Table 257-6 Pathogenic Mechanisms and Corresponding Prevention Strategies for Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia

 
 
Pathogenic Mechanism Prevention Strategy 
Oropharyngeal colonization with pathogenic bacteria   
  Elimination of normal flora Avoidance of prolonged antibiotic courses 
  Large-volume oropharyngeal aspiration around time of intubation Short course of prophylactic antibiotics for comatose patientsa  
  Gastroesophageal reflux Postpyloric enteral feedingb; avoidance of high gastric residuals, prokinetic agents  
  Bacterial overgrowth of stomach Prophylactic agents that raise gastric pHb; selective decontamination of digestive tract with nonabsorbable antibioticsb  
Cross-infection from other colonized patients Hand washing, especially with alcohol-based hand rub; intensive infection control educationa; isolation; proper cleaning of reusable equipment  
Large-volume aspiration Endotracheal intubation; avoidance of sedation; decompression of small-bowel obstruction 
Microaspiration around endotracheal tube   
  Endotracheal intubation Noninvasive ventilationa  
  Prolonged duration of ventilation Daily awakening from sedation,a weaning protocolsa  
  Abnormal swallowing function Early percutaneous tracheostomya  
  Secretions pooled above endotracheal tube Head of bed elevateda; continuous aspiration of subglottic secretions with specialized endotracheal tubea; avoidance of reintubation; minimization of sedation and patient transport  
Altered lower respiratory host defenses Tight glycemic controlb; lowering of hemoglobin transfusion threshold; specialized enteral feeding formula  
 


aStrategies demonstrated to be effective in at least one randomized controlled trial.

bStrategies with negative randomized trials or conflicting results.
 

The most obvious risk factor is the endotracheal tube, which bypasses the normal mechanical factors preventing aspiration. While the presence of an endotracheal tube may prevent large-volume aspiration, microaspiration is actually exacerbated by secretions pooling above the cuff. The endotracheal tube and the concomitant need for suctioning can damage the tracheal mucosa, thereby facilitating tracheal colonization. In addition, pathogenic bacteria can form a glycocalyx biofilm on the tube's surface that protects them from both antibiotics and host defenses. The bacteria can also be dislodged during suctioning and can reinoculate the trachea, or tiny fragments of glycocalyx can embolize to distal airways, carrying bacteria with them.

In a high percentage of critically ill patients, the normal oropharyngeal flora is replaced by pathogenic microorganisms. The most important risk factors are antibiotic selection pressure, cross-infection from other infected/colonized patients or contaminated equipment, and malnutrition. Of these factors, antibiotic exposure poses the greatest risk by far. Pathogens such as P. aeruginosa almost never cause infection in patients without prior exposure to antibiotics. The recent emphasis on hand hygiene has lowered the cross-infection rate.

How the lower respiratory tract defenses become overwhelmed remains poorly understood. Almost all intubated patients experience microaspiration and are at least transiently colonized with pathogenic bacteria. However, only around one-third of colonized patients develop VAP. Colony counts increase to high levels, sometimes days before the development of clinical pneumonia; these increases suggest that the final step in VAP development, independent of aspiration and oropharyngeal colonization, is the overwhelming of host defenses. Severely ill patients with sepsis and trauma appear to enter a state of immunoparalysis several days after admission to the ICU〞a time that corresponds to the greatest risk of developing VAP. The mechanism of this immunosuppression is not clear, although several factors have been suggested. Hyperglycemia affects neutrophil function, and trials suggest that keeping the blood sugar close to normal with exogenous insulin may have beneficial effects, including a decreased risk of infection. More frequent transfusions also adversely affect the immune response.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations are generally the same in VAP as in all other forms of pneumonia: fever, leukocytosis, increase in respiratory secretions, and pulmonary consolidation on physical examination, along with a new or changing radiographic infiltrate. The frequency of abnormal chest radiographs before the onset of pneumonia in intubated patients and the limitations of portable radiographic technique make interpretation of radiographs more difficult than in patients who are not intubated. Other clinical features may include tachypnea, tachycardia, worsening oxygenation, and increased minute ventilation.

Diagnosis

No single set of criteria is reliably diagnostic of pneumonia in a ventilated patient. The inability to identify such patients compromises efforts to prevent and treat VAP and even calls into question estimates of the impact of VAP on mortality rates.

Application of clinical criteria consistently results in overdiagnosis of VAP, largely because of three common findings in at-risk patients: (1) tracheal colonization with pathogenic bacteria in patients with endotracheal tubes, (2) multiple alternative causes of radiographic infiltrates in mechanically ventilated patients, and (3) the high frequency of other sources of fever in critically ill patients. The differential diagnosis of VAP includes a number of entities such as atypical pulmonary edema, pulmonary contusion, alveolar hemorrhage, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, ARDS, and pulmonary embolism. Clinical findings in ventilated patients with fever and/or leukocytosis may have alternative causes, including antibiotic-associated diarrhea, sinusitis, urinary tract infection, pancreatitis, and drug fever. Conditions mimicking pneumonia are often documented in patients in whom VAP has been ruled out by accurate diagnostic techniques. Most of these alternative diagnoses do not require antibiotic treatment; require antibiotics different from those used to treat VAP; or require some additional intervention, such as surgical drainage or catheter removal, for optimal management.

This diagnostic dilemma has led to debate and controversy. The major question is whether a quantitative-culture approach as a means of eliminating false-positive clinical diagnoses is superior to the clinical approach enhanced by principles learned from quantitative-culture studies. The most recent IDSA/ATS guidelines for HCAP suggest that either approach is clinically valid.

Quantitative-Culture Approach

The essence of the quantitative-culture approach is to discriminate between colonization and true infection by determining the bacterial burden. The more distal in the respiratory tree the diagnostic sampling, the more specific the results and therefore the lower the threshold of growth necessary to diagnose pneumonia and exclude colonization. For example, a quantitative endotracheal aspirate yields proximate samples, and the diagnostic threshold is 106 cfu/mL. The protected specimen brush method, in contrast, obtains distal samples and has a threshold of 103 cfu/mL. Conversely, sensitivity declines as more distal secretions are obtained, especially when they are collected blindly (i.e., by a technique other than bronchoscopy). Additional tests that may increase the diagnostic yield include Gram's stain, differential cell counts, staining for intracellular organisms, and detection of local protein levels elevated in response to infection.

Several studies have compared patient cohorts managed by the various quantitative-culture methods. While these studies documented issues of relative sensitivity and specificity, outcomes were not significantly different for the various groups of patients. The IDSA/ATS guidelines suggest that all these methods are appropriate and that the choice depends on availability and local expertise.

The Achilles heel of the quantitative approach is the effect of antibiotic therapy. With sensitive microorganisms, a single antibiotic dose can reduce colony counts below the diagnostic threshold. Recent changes in antibiotic therapy are the most significant. After 3 days, the operating characteristics of the tests are almost the same as if no antibiotic therapy has been given. Conversely, colony counts above the diagnostic threshold during antibiotic therapy suggest that the current antibiotics are ineffective. Even the normal host response may be sufficient to reduce quantitative-culture counts below the diagnostic threshold if sampling is delayed. In short, expertise in quantitative-culture techniques is critical, with a specimen obtained as soon as pneumonia is suspected and before antibiotic therapy is initiated or changed.

In a study comparing the quantitative with the clinical approach, use of bronchoscopic quantitative cultures resulted in significantly less antibiotic use at 14 days after study entry and lower rates of mortality and severity-adjusted mortality at 28 days. In addition, more alternative sites of infection were found in patients randomized to the quantitative-culture strategy. A critical aspect of this study was that antibiotic treatment was initiated only in patients whose gram-stained respiratory sample was positive or who displayed signs of hemodynamic instability. Fewer than one-half as many patients were treated for pneumonia in the bronchoscopy group, and only one-third as many microorganisms were cultured. Other studies that did not demonstrate a similar beneficial impact of quantitative culture on outcomes did not tightly link antibiotic treatment to the results of quantitative culture and other tests.

Clinical Approach

The lack of specificity of a clinical diagnosis of VAP has led to efforts to improve the diagnostic criteria. The Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) was developed by weighting of the various clinical criteria usually used for the diagnosis of VAP (Table 257-7). Use of the CPIS allows the selection of low-risk patients who may need only short-course antibiotic therapy or no treatment at all. Moreover, studies have demonstrated that the absence of bacteria in gram-stained endotracheal aspirates makes pneumonia an unlikely cause of fever or pulmonary infiltrates. These findings, coupled with a heightened awareness of the alternative diagnoses possible in patients with suspected VAP, can prevent inappropriate treatment for this disease. Furthermore, data show that the absence of an MDR pathogen in tracheal aspirate cultures eliminates the need for MDR coverage when empirical antibiotic therapy is narrowed. Since the most likely explanations for the mortality benefit of bronchoscopic quantitative cultures are decreased antibiotic selection pressure (which reduces the risk of subsequent infection with MDR pathogens) and identification of alternative sources of infection, a clinical diagnostic approach that incorporates such principles may result in similar outcomes.

Table 257-7 Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS)

 
 
Criterion Score 
Fever (∼C)   
  38.5 but 38.9 1 
  >39 or <36 2 
Leukocytosis   
  <4000 or >11,000/L 1 
  Bands >50% 1 (additional) 
Oxygenation (mmHg)   
  PaO2/FIO2 <250 and no ARDS
  2 
Chest radiograph   
  Localized infiltrate 2 
  Patchy or diffuse infiltrate 1 
  Progression of infiltrate (no ARDS or CHF) 2 
Tracheal aspirate   
  Moderate or heavy growth 1 
  Same morphology on Gram's stain 1 (additional) 
Maximal scorea  12 
 


aAt the time of the original diagnosis, the progression of the infiltrate is not known and tracheal aspirate culture results are often unavailable; thus, the maximal score is initially 8每10.

Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CHF, congestive heart failure.
 

Treatment: Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia

Many studies have demonstrated higher mortality rates with inappropriate than with appropriate empirical antibiotic therapy. The key to appropriate antibiotic management of VAP is an appreciation of the patterns of resistance of the most likely pathogens in any given patient.

Antibiotic Resistance

If it were not for the risk of infection with MDR pathogens (Table 257-1), VAP could be treated with the same antibiotics used for severe CAP. However, antibiotic selection pressure leads to the frequent involvement of MDR pathogens by selecting either for drug-resistant isolates of common pathogens (MRSA and extended-spectrum -lactamase每positive Enterobacteriaceae) or for intrinsically resistant pathogens (P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp.). Frequent use of -lactam drugs, especially cephalosporins, appears to be the major risk factor for infection with MRSA and extended spectrum -lactamase每positive strains.

P. aeruginosa has demonstrated the ability to develop resistance to all routinely used antibiotics. Unfortunately, even if initially sensitive, P. aeruginosa isolates have also shown a propensity to develop resistance during treatment. Either derepression of resistance genes or selection of resistant clones within the large bacterial inoculum associated with most pneumonias may be the cause. Acinetobacter spp., Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Burkholderia cepacia are intrinsically resistant to many of the empirical antibiotic regimens employed (see below). VAP caused by these pathogens emerges during treatment of other infections, and resistance is always evident at initial diagnosis.

Empirical Therapy

Recommended options for empirical therapy are listed in Table 257-8. Treatment should be started once diagnostic specimens have been obtained. The major factor in the selection of agents is the presence of risk factors for MDR pathogens. Choices among the various options listed depend on local patterns of resistance and the patient's prior antibiotic exposure.

Table 257-8 Empirical Antibiotic Treatment of Health Care每Associated Pneumonia

 
 
Patients without Risk Factors for MDR Pathogens  
Ceftriaxone (2 g IV q24h) or  
Moxifloxacin (400 mg IV q24h), ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q8h), or levofloxacin (750 mg IV q24h) or  
Ampicillin/sulbactam (3 g IV q6h) or  
Ertapenem (1 g IV q24h) 
Patients with Risk Factors for MDR Pathogens  
1. A -lactam:

    Ceftazidime (2 g IV q8h) or cefepime (2 g IV q8每12h) or

    Piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g IV q6h), imipenem (500 mg IV q6h or 1 g IV q8h), or meropenem (1 g IV q8h) plus
 
2. A second agent active against gram-negative bacterial pathogens:

    Gentamicin or tobramycin (7 mg/kg IV q24h) or amikacin (20 mg/kg IV q24h) or

    Ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q8h) or levofloxacin (750 mg IV q24h) plus
 
3. An agent active against gram-positive bacterial pathogens:

    Linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or

    Vancomycin (15 mg/kg, up to 1 g IV, q12h)
 
 


Abbreviation: MDR, multidrug-resistant.
 

The majority of patients without risk factors for MDR infection can be treated with a single agent. The major difference from CAP is the markedly lower incidence of atypical pathogens in VAP; the exception is Legionella, which can be a nosocomial pathogen, especially with breakdowns in the treatment of potable water in the hospital.

The standard recommendation for patients with risk factors for MDR infection is for three antibiotics: two directed at P. aeruginosa and one at MRSA. The choice of a -lactam agent provides the greatest variability in coverage, yet the use of the broadest-spectrum agent〞a carbapenem, even in an antibiotic combination〞still represents inappropriate initial therapy in 10每15% of cases.

Specific Treatment

Once an etiologic diagnosis is made, broad-spectrum empirical therapy can be modified to address the known pathogen specifically. For patients with MDR risk factors, antibiotic regimens can be reduced to a single agent in more than one-half of cases and to a two-drug combination in more than one-quarter of cases. Only a minority of cases require a complete course with three drugs. A negative tracheal-aspirate culture or growth below the threshold for quantitative cultures, especially if the sample was obtained before any antibiotic change, strongly suggests that antibiotics should be discontinued. Identification of other confirmed or suspected sites of infection may require ongoing antibiotic therapy, but the spectrum of pathogens (and the corresponding antibiotic choices) may be different from those for VAP. If the CPIS decreases over the first 3 days, antibiotics should be stopped after 8 days. An 8-day course of therapy is just as effective as a 2-week course and is associated with less frequent emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains.

The major controversy regarding specific therapy for VAP concerns the need for ongoing combination treatment of Pseudomonas infection. No randomized controlled trials have demonstrated a benefit of combination therapy with a -lactam and an aminoglycoside, nor have subgroup analyses in other trials found a survival benefit with such a regimen. The unacceptably high rates of clinical failure and death for VAP caused by P. aeruginosa despite combination therapy (see "Failure to Improve," below) indicate that better regimens are needed〞including, perhaps, aerosolized antibiotics.

VAP caused by MRSA is associated with a 40% clinical failure rate when treated with standard-dose vancomycin. One proposed solution is the use of high-dose individualized treatment, although the risk of renal toxicity increases with this strategy. In addition, the MIC of vancomycin has been increasing, and a high percentage of clinical failures occur when the MIC is in the upper range of sensitivity (i.e., 1.5每2 g/mL). Linezolid appears to be more efficacious than the standard dose of vancomycin and may be the preferred agent in patients with renal insufficiency and in those infected with high-MIC isolates of MRSA.

Failure to Improve

Treatment failure is not uncommon in VAP, especially in that caused by MDR pathogens. In addition to the 40% failure rate for MRSA infection treated with vancomycin, VAP due to Pseudomonas has a 50% failure rate, no matter what the regimen. The causes of clinical failure vary with the pathogen(s) and the antibiotic(s). Inappropriate therapy can usually be minimized by use of the recommended triple-drug regimen (Table 257-8). However, the emergence of -lactam resistance during therapy is an important problem, especially in infection with Pseudomonas and Enterobacter spp. Recurrent VAP caused by the same pathogen is possible because the biofilm on endotracheal tubes allows reintroduction of the microorganism. However, studies of VAP caused by Pseudomonas show that approximately one-half of recurrent cases are caused by a new strain. Inadequate local levels of vancomycin are the likely cause of treatment failure in VAP due to MRSA.

Treatment failure is very difficult to diagnose. Pneumonia due to a new superinfection, the presence of extrapulmonary infection, and drug toxicity must be considered in the differential diagnosis of treatment failure. Serial CPIS appears to track the clinical response accurately, while repeat quantitative cultures may clarify the microbiologic response. A persistently elevated or rising CPIS value by day 3 of therapy is likely to indicate failure. The most sensitive component of the CPIS is improvement in oxygenation.

Complications

Apart from death, the major complication of VAP is prolongation of mechanical ventilation, with corresponding increases in length of stay in the ICU and in the hospital. In most studies, an additional week of mechanical ventilation because of VAP is common. The additional expense of this complication often warrants costly and aggressive efforts at prevention.

In rare cases, some types of necrotizing pneumonia (e.g., that due to P. aeruginosa) result in significant pulmonary hemorrhage. More commonly, necrotizing infections result in the long-term complications of bronchiectasis and parenchymal scarring leading to recurrent pneumonias. The long-term complications of pneumonia are underappreciated. Pneumonia results in a catabolic state in a patient already nutritionally at risk. The muscle loss and general debilitation from an episode of VAP often require prolonged rehabilitation and, in the elderly, commonly result in an inability to return to independent function and the need for nursing home placement.

Follow-Up

Clinical improvement, if it occurs, is usually evident within 48每72 h of the initiation of antimicrobial treatment. Because findings on chest radiography often worsen initially during treatment, they are less helpful than clinical criteria as an indicator of clinical response in severe pneumonia. Seriously ill patients with pneumonia often undergo follow-up chest radiography daily, at least until they are being weaned off mechanical ventilation. Once a patient has been extubated and is in stable condition, follow-up radiographs may not be necessary for a few weeks.

Prognosis

VAP is associated with significant mortality. Crude mortality rates of 50每70% have been reported, but the real issue is attributable mortality. Many patients with VAP have underlying diseases that would result in death even if VAP did not occur. Attributable mortality exceeded 25% in one matched cohort study. Patients who develop VAP are at least twice as likely to die as those who do not. Some of the variability in VAP mortality rates is clearly related to the type of patient and ICU studied. VAP in trauma patients is not associated with attributable mortality, possibly because many of the patients were otherwise healthy before being injured. However, the causative pathogen also plays a major role. Generally, MDR pathogens are associated with significantly greater attributable mortality than non-MDR pathogens. Pneumonia caused by some pathogens (e.g., S. maltophilia) is simply a marker for a patient whose immune system is so compromised that death is almost inevitable.

Prevention

(Table 257-6) Because of the significance of the endotracheal tube as a risk factor for VAP, the most important preventive intervention is to avoid endotracheal intubation or at least to minimize its duration. Successful use of noninvasive ventilation via a nasal or full-face mask avoids many of the problems associated with endotracheal tubes. Strategies that minimize the duration of ventilation through daily holding of sedation and formal weaning protocols have also been highly effective in preventing VAP.

Unfortunately, a tradeoff in risks is sometimes required. Aggressive attempts to extubate early may result in reintubation(s) and increase aspiration, posing a risk of VAP. Heavy continuous sedation increases the risk, but self-extubation because of too little sedation is also a risk. The tradeoffs also apply to antibiotic therapy. Short-course antibiotic prophylaxis can decrease the risk of VAP in comatose patients requiring intubation, and data suggest that antibiotics decrease VAP rates in general. However, the major benefit appears to be a decrease in the incidence of early-onset VAP, which is usually caused by the less pathogenic non-MDR microorganisms. Conversely, prolonged courses of antibiotics consistently increase the risk of VAP caused by the more lethal MDR pathogens. Despite its virulence and associated mortality, VAP caused by Pseudomonas is rare among patients who have not recently received antibiotics.

Minimizing the amount of microaspiration around the endotracheal tube cuff is also a strategy for avoidance of VAP. Simply elevating the head of the bed (at least 30∼ above horizontal but preferably 45∼) decreases VAP rates. Specially modified endotracheal tubes that allow removal of the secretions pooled above the cuff may also prevent VAP. The risk-to-benefit ratio of transporting the patient outside the ICU for diagnostic tests or procedures should be carefully considered, since VAP rates are increased among transported patients.

Emphasis on the avoidance of agents that raise gastric pH and on oropharyngeal decontamination has been diminished by the equivocal and conflicting results of more recent clinical trials. The role in the pathogenesis of VAP that is played by the overgrowth of bacterial components of the bowel flora in the stomach has also been downplayed. MRSA and the nonfermenters P. aeruginosa and Acinetobacter spp. are not normally part of the bowel flora but reside primarily in the nose and on the skin, respectively. Therefore, an emphasis on controlling overgrowth of the bowel flora may be relevant only in certain populations, such as liver transplant recipients and patients who have undergone other major intraabdominal procedures or who have bowel obstruction.

In outbreaks of VAP due to specific pathogens, the possibility of a breakdown in infection control measures (particularly contamination of reusable equipment) should be investigated. Even high rates of pathogens that are already common in a particular ICU may be a result of cross-infection. Education and reminders of the need for consistent hand washing and other infection control practices can minimize this risk.

Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia

While significantly less well studied than VAP, HAP in nonintubated patients〞both inside and outside the ICU〞is similar to VAP. The main differences are in the higher frequency of non-MDR pathogens and the better underlying host immunity in nonintubated patients. The lower frequency of MDR pathogens allows monotherapy in a larger proportion of cases of HAP than of VAP.

The only pathogens that may be more common in the non-VAP population are anaerobes. The greater risk of macroaspiration by nonintubated patients and the lower oxygen tensions in the lower respiratory tract of these patients increase the likelihood of a role for anaerobes. While more common in patients with HAP, anaerobes are usually only contributors to polymicrobial pneumonias except in patients with large-volume aspiration or in the setting of bowel obstruction/ileus. As in the management of CAP, specific therapy targeting anaerobes probably is not indicated (unless gross aspiration is a concern) since many of the recommended antibiotics are active against anaerobes.

Diagnosis is even more difficult for HAP in the nonintubated patient than for VAP. Lower respiratory tract samples appropriate for culture are considerably more difficult to obtain from nonintubated patients. Many of the underlying diseases that predispose a patient to HAP are also associated with an inability to cough adequately. Since blood cultures are infrequently positive (<15% of cases), the majority of patients with HAP do not have culture data on which antibiotic modifications can be based. Therefore, de-escalation of therapy is less likely in patients with risk factors for MDR pathogens. Despite these difficulties, the better host defenses in non-ICU patients result in lower mortality rates than are documented for VAP. In addition, the risk of antibiotic failure is lower in HAP.
 
Further Readings

American Thoracic Society/Infectious Diseases Society of America: Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired, ventilator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:388, 2005 

 
Chastre J, Fagon JY: Ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165:867, 2002[PMID: 11934711]  [Full Text]

 
Fagon JY et al: Invasive and noninvasive strategies for management of suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia. A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 132:621, 2000[PMID: 10766680]  [Full Text]

 
Fine MJ et al: A prediction rule to identify low-risk patients with community-acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med 336:243, 1997[PMID: 8995086]  [Full Text]

 
Lim WS et al: Defining community acquired pneumonia severity on presentation to hospital: An international derivation and validation study. Thorax 58:377, 2003[PMID: 12728155]  [Full Text]

 
Mandell LA et al: Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 44(Suppl 2): S27, 2007 

 
Singh N et al: Short-course empiric antibiotic therapy for patients with pulmonary infiltrates in the intensive care unit. A proposed solution for indiscriminate antibiotic prescription. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162:505, 2000[PMID: 10934078]  [Full Text]

 
Vanderkooi OG et al: Predicting antimicrobial resistance in invasive pneumococcal infections. Clin Infect Dis 40:1288, 2005[PMID: 15825031]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Bronchiectasis

Bronchiectasis refers to an irreversible airway dilation that involves the lung in either a focal or a diffuse manner and that classically has been categorized as cylindrical or tubular (the most common form), varicose, or cystic.

Etiology

Bronchiectasis can arise from infectious or noninfectious causes (Table 258-1). Clues to the underlying etiology are often provided by the pattern of lung involvement. Focal bronchiectasis refers to bronchiectatic changes in a localized area of the lung and can be a consequence of obstruction of the airway〞either extrinsic (e.g., due to compression by adjacent lymphadenopathy or parenchymal tumor mass) or intrinsic (e.g., due to an airway tumor or aspirated foreign body, a scarred/stenotic airway, or bronchial atresia from congenital underdevelopment of the airway). Diffuse bronchiectasis is characterized by widespread bronchiectatic changes throughout the lung and often arises from an underlying systemic or infectious disease process.

Table 258-1 Major Etiologies of Bronchiectasis and Proposed Workup

 
 
Pattern of Lung Involvement by Bronchiectasis Etiology by Categories (with Specific Examples) Workup 
Focal Obstruction (e.g., aspirated foreign body, tumor mass) Chest imaging (chest x-ray and/or chest CT); bronchoscopy 
Diffuse Infection (e.g., bacterial, nontuberculous mycobacterial) Gram's stain/culture; stains/cultures for acid-fast bacilli and fungi. If no pathogen is identified, consider bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) 
  Immunodeficiency (e.g., hypogammaglobulinemia, HIV infection, bronchiolitis obliterans after lung transplantation) Complete blood count with differential; immunoglobulin measurement; HIV testing 
  Genetic causes (e.g., cystic fibrosis, Kartagener's syndrome, 1 antitrypsin deficiency)
  Measurement of chloride levels in sweat (for cystic fibrosis), 1 antitrypsin levels; nasal or respiratory tract brush/biopsy (for dyskinetic/immotile cilia syndrome); genetic testing
  
  Autoimmune or rheumatologic causes (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, Sj?gren's syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease); immune-mediated disease (e.g., allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis) Clinical examination with careful joint exam, serologic testing (e.g., for rheumatoid factor). Consider workup for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, especially in patients with refractory asthmaa  
  Recurrent aspiration Test of swallowing function and general neuromuscular strength 
  Miscellaneous (e.g., yellow nail syndrome; traction bronchiectasis from postradiation fibrosis or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis) Guided by clinical condition 
  Idiopathic Exclusion of other causes 
 


aSkin testing for Aspergillus reactivity; measurement of serum precipitins for Aspergillus, serum IgE levels, serum eosinophils, etc.
 

More pronounced involvement of the upper lung fields is most common in cystic fibrosis (CF) and is also observed in postradiation fibrosis, corresponding to the lung region encompassed by the radiation port. Bronchiectasis with predominant involvement of the lower lung fields usually has its source in chronic recurrent aspiration (e.g., due to esophageal motility disorders like those in scleroderma), end-stage fibrotic lung disease (e.g., traction bronchiectasis from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis), or recurrent immunodeficiency-associated infections (e.g., hypogammaglobulinemia). Bronchiectasis resulting from infection by nontuberculous mycobacteria [NTM; most commonly the Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAC)] often preferentially affects the midlung fields. Congenital causes of bronchiectasis with predominant midlung field involvement include the dyskinetic/immotile cilia syndrome. Finally, predominant involvement of the central airways is reported in association with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), in which an immune-mediated reaction to Aspergillus damages the bronchial wall. Congenital causes of central airway每predominant bronchiectasis resulting from cartilage deficiency include tracheobronchomegaly (Mounier-Kuhn syndrome) and Williams-Campbell syndrome.

In many cases, the etiology of bronchiectasis is not determined. In case series, as many as 25每50% of patients referred for bronchiectasis have idiopathic disease.

Epidemiology

The epidemiology of bronchiectasis varies greatly with the underlying etiology. For example, patients born with CF often develop significant clinical bronchiectasis in late adolescence or early adulthood, although atypical presentations of CF in adults in their thirties and forties are also possible. In contrast, bronchiectasis resulting from MAC infection classically affects nonsmoking women older than age 50 years. In general, the incidence of bronchiectasis increases with age. Bronchiectasis is more common among women than among men.

In areas where tuberculosis is prevalent, bronchiectasis more frequently occurs as a sequela of granulomatous infection. Focal bronchiectasis can arise from extrinsic compression of the airway by enlarged granulomatous lymph nodes and/or from development of intrinsic obstruction as a result of erosion of a calcified lymph node through the airway wall (e.g., broncholithiasis). Especially in reactivated tuberculosis, parenchymal destruction from infection can result in areas of more diffuse bronchiectasis. Apart from cases associated with tuberculosis, an increased incidence of non-CF bronchiectasis with an unclear underlying mechanism has been reported as a significant problem in developing nations. It has been suggested that the high incidence of malnutrition in certain areas may predispose to immune dysfunction and development of bronchiectasis.

Pathogenesis and Pathology

The most widely cited mechanism of infectious bronchiectasis is the "vicious cycle hypothesis," in which susceptibility to infection and poor mucociliary clearance result in microbial colonization of the bronchial tree. Some organisms, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, exhibit a particular propensity for colonizing damaged airways and evading host defense mechanisms. Impaired mucociliary clearance can result from inherited conditions such as CF or dyskinetic cilia syndrome, and it has been proposed that a single severe infection (e.g., pneumonia caused by Bordetella pertussis or Mycoplasma pneumoniae) can result in significant airway damage and poor secretion clearance. The presence of the microbes incites continued chronic inflammation, with consequent damage to the airway wall, continued impairment of secretion and microbial clearance, and ongoing propagation of the infectious/inflammatory cycle. Moreover, it has been proposed that mediators released directly from bacteria can interfere with mucociliary clearance.

Classic studies of the pathology of bronchiectasis from the 1950s demonstrated significant small-airway wall inflammation and larger-airway wall destruction as well as dilation, with loss of elastin, smooth muscle, and cartilage. It has been proposed that inflammatory cells in the small airways release proteases and other mediators, such as reactive oxygen species and proinflammatory cytokines, that damage the larger-airway walls. Furthermore, the ongoing inflammatory process in the smaller airways results in airflow obstruction. It is believed that antiproteases, such as 1 antitrypsin, play an important role in neutralizing the damaging effects of neutrophil elastase and in enhancing bacterial killing. In addition to emphysema, bronchiectasis has been observed in patients with 1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Proposed mechanisms for noninfectious bronchiectasis include immune-mediated reactions that damage the bronchial wall (e.g., those associated with systemic autoimmune conditions such as Sj?gren's syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis). Traction bronchiectasis refers to dilated airways arising from parenchymal distortion as a result of lung fibrosis (e.g., postradiation fibrosis or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis).

Clinical Manifestations

The most common clinical presentation is a persistent productive cough with ongoing production of thick, tenacious sputum. Physical findings often include crackles and wheezing on lung auscultation, and some patients with bronchiectasis exhibit clubbing of the digits. Mild to moderate airflow obstruction is often detected on pulmonary function tests, overlapping with that seen at presentation with other conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Acute exacerbations of bronchiectasis are usually characterized by changes in the nature of sputum production, with increased volume and purulence. However, typical signs and symptoms of lung infection, such as fever and new infiltrates, may not be present.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is usually based on presentation with a persistent chronic cough and sputum production accompanied by consistent radiographic features. While chest radiographs lack sensitivity, the presence of "tram tracks" indicating dilated airways is consistent with bronchiectasis. Chest CT is more specific for bronchiectasis and is the imaging modality of choice for confirming the diagnosis. CT findings include airway dilation (detected as parallel "tram tracks" or as the "signet-ring sign"〞a cross-sectional area of the airway with a diameter at least 1.5 times that of the adjacent vessel), lack of bronchial tapering (including the presence of tubular structures within 1 cm from the pleural surface), bronchial wall thickening in dilated airways, inspissated secretions (e.g., the "tree-in-bud" pattern), or cysts emanating from the bronchial wall (especially pronounced in cystic bronchiectasis; Fig. 258-1).

Figure 258-1

 
 
 
Representative chest CT image of severe bronchiectasis. This patient's CT demonstrates many severely dilated airways, seen both longitudinally (arrowhead) and in cross-section (arrow).
 
 

Approach to the Patient: Bronchiectasis

The evaluation of a patient with bronchiectasis entails elicitation of a clinical history, chest imaging, and a workup to determine the underlying etiology. Evaluation of focal bronchiectasis almost always requires bronchoscopy to exclude airway obstruction by an underlying mass or foreign body. A workup for diffuse bronchiectasis includes analysis for the major etiologies (Table 258-1). Pulmonary function testing is an important component of a functional assessment of the patient.

Treatment: Bronchiectasis

Treatment of infectious bronchiectasis is directed at the control of active infection and improvements in secretion clearance and bronchial hygiene so as to decrease the microbial load within the airways and minimize the risk of repeated infections.

Antibiotic Treatment

Antibiotics targeting the causative or presumptive pathogen (with Haemophilus influenzae and P. aeruginosa isolated commonly) should be administered in acute exacerbations, usually for a minimum of 7每10 days. Decisions about treatment of NTM infection can be difficult, given that these organisms can be colonizers as well as pathogens and the prolonged treatment course often is not well tolerated. Consensus guidelines have advised that diagnostic criteria for true clinical infection with NTM should be considered in patients with symptoms and radiographic findings of lung disease who have at least two sputum samples positive on culture; at least one bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid sample positive on culture; a biopsy sample displaying histopathologic features of NTM infection (e.g., granuloma or a positive stain for acid-fast bacilli) along with one positive sputum culture; or a pleural fluid sample (or a sample from another sterile extrapulmonary site) positive on culture. MAC strains are the most common NTM pathogens, and the recommended regimen for HIV-negative patients includes a macrolide combined with rifampin and ethambutol. Consensus guidelines also recommend macrolide susceptibility testing for clinically significant MAC isolates.

Bronchial Hygiene

The numerous approaches employed to enhance secretion clearance in bronchiectasis include hydration and mucolytic administration, aerosolization of bronchodilators and hyperosmolar agents (e.g., hypertonic saline), and chest physiotherapy (e.g., postural drainage, traditional mechanical chest percussion via hand clapping to the chest, or use of devices such as an oscillatory positive expiratory pressure flutter valve or a high-frequency chest wall oscillation vest). The mucolytic dornase (DNase) is recommended routinely in CF-related bronchiectasis but not in non-CF bronchiectasis, given concerns about lack of efficacy and potential harm in the non-CF population.

Anti-Inflammatory Therapy

It has been proposed that control of the inflammatory response may be of benefit in bronchiectasis, and relatively small-scale trials have yielded evidence of alleviated dyspnea, decreased need for inhaled -agonists, and reduced sputum production with inhaled glucocorticoids. However, no significant differences in lung function or bronchiectasis exacerbation rates have been observed. Risks of immunosuppression and adrenal suppression must be carefully considered with use of anti-inflammatory therapy in infectious bronchiectasis. Nevertheless, administration of oral/systemic glucocorticoids may be important in treating bronchiectasis due to certain etiologies, such as ABPA, or noninfectious bronchiectasis due to underlying conditions, especially that in which an autoimmune condition is believed to be active (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis or Sj?gren's syndrome). Patients with ABPA may also benefit from a prolonged course of treatment with the oral antifungal agent itraconazole.

Refractory Cases

In select cases, surgery can be considered, with resection of a focal area of suppuration. In advanced cases, lung transplantation can be considered.

Complications

In more severe cases of infectious bronchiectasis, recurrent infections and repeated courses of antibiotics can lead to microbial resistance to antibiotics. In certain cases, combinations of antibiotics that have their own independent toxicity profiles may be necessary to treat resistant organisms.

Recurrent infections can result in injury to superficial mucosal vessels, with bleeding and, in severe cases, life-threatening hemoptysis. Management of massive hemoptysis usually requires intubation to stabilize the patient, identifying the source of bleeding, and protecting the nonbleeding lung. Control of bleeding often necessitates bronchial artery embolization and, in severe cases, surgery.

Prognosis

Outcomes of bronchiectasis vary widely with the underlying etiology and may also be influenced by the frequency of exacerbations and (in infectious cases) the specific pathogens involved. In one study, the decline of lung function in patients with non-CF bronchiectasis was similar to that in patients with COPD, with the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) declining by 50每55 mL per year as opposed to 20每30 mL per year for healthy controls.

Prevention

Reversal of an underlying immunodeficient state (e.g., by administration of gamma globulin for immunoglobulin-deficient patients) and vaccination of patients with chronic respiratory conditions (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal vaccines) can decrease the risk of recurrent infections. Patients who smoke should be counseled about smoking cessation.

After resolution of an acute infection in patients with recurrences (e.g., 3 episodes per year), the use of suppressive antibiotics to minimize the microbial load and reduce the frequency of exacerbations has been proposed, although there is less consensus with regard to this approach in non-CF-associated bronchiectasis than there is in patients with CF-related bronchiectasis. Possible suppressive treatments include (1) administration of an oral antibiotic (e.g., ciprofloxacin) daily for 1每2 weeks per month; (2) use of a rotating schedule of oral antibiotics (to minimize the risk of development of drug resistance); (3) administration of a macrolide antibiotic daily or three times per week (with mechanisms of possible benefit related to non-antimicrobial properties, such as anti-inflammatory effects and reduction of gram-negative bacillary biofilms); (4) inhalation of aerosolized antibiotics [e.g., tobramycin inhalation solution (TOBI)] by select patients on a rotating schedule (e.g., 30 days on, 30 days off) with the goal of decreasing the microbial load without encountering the side effects of systemic drug administration; and (5) intermittent administration of IV antibiotics (e.g., "clean-outs") for patients with more severe bronchiectasis and/or resistant pathogens.

In addition, ongoing, consistent attention to bronchial hygiene can promote secretion clearance and decrease the microbial load in the airways.
 
Lung Abscess

The term lung abscess refers to a microbial infection of the lung that results in necrosis of the pulmonary parenchyma. Necrotizing pneumonia or lung gangrene refers to multiple small pulmonary abscesses in contiguous areas of the lung, usually resulting from a more virulent infection.

Classification

Lung abscesses are classified by clinical and pathologic features including the tempo of progression, the presence or absence of an associated underlying lesion, and the microbial pathogen responsible. Duration defines the infection as acute versus chronic, with the dividing line usually at 4每6 weeks. Abscesses occurring in the presence of underlying pulmonary lesions, including tumors or systemic conditions (e.g., HIV infection), are referred to as secondary; those that occur in the absence of underlying pulmonary lesions are considered primary. The term nonspecific lung abscess refers to cases in which no likely pathogen is recovered from expectorated sputum; most such cases are presumed to be due to anaerobic bacteria. Putrid lung abscess is a term applied to anaerobic bacterial lung abscesses, which are characterized by distinctive foul-smelling breath, sputum, or empyema fluid.

Etiology

The likely etiologic agent, appropriate diagnostic testing, and appropriate treatment are frequently indicated by the characteristics of the host and the disease process. A variety of microbial pathogens cause lung abscess (Table 258-2). Most nonspecific lung abscesses are presumed to be due to anaerobic bacteria. Mycobacteria, especially M. tuberculosis, are a very important cause of pulmonary infections and abscess formation. Fungi and some parasites also cause lung abscess. An acute lung abscess developing in a young, previously healthy patient, especially in conjunction with influenza, is likely to involve Staphylococcus aureus; this pathogen generally is seen easily on sputum Gram's stain and culture, and presumptive treatment for methicillin-resistant S. aureus is urgent. In an immunocompromised host, suspected pathogens include enteric gram-negative bacilli〞especially Klebsiella pneumoniae but also agents that are found almost exclusively in patients with defective cell-mediated immunity, such as Nocardia asteroides and Rhodococcus equi. Lung abscess acquired in other countries may involve Burkholderia pseudomallei or Paragonimus westermani.

Table 258-2 Microbial Pathogens Causing Cavitary Lung Infection

 
 
Aspiration-Prone Host  
Anaerobic bacteria plus microaerophilic and/or anaerobic streptococci, Gemella spp.  
Embolic (endovascular) lesions: usually Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Fusobacterium necrophoruma  
Endemic fungi: Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coccidioides spp.  
Mycobacteria: M. tuberculosis, M. kansasii, M. avium  
Immunocompromised Host  
M. tuberculosis, Nocardia asteroides, Rhodococcus equi, Legionella spp., P. aeruginosa, Enterobacteriaceae (especially Klebsiella pneumoniae), Aspergillus spp., Cryptococcus spp.  
Previously Healthy Host  
Bacteria: S. aureus,bS. milleri, K. pneumoniae, group A Streptococcus; Gemella, Legionella, and Actinomyces spp.  
Parasites: Entamoeba histolytica, Paragonimus westermani, Strongyloides stercoralis  
 


aLemierre's disease.

bOften in a young patient with influenza.
 

Multiple pulmonary lesions that are not caused by microbes may resemble lung abscess. These include the lesions of pulmonary infarction, bronchiectasis, necrotizing carcinoma, pulmonary sequestration, vasculitides [e.g., periarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), Goodpasture syndrome], and cysts or bullae with fluid collections. In some cases, multiple lung abscesses result from septic emboli, most commonly in association with tricuspid valve endocarditis.

Clinical Features

The classic presentation of nonspecific lung abscess is an indolent infection that evolves over several days or weeks, usually in a host who has a predisposition to aspiration. A common feature is periodontal infection with pyorrhea or gingivitis. Anaerobes and aerobic or microaerophilic streptococci that colonize the upper airways are implicated in these lesions. The usual symptoms are fatigue, cough, sputum production, and fever. Chills are uncommon. Many patients have evidence of chronic disease, such as weight loss and anemia. Some patients have putrid-smelling sputum indicative of the presence of anaerobes; the foul odor is presumably due to the organisms' production of short-chain fatty acids, such as butyric or succinic acid. Some patients have pleurisy due to pleural involvement by contiguous spread or by a bronchopleural fistula. The pleurisy may be severe and may be the symptom that prompts medical evaluation. Sequential x-rays or CT scans show the evolution of this lesion from pneumonitis to cavitation, a process that generally requires 7每14 days in experimental animals (Fig. 258-2).

Figure 258-2

 
 
 
 
Representative chest CT demonstrating development of lung abscesses. This patient was immunocompromised due to underlying lymphoma and developed severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia, as represented by a left lung infiltrate with concern for central regions of necrosis (panel A, black arrow). Two weeks later, areas of cavitation with air fluid levels were visible in this region and were consistent with the development of lung abscesses (panel B, white arrow). (Images provided by Dr. Ritu Gill, Division of Chest Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston.)
 
 

Diagnosis

Lung abscess can usually be detected with standard imaging, including chest x-ray and CT (Fig. 258-2). The latter is clearly preferred for precise definition of the lesion and its location and possibly for detection of underlying lesions. Lymphadenopathy is not associated with bacterial lung abscess; thus this finding suggests an alternative diagnosis.

Microbiologic studies include stains and cultures of expectorated sputum to detect aerobic bacterial pathogens. However, clinical correlations are very important because sputum cultures (especially those that do not satisfy standard cytologic criteria) are unreliable. In appropriate settings, it is important to consider cultures for fungi and mycobacteria. Anaerobic bacteria, the most common causes of primary lung abscess, are not detected in expectorated sputum cultures, and in any case the specimen is subject to anaerobic contamination as it traverses the upper airways. Alternative specimens that may be useful include pleural fluid obtained by thoracentesis in patients who have empyema and quantitative bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens if they are processed promptly and appropriately for anaerobic bacteria. Many reports describe the use of transtracheal aspiration to bypass the upper airways and obtain a specimen for meaningful anaerobic culture. This procedure, which was used extensively in the 1970s, has largely been abandoned out of concern about adverse consequences and because of a general decline in the pursuit of an etiologic agent in pulmonary infections. Another invasive method for bypassing contamination by the flora of the upper airways is transthoracic needle aspiration under CT guidance; the popularity of this procedure has increased in recent years. In most cases, the etiology of anaerobic lung abscess is clear: the host is prone to aspiration and has an abscess in a dependent pulmonary segment, with no other likely cause. As stated above, putrid breath, sputum, or empyema fluid indicates anaerobic infection.

Treatment: Lung Abscess

Antibiotic Selection

Treatment depends on the presumed or established etiology. Infections caused by anaerobic bacteria should usually be treated with clindamycin; the initial IV dosage of 600 mg four times daily can be changed to an oral dosage of 300 mg four times daily once the patient becomes afebrile and improves clinically. The duration of therapy is arbitrary, but many experts recommend continuation of oral treatment until imaging shows that chest lesions have cleared or have left a small, stable scar. A shorter course may be effective. An alternative to clindamycin is any -lactam/-lactamase inhibitor combination; parenteral treatment may be followed by orally administered amoxicillin/clavulanate. Carbapenems are also effective against anaerobic bacteria as well as streptococci, but the published data with these drugs in the treatment of anaerobic pulmonary infections are sparse. Penicillin was previously regarded as a preferred drug for these infections, but many oral anaerobes produce -lactamases, and clindamycin proved superior to penicillin G in a randomized clinical trial. Metronidazole is highly active against virtually all anaerobes but not against aerobic microaerophilic streptococci, which play an important role in mixed infections. In therapeutic trials, metronidazole has done poorly unless combined with a -lactam or another agent active against aerobic and microaerophilic streptococci.

Persistence of fever beyond 5每7 days or progression of the infiltrate suggests failure of therapy and a need to exclude factors such as obstruction, complicating empyema, and involvement of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Many patients with uncomplicated lung abscesses and all those with atypical presentations or unresponsive abscesses should undergo bronchoscopy and/or CT to detect a possible associated anatomic lesion, such as a tumor, or a foreign body. Quantitative bacteriologic studies using a protected brush catheter or BAL are much less reliable when done after antibiotic therapy. Postural drainage was previously popular for patients with lung abscess, but aggressive attempts to implement this strategy may result in spillage to other pulmonary segments, leading to airway obstruction and clinical deterioration.

Lung abscess due to S. aureus is usually treated with vancomycin at a dosage that targets a trough serum level of 15每20 g/mL. The main alternative is linezolid. Daptomycin should not be used for pulmonary infections. Lung abscesses caused by aerobic gram-negative bacteria need to be treated according to the results of antibiotic sensitivity tests. Most common among the pathogens involved are K. pneumoniae (especially the K1 strain in Taiwan) and P. aeruginosa in patients with severe chronic lung disease or compromised immune defenses. Pseudomonal lung abscesses usually require prolonged courses of parenteral antibiotics. Carbapenems or -lactams are frequently combined with aminoglycosides; oral fluoroquinolones are often effective initially, but resistance is common with prolonged use. Aerosolized colistin and aminoglycosides are sometimes used to augment other therapy, but the efficacy of this approach is variable.

Surgery for lung abscesses was developed at the time penicillin became available in the late 1940s. The relative roles of penicillin and resectional surgery were hotly debated at that time, but by the late 1950s penicillin was favored. Initially the standard choice for most lung abscesses, penicillin was subsequently supplanted by the options summarized above. Recent large-scale reviews indicate that, in general, surgery is now reserved for ~10每12% of patients. The major indications for surgery are failure to respond to medical management, suspected neoplasm, and hemorrhage. Failure to respond to antibiotics is usually due to an obstructed bronchus and an extremely large abscess (>6 cm in diameter) or to infection involving relatively resistant bacteria, such as P. aeruginosa. The usual procedure is lobectomy. An alternative intervention that is becoming popular is percutaneous drainage under CT guidance. Aspirate samples for assay of possible pathogens should be carefully collected.

Response to Therapy

Patients with lung abscess usually show clinical improvement, with decreased fever, within 3每5 days of initiation of antibiotic treatment. Defervescence can be expected within 5每10 days. Patients with fevers persisting for 7每14 days should undergo bronchoscopy or other diagnostic tests to better define anatomic changes and microbiologic findings. Cultures of expectorated sputum are not likely to be helpful at this juncture except for detecting pathogens such as mycobacteria and fungi. The response to therapy apparent on serial chest radiographs is delayed in comparison with the clinical course. In fact, infiltrates usually progress during the first 3 days of treatment in approximately one-half of patients. Pleural involvement is relatively common and may develop in dramatic fashion. The most common causes of failures of medical management include a failure to drain pleural collections, an inappropriate choice of antimicrobial therapy, an obstructed bronchus that prevents drainage, a "giant" abscess, a resistant pathogen, or refractory lesions due to immunocompromise.
 
Further Readings

Bronchiectasis

Barbato A et al: Primary ciliary dyskinesia: A consensus statement on diagnostic and treatment approaches in children. Eur Respir J 34:1264, 2009[PMID: 19948909]  [Full Text]

 
Cantin L et al: Bronchiectasis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 193:W158, 2009 

 
Griffith DE et al: An official ATS/IDSA statement: Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:367, 2007[PMID: 17277290]  [Full Text]

 
Kapur N et al: Inhaled steroids for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev Jan 21(1):CD000996, 2009 

 
Martinez-Garcia MA et al: Factors associated with lung function decline in adult patients with stable non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Chest 132:1565, 2007[PMID: 17998359]  [Full Text]

 
Parr DG et al: Prevalence and impact of bronchiectasis in alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:1215, 2007[PMID: 17872489]  [Full Text]

 
Seitz AE et al: Trends and burdens of bronchiectasis-associated hospitalizations in the United States, 1993每2006. Chest 138:944, 2010[PMID: 20435655]  [Full Text]

 
Shoemark A et al: Aetiology in adult patients with bronchiectasis. Respir Med 101:1163, 2007[PMID: 17223027]  [Full Text]

 
Stevens DA et al: A randomized trial of itraconazole in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. N Engl J Med 342:756, 2000[PMID: 10717010]  [Full Text]

 
Weycker D et al: Prevalence and economic burden of bronchiectasis (obstructive airways disease). Clin Pulm Med 12:205, 2005 

 

Lung Abscess

Allewelt M et al: Ampicillin + sulbactam vs clindamycin +/每 cephalosporin for the treatment of aspiration pneumonia and primary lung abscess. Clin Microbiol Infect 10:163, 2004[PMID: 14759242]  [Full Text]

 
Bartlett JG: The role of anaerobic bacteria in lung abscess. Clin Infect Dis 40:923, 2005[PMID: 15824980]  [Full Text]

 
每每每〞: Anaerobic bacterial infections of the lung and pleural space. Clin Infect Dis 16:S248, 1993 

 
Fern芍ndez-Sab谷 N et al: Efficacy and safety of sequential amoxicillin-clavulanate in the treatment of anaerobic lung infections. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 22:185, 2003[PMID: 21696853]  [Full Text]

 
Francis JS et al: Severe community-onset pneumonia in healthy adults caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus carrying Panton-Valentine leukocidin genes. Clin Infect Dis 40:100, 2005[PMID: 15614698]  [Full Text]

 
Moreira Jda S et al: Lung abscess: Analysis of 252 consecutive cases diagnosed between 1968 and 2004. J Bras Pneumol 32:136, 2006[PMID: 17273583]  [Full Text]

 
Shinzato T, Saito A: The Streptococcus milleri group as a cause of pulmonary infections. Clin Infect Dis 21(Suppl 3):S238, 1995 

 
Takayanagi N et al: Etiology and outcome of community-acquired lung abscess. Respiration 80:98, 2010[PMID: 20389050]  [Full Text]

 
Vardakas KZ et al: Comparison of community-acquired pneumonia due to methicillin-resistant and methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus producing the Panton-Valentine leukocidin. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 13:1476, 2009[PMID: 19919764]  [Full Text]

 
Wang JL et al: Changing bacteriology of adult community-acquired lung abscess in Taiwan: Klebsiella pneumoniae vs. anaerobes. Clin Infect Dis 40:915, 2005[PMID: 16242281]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Cystic Fibrosis: Introduction

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a monogenic disorder that presents as a multisystem disease. The first signs and symptoms typically occur in childhood, but about 5% of patients in the United States are diagnosed as adults. Due to improvements in therapy, >46% of patients are now adults (18 years old) and 16.4% are past the age of 30. The median survival is >37.4 years for patients with CF; thus, CF is no longer only a pediatric disease, and internists must be prepared to recognize and treat its many complications. CF is characterized by chronic bacterial infection of the airways that leads to bronchiectasis and bronchiolectasis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and intestinal dysfunction, abnormal sweat gland function, and urogenital dysfunction.
 
Pathogenesis

Genetic Considerations

CF is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from mutations in the CFTR gene located on chromosome 7. The mutations in the CFTR gene fall into five major classes, as depicted in Fig. 259-1. Classes I每III mutations are considered "severe," as indexed by pancreatic insufficiency and high sweat NaCl values (see below). Class IV and V mutations can be "mild," i.e., associated with pancreatic sufficiency and intermediate/normal sweat NaCl values.

Figure 259-1

 
 
 
Schema describing classes of genetic mutations in CFTR gene and effects on CFTR protein/function. Note the F508 mutation is a class II mutation and, like class I mutations, would be predicted to produce no mature CFTR protein in the apical membrane. CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.
 
 

The prevalence of CF varies with the ethnic origin of a population. CF is detected in approximately 1 in 3000 live births in the Caucasian population of North America and northern Europe, 1 in 17,000 live births of African Americans, and 1 in 90,000 live births of the Asian population of Hawaii. The most common mutation in the CFTR gene (~70% of CF chromosomes) is a 3-bp deletion (a class II mutation) that results in an absence of phenylalanine at amino acid position 508 (F508) of the CF gene protein product, known as cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). The large number (>1500) of relatively uncommon (<2% each) mutations identified in the CFTR gene makes genetic testing challenging.

CFTR Protein

The CFTR protein is a single polypeptide chain, containing 1480 amino acids, that functions both as a cyclic AMP每regulated Cl每 channel and a regulator of other ion channels. The fully processed form of CFTR localizes to the plasma membrane in normal epithelia. Biochemical studies indicate that the F508 mutation leads to improper maturation and intracellular degradation of the mutant CFTR protein. Thus, absence of CFTR in the plasma membrane is central to the molecular pathophysiology of the F508 mutation and other classes I每II mutations. Classes III每IV mutations produce CFTR proteins that are fully processed but are nonfunctional or only partially functional in the plasma membrane. Class V mutations include splicing mutations that produce small amounts of functional CFTR.

Epithelial Dysfunction

The epithelia affected by CF exhibit different functions in their native state, i.e., some are volume-absorbing (airways and distal intestinal epithelia), and some are salt- but not volume-absorbing (sweat duct), whereas others are volume-secretory (proximal intestine and pancreas). Given this diversity of native activities, it is not surprising that CF produces organ-specific effects on electrolyte and water transport. However, the unifying concept is that all affected tissues express abnormal ion transport function.

Organ-Specific Pathophysiology

Lung

The diagnostic biophysical hallmark of CF airway epithelia is the raised transepithelial electric potential difference (PD), which reflects both the rate of active ion transport and epithelial resistance to ion flow. CF airway epithelia exhibit abnormalities in both active Cl每 secretion and Na+ absorption (Fig. 259-2). The Cl每 secretory defect reflects the absence of cyclic AMP每dependent kinase and protein kinase C每regulated Cl每 transport mediated by CFTR itself. An important observation is that there is also a molecularly distinct Ca2+-activated Cl每 channel (CaCC, TMEM16a) expressed in the apical membrane. This channel can substitute for CFTR with regard to Cl每 secretion and is a potential therapeutic target. The abnormal Na+ transport reflects a second function of CFTR, its function as a tonic inhibitor of the epithelial Na+ channel. The molecular mechanisms mediating this action of CFTR remain unknown.

Figure 259-2

 
 
 
Comparison of ion transport properties of normal (top) and CF (bottom) airway epithelia. The vectors describe routes and magnitudes of Na+ and Cl每 transport that is accompanied by osmotically driven water flow. The normal basal pattern for ion transport is absorption of Na+ from the lumen via an amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) composed of , , and  ENaC subunits. This process is accelerated in CF. The capacity to initiate cyclic AMP每mediated Cl每 secretion is diminished in CF airway epithelia due to abnormal maturation/dysfunction of the CFTR Cl每 channel. The accelerated Na+ absorption in CF reflects the absence of CFTR inhibitory effects on Na+ channels. A Ca2+-activated Cl每 channel, likely a product of the TMEM16a gene, is expressed in normal and CF apical membranes and can be activated by extracellular ATP. Horizontal arrows depict velocity of mucociliary clearance (m/sec).
 
 

Mucus clearance is the primary innate airways defense mechanism against infection by inhaled bacteria. Normal airways vary the rates of active Na+ absorption and Cl每 secretion to adjust the volume of liquid (water), i.e., "hydration," on airway surfaces for efficient mucus clearance. The central hypothesis of CF airways pathophysiology is that the faulty regulation of Na+ absorption and inability to secrete Cl每 via CFTR reduce the volume of liquid on airway surfaces; i.e., they are "dehydrated." Dehydration of both the mucus and the periciliary liquid layers produces adhesion of mucus to the airway surface, which leads to a failure to clear mucus from the airways both by ciliary and cough-dependent mechanisms. The absence of a strict correspondence between gene-mutation class and severity of lung disease suggests important roles for modifier genes and gene-environmental interactions.

The infection that characterizes CF airways involves the mucus layer rather than epithelial or airway wall invasion. The predisposition of CF airways to chronic infection by Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa is consistent with failure to clear mucus. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the O2 tension is very low in CF mucus, and adaptations to hypoxemia are important determinants of the physiology of bacteria in the CF lung. Indeed, both mucus stasis and mucus hypoxemia contribute to (1) the propensity for Pseudomonas to grow in biofilm colonies within CF airway mucus and (2) the presence of strict anaerobes in CF lungs.

Gastrointestinal Tract

The gastrointestinal effects of CF are diverse. In the exocrine pancreas, the absence of the CFTR Cl每 channel in the apical membrane of pancreatic ductal epithelia limits the function of an apical membrane Cl每-HCO3每 exchanger to secrete bicarbonate and Na+ (by a passive process) into the duct. The failure to secrete Na+ HCO3每 and water leads to retention of enzymes in the pancreas and destruction of virtually all pancreatic tissue. Because of the lack of Cl每 and water secretion, the CF intestinal epithelium fails to flush secreted mucins and other macromolecules from intestinal crypts. The diminished CFTR-mediated liquid secretion may be exacerbated by excessive absorption of liquid, reflecting abnormalities of CFTR-mediated regulation of Na+ absorption (both mediated by Na+ channels and possibly other Na+ transporters, e.g., Na+-H+ exchangers). Both dysfunctions lead to dehydrated intraluminal contents and intestinal obstruction. In the hepatobiliary system, defective hepatic ductal salt (Cl每) and water secretion causes thickened biliary secretions, focal biliary cirrhosis, and bile-duct proliferation in approximately 25每30% of patients with CF. The inability of the CF gallbladder epithelium to secrete salt and water can lead to both chronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasis.

Sweat Gland

CF patients secrete nearly normal volumes of sweat in the sweat acinus, but are not able to absorb NaCl from the sweat duct due to the inability to absorb Cl每 via CFTR across ductal epithelial cells. This sweat gland dysfunction is typically measured by measuring Cl每 concentrations in sweat collected after iontophoresis of cholinergic agonists.
 
Clinical Features

Most patients with CF present with signs and symptoms of the disease in childhood. Approximately 20% of patients present within the first 24 h of life with gastrointestinal obstruction, termed meconium ileus. Other common presentations within the first year or two of life include respiratory tract symptoms, most prominently cough and/or recurrent pulmonary infiltrates, and failure to thrive. A significant proportion of patients (~5%), however, are diagnosed after age 18.

Respiratory Tract

Upper respiratory tract disease is almost universal in patients with CF. Chronic sinusitis is common in childhood, and the incidence of nasal polyps, which often requires treatment with topical steroids and/or surgery, approaches 25%.

In the lower respiratory tract, the first symptom of CF is cough. With time, the cough becomes persistent and produces viscous, purulent, often greenish-colored sputum. There are protracted periods of clinical stability interrupted by "pulmonary exacerbations," often triggered by viral infections, and defined by increased cough, weight loss, low-grade fever, increased sputum volume, and decrements in pulmonary function. Over the course of years, the exacerbation frequency increases and the recovery of lost lung function becomes incomplete, leading to respiratory failure.

CF patients exhibit a characteristic sputum microbiology. Haemophilus influenzae and S. aureus are often the first organisms recovered from lung secretions in newly diagnosed CF patients. P. aeruginosa, often mucoid and antibiotic-resistant, is typically cultured from lower respiratory tract secretions thereafter. Burkholderia cepacia is also recovered from CF sputum and is pathogenic. Patient-to-patient spread of certain strains of these organisms mandates strict infection control in the hospital. Other gram-negative rods recovered from CF sputum include Alcaligenes xylosoxidans, B. gladioli; and, occasionally, Proteus, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella. Up to 50% of CF patients have Aspergillus fumigatus in their sputum, and up to 10% of these patients exhibit the syndrome of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is rare in patients with CF. However, 10每20% of adult patients with CF have sputum cultures positive for nontuberculous mycobacteria, and in some patients, these microorganisms are associated with disease.

The first lung-function abnormalities in CF children, increased ratios of residual volume to total lung capacity, suggest that small-airways disease is the first functional lung abnormality in CF. As disease progresses, both reversible and irreversible changes in forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) develop. The reversible component reflects the accumulation of intraluminal secretions and/or airway reactivity, which occurs in 40每60% of patients with CF. The irreversible component reflects chronic destruction of the airway wall and bronchiolitis.

The earliest chest x-ray change in CF lungs is hyperinflation, reflecting small-airways obstruction. Later, signs of luminal mucus impaction, bronchial cuffing, and finally bronchiectasis, e.g., ring shadows, are noted. For reasons that remain speculative, the right upper lobe displays the earliest and most severe changes.

CF pulmonary disease is associated with many intermittent complications. Pneumothorax is common (>10% of patients). The production of small amounts of blood in sputum is common in CF patients with advanced pulmonary disease. Massive hemoptysis is life-threatening. With advanced lung disease, clubbing of digits appears in virtually all patients with CF. As late events, respiratory failure and cor pulmonale are prominent features of CF.

Gastrointestinal Tract

Meconium ileus in infants presents with abdominal distention, failure to pass stool, and emesis. The abdominal flat plate can be diagnostic, with small intestinal air-fluid levels, a granular appearance representing meconium, and a small colon. In children and young adults, a syndrome termed distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS) occurs, which presents with right lower quadrant pain, loss of appetite, occasionally emesis, and often a palpable mass. DIOS can be confused with appendicitis, whose frequency is not increased in CF patients.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency occurs in >90% of patients with CF. Insufficient pancreatic enzyme secretion yields protein and fat malabsorption, with frequent, bulky, foul-smelling stools. Signs and symptoms of malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamins E and K, are also noted. Pancreatic beta cells are spared early, but function decreases with age. This effect, plus inflammation-induced insulin resistance, causes hyperglycemia and a requirement for insulin in >29% of older patients with CF (>35 years).

Genitourinary System

Late onset of puberty is common in both males and females with CF. More than 95% of male patients with CF are azoospermic, reflecting obliteration of the vas deferens due to defective liquid secretion. Some 20% of CF women are infertile due to effects of chronic lung disease on the menstrual cycle and thick, tenacious cervical mucus that blocks sperm migration. Most pregnancies produce viable infants, and CF women breast-feed infants normally.
 
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of CF rests on the combination of clinical criteria and abnormal CFTR function as documented by sweat tests, nasal PD measurements, and CFTR mutation analysis. Elevated sweat Cl每 values are nearly pathognomonic for CF. The sweat concentration values for Cl每 (and Na+) vary with age, but, typically, a Cl每 concentration of >70 meq/L in adults discriminates between CF and other lung diseases. DNA analysis of the most common mutations identify CF mutations in >90% of affected patients. The nasal PD measurement can document CFTR dysfunction if the sweat Cl每 test is normal or borderline and two CF mutations are not identified. DNA analysis is performed routinely in patients with CF, because pancreatic genotype-phenotype relationships have been identified and mutation class每specific treatments are being developed.

Between 1 and 2% of patients with the clinical syndrome of CF have normal sweat Cl每 values. In most of these patients, the nasal transepithelial PD is raised into the diagnostic range for CF, and sweat acini do not secrete in response to injected -adrenergic agonists. A single mutation of the CFTR gene, 3849 + 10 kb CT, is associated with most CF patients with normal sweat Cl每 values.

Treatment: Cystic Fibrosis

The major objectives of therapy for CF are to promote clearance of secretions and control infection in the lung, provide adequate nutrition, and prevent intestinal obstruction. Ultimately, therapies that restore the processing of misfolded mutant CFTR or gene therapy may be the treatments of choice.

Lung Disease

More than 95% of CF patients die of complications from lung infection. Theoretically, promoting clearance of adherent mucus should both treat and prevent progression of CF lung disease, whereas antibiotics principally reduce the bacterial burden in the CF lung.

The time-honored techniques for clearing pulmonary secretions are exercise, flutter valves, and chest percussion. Regular use of these maneuvers is effective in preserving lung function. Inhaled hypertonic saline (7%) has demonstrated efficacy in restoring mucus clearance and pulmonary function in short-term studies and in reducing acute exacerbations in a long-term (one-year) study. Hypertonic saline is safe but produces bronchoconstriction in some patients, which can be prevented with coadministered bronchodilators. Inhaled hypertonic saline is becoming a standard of care for all CF patients.

Pharmacologic agents for increasing mucus clearance are in use and in development. An important adjunct to secretion clearance can be recombinant human DNAse, which degrades DNA in CF sputum, increases airflow during short-term administration, and increases the time between pulmonary exacerbations. Most patients receive a therapeutic trial of DNAse for several months to test for efficacy. Clinical trials of experimental drugs aimed at restoring salt and water content of secretions are under way, but these drugs are not yet available for clinical use.

Antibiotics are used to treat lung infection, and their selection is guided by sputum culture results. However, because routine hospital microbiologic cultures are performed under conditions that do not mimic conditions in the CF lung, (e.g., hypoxemia) clinical efficacy often does not correlate with sensitivity testing. Because of increased total-body clearance and volume of distribution of antibiotics in CF patients, the required doses are higher for patients with CF.

Early intervention with antibiotics in infants with infection may eradicate P. aeruginosa for extended periods. In older patients with established infection, suppression of bacterial growth is the therapeutic goal. Azithromycin (250 mg/d or 500 mg three times weekly) is often used chronically, although it is unclear whether its actions are antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory. Inhaled aminoglycosides, (e.g., tobramycin 300 mg bid) are also used. "Mild exacerbations," as defined by increased cough and mucus production, are treated with additional oral antibiotics. Oral agents used to treat Staphylococcus include a semisynthetic penicillin or a cephalosporin. Oral ciprofloxacin may reduce pseudomonal bacterial counts and control symptoms, but its clinical utility is limited by emergence of resistant organisms. Accordingly, it is often used with an inhaled antibiotic, either tobramycin or colistin (75 mg bid). More severe exacerbations require intravenous antibiotics. Intravenous therapy is given both in hospital and outpatient settings. Usually, two drugs with different mechanisms of action (e.g., a cephalosporin and an aminoglycoside) are used to treat P. aeruginosa to minimize emergence of resistant organisms. Drug dosage should be monitored so that levels for gentamicin or tobramycin peak at ranges of ~10 g/mL and exhibit troughs of <2 g/mL. Antibiotics directed at Staphylococcus and/or H. influenzae are added, depending on culture results.

Inhaled -adrenergic agonists can be useful to control airways constriction, but long-term benefit has not been shown. Oral glucocorticoids may reduce airway inflammation, but their long-term use is limited by adverse side effects; however, they may be useful for treating allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.

The chronic damage to airway walls reflects in part the destructive activities of proteolytic enzymes generated, in part, by inflammatory cells. Specific antiprotease therapies are not available. However, a subset of adolescents with CF may benefit from long-term, high-dose nonsteroidal (ibuprofen) therapy.

Pulmonary complications often require acute interventions. Atelectasis requires treatment with inhaled hypertonic saline, chest physiotherapy, and antibiotics. Pneumothoraxes involving 10% of the lung can be observed, but chest tubes are required to expand a collapsed, diseased lung. Small-volume hemoptysis typically requires treatment of lung infection and assessment of coagulation and vitamin K status. For massive hemoptysis, bronchial artery embolization should be performed. The most ominous complications of CF are respiratory failure and cor pulmonale. The most effective conventional therapy for these conditions is vigorous medical management of the lung disease and O2 supplementation. Ultimately, the only effective treatment for respiratory failure in CF is lung transplantation (Chap. 266). The 2-year survival for lung transplantation exceeds 60%, and transplant-patient deaths result principally from obliterative bronchiolitis.

Gastrointestinal Disease

Maintenance of adequate nutrition is critical for the health of the CF patient. Most (>90%) CF patients require pancreatic enzyme replacement. Capsules generally contain between 4000 and 20,000 units of lipase. The dose of enzymes (typically no more than 2500 units/kg per meal, to avoid risk of fibrosing colonopathy) is adjusted on the basis of weight, abdominal symptomatology, and stool character. Replacement of fat-soluble vitamins, particularly vitamins E and K, is usually required. Hyperglycemia most often becomes manifest in the adult and typically requires insulin treatment.

For treatment of acute distal intestinal obstruction, megalodiatrizoate or other hypertonic radiocontrast materials delivered by enema to the terminal ileum are used. For control of symptoms, adjustment of pancreatic enzymes and solutions containing osmotically active agents, (e.g., propyleneglycol) is recommended. Persistent symptoms may indicate a gastrointestinal malignancy, which is increased in incidence in patients with CF.

Cholestatic liver disease occurs in about 8% of CF patients. Treatment with urodeoxycholic acid is often initiated, but has not been shown to influence the course of hepatic disease. End-stage liver disease occurs in about 5% of CF patients and is treated by transplantation.

Other Organ Complications

Dehydration due to heat-induced salt loss occurs more readily in CF patients. CF patients also have an increased incidence of osteoarthropathy, renal stones, and osteoporosis, particularly following transplant.

Psychosocial Factors

CF imposes a tremendous burden on patients, and depression is common. Health insurance, career options, family planning, and life expectancy become major issues. Thus, assisting patients with the psychosocial adjustments required by CF is critical.
 
Further Readings

Boucher RC: Airway surface dehydration in cystic fibrosis: pathogenesis and therapy. Ann Rev Med 58:157, 2007[PMID: 17217330]  [Full Text]

 
Boyle MP: Cystic fibrosis: Year in review. Curr Opin Pulm Med 16:583, 2010[PMID: 20829695]  [Full Text]

 
Davies JC et al: Cystic fibrosis. Br Med J 335:1255, 2007[PMID: 18079549]  [Full Text]

 
Davis PB: Cystic fibrosis since 1938. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 173:475, 2006[PMID: 16126935]  [Full Text]

 
Elizur A et al: Airway inflammation in cystic fibrosis. Chest 133:489, 2008[PMID: 18252915]  [Full Text]

 
Elkins MR et al: A controlled trial of long-term inhaled hypertonic saline in patients with cystic fibrosis. N Engl J Med 354:229, 2006[PMID: 16421364]  [Full Text]

 
Ferkol T et al: Cystic fibrosis pulmonary exacerbations. J Pediatr 148:259, 2006[PMID: 16492439]  [Full Text]

 
Flume PA, Stenbit A: Making the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis. Am J Med Sci 335:51, 2008[PMID: 18195584]  [Full Text]

 
Guggino WB, Stanton BA: New insights into cystic fibrosis: molecular switches that regulate CFTR. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7:426, 2006[PMID: 16723978]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Introduction

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is defined as a disease state characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully reversible (http://www.goldcopd.com/). COPD includes emphysema, an anatomically defined condition characterized by destruction and enlargement of the lung alveoli; chronic bronchitis, a clinically defined condition with chronic cough and phlegm; and small airways disease, a condition in which small bronchioles are narrowed. COPD is present only if chronic airflow obstruction occurs; chronic bronchitis without chronic airflow obstruction is not included within COPD.

COPD is the fourth leading cause of death and affects >10 million persons in the United States. COPD is also a disease of increasing public health importance around the world. Estimates suggest that COPD will rise from the sixth to the third most common cause of death worldwide by 2020.
 
Risk Factors

Cigarette Smoking

By 1964, the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the United States had concluded that cigarette smoking was a major risk factor for mortality from chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Subsequent longitudinal studies have shown accelerated decline in the volume of air exhaled within the first second of the forced expiratory maneuver (FEV1) in a dose-response relationship to the intensity of cigarette smoking, which is typically expressed as pack-years (average number of packs of cigarettes smoked per day multiplied by the total number of years of smoking). This dose-response relationship between reduced pulmonary function and cigarette smoking intensity accounts for the higher prevalence rates for COPD with increasing age. The historically higher rate of smoking among males is the likely explanation for the higher prevalence of COPD among males; however, the prevalence of COPD among females is increasing as the gender gap in smoking rates has diminished in the past 50 years.

Although the causal relationship between cigarette smoking and the development of COPD has been absolutely proved, there is considerable variability in the response to smoking. Although pack-years of cigarette smoking is the most highly significant predictor of FEV1 (Fig. 260-1), only 15% of the variability in FEV1 is explained by pack-years. This finding suggests that additional environmental and/or genetic factors contribute to the impact of smoking on the development of airflow obstruction.

Figure 260-1

 
 
 
Distributions of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) values in a general population sample, stratified by pack-years of smoking. Means, medians, and ㊣1 standard deviation of percent predicted FEV1 are shown for each smoking group. Although a dose-response relationship between smoking intensity and FEV1 was found, marked variability in pulmonary function was observed among subjects with similar smoking histories. (From B Burrows et al: Am Rev Respir Dis 115:95, 1977; with permission.)
 
 

Although cigar and pipe smoking may also be associated with the development of COPD, the evidence supporting such associations is less compelling, likely related to the lower dose of inhaled tobacco by-products during cigar and pipe smoking.

Airway Responsiveness and COPD

A tendency for increased bronchoconstriction in response to a variety of exogenous stimuli, including methacholine and histamine, is one of the defining features of asthma (Chap. 254). However, many patients with COPD also share this feature of airway hyperresponsiveness. The considerable overlap between persons with asthma and those with COPD in airway responsiveness, airflow obstruction, and pulmonary symptoms led to the formulation of the Dutch hypothesis. This suggests that asthma, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema are variations of the same basic disease, which is modulated by environmental and genetic factors to produce these pathologically distinct entities. The alternative British hypothesis contends that asthma and COPD are fundamentally different diseases: Asthma is viewed as largely an allergic phenomenon, while COPD results from smoking-related inflammation and damage. Determination of the validity of the Dutch hypothesis vs. the British hypothesis awaits identification of the genetic predisposing factors for asthma and/or COPD, as well as the interactions between these postulated genetic factors and environmental risk factors. Of note, several genes related to the proteinase-antiproteinase hypothesis have been implicated as genetic determinants for both COPD and asthma, including ADAM33 and macrophage elastase (MMP12) as described below.

Longitudinal studies that compared airway responsiveness at the beginning of the study to subsequent decline in pulmonary function have demonstrated that increased airway responsiveness is clearly a significant predictor of subsequent decline in pulmonary function. Thus, airway hyperresponsiveness is a risk factor for COPD.

Respiratory Infections

The impact of adult respiratory infections on decline in pulmonary function is controversial, but significant long-term reductions in pulmonary function are not typically seen following an episode of bronchitis or pneumonia. The impact of the effects of childhood respiratory illnesses on the subsequent development of COPD has been difficult to assess due to a lack of adequate longitudinal data. Thus, although respiratory infections are important causes of exacerbations of COPD, the association of both adult and childhood respiratory infections to the development and progression of COPD remains to be proven.

Occupational Exposures

Increased respiratory symptoms and airflow obstruction have been suggested to result from general exposure to dust and fumes at work. Several specific occupational exposures, including coal mining, gold mining, and cotton textile dust, have been suggested as risk factors for chronic airflow obstruction. Although nonsmokers in these occupations developed some reductions in FEV1, the importance of dust exposure as a risk factor for COPD, independent of cigarette smoking, is not certain for most of these exposures. However, a recent study found that coal mine dust exposure was a significant risk factor for emphysema in both smokers and nonsmokers. In most cases, the magnitude of these occupational exposures on COPD risk is likely substantially less important than the effect of cigarette smoking.

Ambient Air Pollution

Some investigators have reported increased respiratory symptoms in those living in urban compared to rural areas, which may relate to increased pollution in the urban settings. However, the relationship of air pollution to chronic airflow obstruction remains unproved. Prolonged exposure to smoke produced by biomass combustion〞a common mode of cooking in some countries〞also appears to be a significant risk factor for COPD among women in those countries. However, in most populations, ambient air pollution is a much less important risk factor for COPD than cigarette smoking.

Passive, or Second-Hand, Smoking Exposure

Exposure of children to maternal smoking results in significantly reduced lung growth. In utero tobacco smoke exposure also contributes to significant reductions in postnatal pulmonary function. Although passive smoke exposure has been associated with reductions in pulmonary function, the importance of this risk factor in the development of the severe pulmonary function reductions in COPD remains uncertain.

Genetic Considerations

Although cigarette smoking is the major environmental risk factor for the development of COPD, the development of airflow obstruction in smokers is highly variable. Severe 1 antitrypsin (1AT) deficiency is a proven genetic risk factor for COPD; there is increasing evidence that other genetic determinants also exist.

1 Antitrypsin Deficiency

Many variants of the protease inhibitor (PI or SERPINA1) locus that encodes 1AT have been described. The common M allele is associated with normal 1AT levels. The S allele, associated with slightly reduced 1AT levels, and the Z allele, associated with markedly reduced 1AT levels, also occur with frequencies >1% in most white populations. Rare individuals inherit null alleles, which lead to the absence of any 1AT production through a heterogeneous collection of mutations. Individuals with two Z alleles or one Z and one null allele are referred to as PiZ, which is the most common form of severe 1AT deficiency.

Although only 1每2% of COPD patients are found to have severe 1AT deficiency as a contributing cause of COPD, these patients demonstrate that genetic factors can have a profound influence on the susceptibility for developing COPD. PiZ individuals often develop early-onset COPD, but the ascertainment bias in the published series of PiZ individuals〞which have usually included many PiZ subjects who were tested for 1AT deficiency because they had COPD〞means that the fraction of PiZ individuals who will develop COPD and the age-of-onset distribution for the development of COPD in PiZ subjects remain unknown. Approximately 1 in 3000 individuals in the United States inherits severe 1AT deficiency, but only a small minority of these individuals has been recognized. The clinical laboratory test used most frequently to screen for 1AT deficiency is measurement of the immunologic level of 1AT in serum (see "Laboratory Findings").

A significant percentage of the variability in pulmonary function among PiZ individuals is explained by cigarette smoking; cigarette smokers with severe 1AT deficiency are more likely to develop COPD at early ages. However, the development of COPD in PiZ subjects, even among current or ex-smokers, is not absolute. Among PiZ nonsmokers, impressive variability has been noted in the development of airflow obstruction. Asthma and male gender also appear to increase the risk of COPD in PiZ subjects. Other genetic and/or environmental factors likely contribute to this variability.

Specific treatment in the form of 1AT augmentation therapy is available for severe 1AT deficiency as a weekly IV infusion (see "Treatment," below).

The risk of lung disease in heterozygous PiMZ individuals, who have intermediate serum levels of 1AT (~60% of PiMM levels), is controversial. Although previous general population surveys have not typically shown increased rates of airflow obstruction in PiMZ compared to PiMM individuals, case-control studies that compared COPD patients to control subjects have usually found an excess of PiMZ genotypes in the COPD patient group. Several recent large population studies have suggested that PiMZ subjects are at slightly increased risk for the development of airflow obstruction, but it remains unclear if all PiMZ subjects are at slightly increased risk for COPD or if a subset of PiMZ subjects are at substantially increased risk for COPD due to other genetic or environmental factors.

Other Genetic Risk Factors

Studies of pulmonary function measurements performed in general population samples have suggested that genetic factors other than PI type influence variation in pulmonary function. Familial aggregation of airflow obstruction within families of COPD patients has also been demonstrated.

Association studies have compared the distribution of variants in candidate genes hypothesized to be involved in the development of COPD in COPD patients and control subjects. However, the results have been quite inconsistent, often due to underpowered studies. However, a recent association study comprising 8300 patients and 7 separate cohorts found that a minor allele SNP of MMP12 (rs2276109) associated with decreased MMP-12 expression has a positive effect on lung function in children with asthma and in adult smokers. Recent genome-wide association studies have identified several COPD loci, including a region near the hedgehog interacting protein (HHIP) gene on chromosome 4 and a cluster of genes on chromosome 15 (including components of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) that likely contain COPD susceptibility determinants, but the specific genetic determinants in those regions have yet to be definitively identified.
 
Natural History

The effects of cigarette smoking on pulmonary function appear to depend on the intensity of smoking exposure, the timing of smoking exposure during growth, and the baseline lung function of the individual; other environmental factors may have similar effects. Most individuals follow a steady trajectory of increasing pulmonary function with growth during childhood and adolescence, followed by a gradual decline with aging. Individuals appear to track in their quartile of pulmonary function based upon environmental and genetic factors that put them on different tracks. The risk of eventual mortality from COPD is closely associated with reduced levels of FEV1. A graphic depiction of the natural history of COPD is shown as a function of the influences on tracking curves of FEV1 in Fig. 260-2. Death or disability from COPD can result from a normal rate of decline after a reduced growth phase (curve C), an early initiation of pulmonary function decline after normal growth (curve B), or an accelerated decline after normal growth (curve D). The rate of decline in pulmonary function can be modified by changing environmental exposures (i.e., quitting smoking), with smoking cessation at an earlier age providing a more beneficial effect than smoking cessation after marked reductions in pulmonary function have already developed. Genetic factors likely contribute to the level of pulmonary function achieved during growth and to the rate of decline in response to smoking and potentially to other environmental factors as well.

Figure 260-2

 
 
 
Hypothetical tracking curves of FEV1for individuals throughout their life spans. The normal pattern of growth and decline with age is shown by curve A. Significantly reduced FEV1 (<65% of predicted value at age 20) can develop from a normal rate of decline after a reduced pulmonary function growth phase (curve C), early initiation of pulmonary function decline after normal growth (curve B), or accelerated decline after normal growth (curve D). (From B Rijcken: Doctoral dissertation, p 133, University of Groningen, 1991; with permission.)
 
 
 
Pathophysiology

Persistent reduction in forced expiratory flow rates is the most typical finding in COPD. Increases in the residual volume and the residual volume/total lung capacity ratio, nonuniform distribution of ventilation, and ventilation-perfusion mismatching also occur.

Airflow Obstruction

Airflow limitation, also known as airflow obstruction, is typically determined by spirometry, which involves forced expiratory maneuvers after the subject has inhaled to total lung capacity. Key parameters obtained from spirometry include FEV1 and the total volume of air exhaled during the entire spirometric maneuver [forced vital capacity (FVC)]. Patients with airflow obstruction related to COPD have a chronically reduced ratio of FEV1/FVC. In contrast to asthma, the reduced FEV1 in COPD seldom shows large responses to inhaled bronchodilators, although improvements up to 15% are common. Asthma patients can also develop chronic (not fully reversible) airflow obstruction.

Airflow during forced exhalation is the result of the balance between the elastic recoil of the lungs promoting flow and the resistance of the airways limiting flow. In normal lungs, as well as in lungs affected by COPD, maximal expiratory flow diminishes as the lungs empty because the lung parenchyma provides progressively less elastic recoil and because the cross-sectional area of the airways falls, raising the resistance to airflow. The decrease in flow coincident with decreased lung volume is readily apparent on the expiratory limb of a flow-volume curve. In the early stages of COPD, the abnormality in airflow is only evident at lung volumes at or below the functional residual capacity (closer to residual volume), appearing as a scooped-out lower part of the descending limb of the flow-volume curve. In more advanced disease the entire curve has decreased expiratory flow compared to normal.

Hyperinflation

Lung volumes are also routinely assessed in pulmonary function testing. In COPD there is often "air trapping" (increased residual volume and increased ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity) and progressive hyperinflation (increased total lung capacity) late in the disease. Hyperinflation of the thorax during tidal breathing preserves maximum expiratory airflow, because as lung volume increases, elastic recoil pressure increases, and airways enlarge so that airway resistance decreases.

Despite compensating for airway obstruction, hyperinflation can push the diaphragm into a flattened position with a number of adverse effects. First, by decreasing the zone of apposition between the diaphragm and the abdominal wall, positive abdominal pressure during inspiration is not applied as effectively to the chest wall, hindering rib cage movement and impairing inspiration. Second, because the muscle fibers of the flattened diaphragm are shorter than those of a more normally curved diaphragm, they are less capable of generating inspiratory pressures than normal. Third, the flattened diaphragm (with increased radius of curvature, r) must generate greater tension (t) to develop the transpulmonary pressure (p) required to produce tidal breathing. This follows from Laplace's law, p = 2t/r. Also, because the thoracic cage is distended beyond its normal resting volume, during tidal breathing the inspiratory muscles must do work to overcome the resistance of the thoracic cage to further inflation instead of gaining the normal assistance from the chest wall recoiling outward toward its resting volume.

Gas Exchange

Although there is considerable variability in the relationships between the FEV1 and other physiologic abnormalities in COPD, certain generalizations may be made. The PaO2 usually remains near normal until the FEV1 is decreased to ~50% of predicted, and even much lower FEV1 values can be associated with a normal PaO2, at least at rest. An elevation of arterial level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) is not expected until the FEV1 is <25% of predicted and even then may not occur. Pulmonary hypertension severe enough to cause cor pulmonale and right ventricular failure due to COPD typically occurs in individuals who have marked decreases in FEV1 (<25% of predicted) and chronic hypoxemia (PaO2 <55 mmHg); however, recent evidence suggests that some patients will develop significant pulmonary hypertension independent of COPD severity (Chap. 250).

Nonuniform ventilation and ventilation-perfusion mismatching are characteristic of COPD, reflecting the heterogeneous nature of the disease process within the airways and lung parenchyma. Physiologic studies are consistent with multiple parenchymal compartments having different rates of ventilation due to regional differences in compliance and airway resistance. Ventilation-perfusion mismatching accounts for essentially all of the reduction in PaO2 that occurs in COPD; shunting is minimal. This finding explains the effectiveness of modest elevations of inspired oxygen in treating hypoxemia due to COPD and therefore the need to consider problems other than COPD when hypoxemia is difficult to correct with modest levels of supplemental oxygen in the patient with COPD.
 
Pathology

Cigarette smoke exposure may affect the large airways, small airways (2 mm diameter), and alveoli. Changes in large airways cause cough and sputum, while changes in small airways and alveoli are responsible for physiologic alterations. Emphysema and small airway pathology are both present in most persons with COPD; however, they do not appear to be mechanistically related to each other, and their relative contributions to obstruction vary from one person to another.

Large Airway

Cigarette smoking often results in mucous gland enlargement and goblet cell hyperplasia leading to cough and mucus production that define chronic bronchitis, but these abnormalities are not related to airflow limitation. Goblet cells not only increase in number but in extent through the bronchial tree. Bronchi also undergo squamous metaplasia, predisposing to carcinogenesis and disrupting mucociliary clearance. Although not as prominent as in asthma, patients may have smooth-muscle hypertrophy and bronchial hyperreactivity leading to airflow limitation. Neutrophil influx has been associated with purulent sputum of upper respiratory tract infections. Independent of its proteolytic activity, neutrophil elastase is among the most potent secretagogues identified.

Small Airways

The major site of increased resistance in most individuals with COPD is in airways 2 mm diameter. Characteristic cellular changes include goblet cell metaplasia, with these mucus-secreting cells replacing surfactant-secreting Clara cells. Infiltration of mononuclear phagocytes is also prominent. Smooth-muscle hypertrophy may also be present. These abnormalities may cause luminal narrowing by fibrosis, excess mucus, edema, and cellular infiltration. Reduced surfactant may increase surface tension at the air-tissue interface, predisposing to airway narrowing or collapse. Respiratory bronchiolitis with mononuclear inflammatory cells collecting in distal airway tissues may cause proteolytic destruction of elastic fibers in the respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts where the fibers are concentrated as rings around alveolar entrances.

Because small airway patency is maintained by the surrounding lung parenchyma that provides radial traction on bronchioles at points of attachment to alveolar septa, loss of bronchiolar attachments as a result of extracellular matrix destruction may cause airway distortion and narrowing in COPD.

Lung Parenchyma

Emphysema is characterized by destruction of gas-exchanging air spaces, i.e., the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. Their walls become perforated and later obliterated with coalescence of small distinct air spaces into abnormal and much larger air spaces. Macrophages accumulate in respiratory bronchioles of essentially all young smokers. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from such individuals contains roughly five times as many macrophages as lavage from nonsmokers. In smokers' lavage fluid, macrophages comprise >95% of the total cell count, and neutrophils, nearly absent in nonsmokers' lavage, account for 1每2% of the cells. T lymphocytes, particularly CD8+ cells, are also increased in the alveolar space of smokers.

Emphysema is classified into distinct pathologic types, the most important being centriacinar and panacinar. Centriacinar emphysema, the type most frequently associated with cigarette smoking, is characterized by enlarged air spaces found (initially) in association with respiratory bronchioles. Centriacinar emphysema is usually most prominent in the upper lobes and superior segments of lower lobes and is often quite focal. Panacinar emphysema refers to abnormally large air spaces evenly distributed within and across acinar units. Panacinar emphysema is usually observed in patients with 1AT deficiency, which has a predilection for the lower lobes. Distinctions between centriacinar and panacinar emphysema are interesting and may ultimately be shown to have different mechanisms of pathogenesis. However, garden-variety smoking-related emphysema is usually mixed, particularly in advanced cases, and these pathologic classifications are not helpful in the care of patients with COPD.
 
Pathogenesis

Airflow limitation, the major physiologic change in COPD, can result from both small airway obstruction and emphysema, as discussed above. Pathologic findings that can contribute to small airway obstruction are described above, but their relative importance is unknown. Fibrosis surrounding the small airways appears to be a significant contributor. Mechanisms leading to collagen accumulation around the airways in the face of increased collagenase activity remain an enigma. Although seemingly counterintuitive, there are several potential mechanisms whereby a proteinase can predispose to fibrosis, including proteolytic activation of transforming growth factor  (TGF-). Largely due to greater similarity of animal air spaces than airways to humans, we know much more about mechanisms involved in emphysema than small airway obstruction.

The dominant paradigm of the pathogenesis of emphysema comprises four interrelated events (Fig. 260-3): (1) Chronic exposure to cigarette smoke may lead to inflammatory cell recruitment within the terminal air spaces of the lung. (2) These inflammatory cells release elastolytic proteinases that damage the extracellular matrix of the lung. (3) Structural cell death results from oxidant stress and loss of matrix-cell attachment. (4) Ineffective repair of elastin and other extracellular matrix components result in air space enlargement that defines pulmonary emphysema.

Figure 260-3

 
 
 
Pathogenesis of emphysema. Upon long-term exposure to cigarette smoke, inflammatory cells are recruited to the lung; they release proteinases in excess of inhibitors, and if repair is abnormal, this leads to air space destruction and enlargement or emphysema. ECM, extracellular matrix; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase.
 
 

The Elastase:Antielastase Hypothesis

Elastin, the principal component of elastic fibers, is a highly stable component of the extracellular matrix that is critical to the integrity of the lung. The elastase:antielastase hypothesis proposed in the mid-1960s states that the balance of elastin-degrading enzymes and their inhibitors determines the susceptibility of the lung to destruction resulting in air space enlargement. This hypothesis was based on the clinical observation that patients with genetic deficiency in 1AT, the inhibitor of the serine proteinase neutrophil elastase, were at increased risk of emphysema, and that instillation of elastases, including neutrophil elastase, to experimental animals results in emphysema. The elastase:antielastase hypothesis remains a prevailing mechanism for the development of emphysema. However, a complex network of immune and inflammatory cells and additional proteinases that contribute to emphysema have subsequently been identified.

Inflammation and Extracellular Matrix Proteolysis

Macrophages patrol the lower air space under normal conditions. Upon exposure to oxidants from cigarette smoke, macrophages become activated, producing proteinases and chemokines that attract other inflammatory cells. One mechanism of macrophage activation occurs via oxidant-induced inactivation of histone deacetylase-2, shifting the balance toward acetylated or loose chromatin, exposing nuclear factor B sites and resulting in transcription of matrix metalloproteinases, proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-); this leads to neutrophil recruitment. CD8+ T cells are also recruited in response to cigarette smoke and release interferon inducible protein-10 (IP-10, CXCL-7) that in turn leads to macrophage production of macrophage elastase [matrix metalloproteinase-12 (MMP-12)]. Matrix metalloproteinases and serine proteinases, most notably neutrophil elastase, work together by degrading the inhibitor of the other, leading to lung destruction. Proteolytic cleavage products of elastin also serve as a macrophage chemokine, fueling this destructive positive feedback loop.

Autoimmune mechanisms have recently been identified in COPD and may promote the progression of disease. Increased B cells and lymphoid follicles are present in patients, particularly those with advanced disease. Antibodies have been found against elastin fragments, as well; IgG autoantibodies with avidity for pulmonary epithelium and the potential to mediate cytotoxicity have been detected.

Concomitant cigarette smoke每induced loss of cilia in the airway epithelium and impaired macrophage phagocytosis predispose to bacterial infection with neutrophilia. In end-stage lung disease, long after smoking cessation there remains an exuberant inflammatory response, suggesting that mechanisms of cigarette smoke每induced inflammation that initiate the disease differ from mechanisms that sustain inflammation after smoking cessation.

Cell Death

Air space enlargement with loss of alveolar units obviously requires disappearance of both extracellular matrix and cells. Cell death can occur from increased oxidant stress both directly from cigarette smoke and from inflammation. Animal models have used endothelial and epithelial cell death as a means to generate transient air space enlargement. Uptake of apoptotic cells by macrophages results in production of growth factors and dampens inflammation, promoting lung repair. Cigarette smoke impairs macrophage uptake of apoptotic cells, limiting repair.

Ineffective Repair

The ability of the adult lung to repair damaged alveoli appears limited. It is unlikely that the process of septation that is responsible for alveologenesis during lung development can be reinitiated. The capacity of stem cells to repopulate the lung is under active investigation. It appears difficult for an adult human to completely restore an appropriate extracellular matrix, particularly functional elastic fibers.
 
Clinical Presentation

History

The three most common symptoms in COPD are cough, sputum production, and exertional dyspnea. Many patients have such symptoms for months or years before seeking medical attention. Although the development of airflow obstruction is a gradual process, many patients date the onset of their disease to an acute illness or exacerbation. A careful history, however, usually reveals the presence of symptoms prior to the acute exacerbation. The development of exertional dyspnea, often described as increased effort to breathe, heaviness, air hunger, or gasping, can be insidious. It is best elicited by a careful history focused on typical physical activities and how the patient's ability to perform them has changed. Activities involving significant arm work, particularly at or above shoulder level, are particularly difficult for patients with COPD. Conversely, activities that allow the patient to brace the arms and use accessory muscles of respiration are better tolerated. Examples of such activities include pushing a shopping cart, walking on a treadmill, or pushing a wheelchair. As COPD advances, the principal feature is worsening dyspnea on exertion with increasing intrusion on the ability to perform vocational or avocational activities. In the most advanced stages, patients are breathless doing simple activities of daily living.

Accompanying worsening airflow obstruction is an increased frequency of exacerbations (described below). Patients may also develop resting hypoxemia and require institution of supplemental oxygen.

Physical Findings

In the early stages of COPD, patients usually have an entirely normal physical examination. Current smokers may have signs of active smoking, including an odor of smoke or nicotine staining of fingernails. In patients with more severe disease, the physical examination is notable for a prolonged expiratory phase and may include expiratory wheezing. In addition, signs of hyperinflation include a barrel chest and enlarged lung volumes with poor diaphragmatic excursion as assessed by percussion. Patients with severe airflow obstruction may also exhibit use of accessory muscles of respiration, sitting in the characteristic "tripod" position to facilitate the actions of the sternocleidomastoid, scalene, and intercostal muscles. Patients may develop cyanosis, visible in the lips and nail beds.

Although traditional teaching is that patients with predominant emphysema, termed "pink puffers," are thin and noncyanotic at rest and have prominent use of accessory muscles, and patients with chronic bronchitis are more likely to be heavy and cyanotic ("blue bloaters"), current evidence demonstrates that most patients have elements of both bronchitis and emphysema and that the physical examination does not reliably differentiate the two entities.

Advanced disease may be accompanied by systemic wasting, with significant weight loss, bitemporal wasting, and diffuse loss of subcutaneous adipose tissue. This syndrome has been associated with both inadequate oral intake and elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-). Such wasting is an independent poor prognostic factor in COPD. Some patients with advanced disease have paradoxical inward movement of the rib cage with inspiration (Hoover's sign), the result of alteration of the vector of diaphragmatic contraction on the rib cage as a result of chronic hyperinflation.

Signs of overt right heart failure, termed cor pulmonale, are relatively infrequent since the advent of supplemental oxygen therapy.

Clubbing of the digits is not a sign of COPD, and its presence should alert the clinician to initiate an investigation for causes of clubbing. In this population, the development of lung cancer is the most likely explanation for newly developed clubbing.

Laboratory Findings

The hallmark of COPD is airflow obstruction (discussed above). Pulmonary function testing shows airflow obstruction with a reduction in FEV1 and FEV1/FVC (Chap. 252). With worsening disease severity, lung volumes may increase, resulting in an increase in total lung capacity, functional residual capacity, and residual volume. In patients with emphysema, the diffusing capacity may be reduced, reflecting the lung parenchymal destruction characteristic of the disease. The degree of airflow obstruction is an important prognostic factor in COPD and is the basis for the Global Initiative for Lung Disease (GOLD) redundant classification (Table 260-1). More recently it has been shown that a multifactorial index incorporating airflow obstruction, exercise performance, dyspnea, and body mass index is a better predictor of mortality rate than pulmonary function alone.

Table 260-1 Gold Criteria for COPD Severity

 
 
GOLD Stage Severity Symptoms Spirometry 
0 At Risk Chronic cough, sputum production Normal 
I Mild With or without chronic cough or sputum production FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 80% predicted
  
IIA Moderate With or without chronic cough or sputum production FEV1/FVC <0.7 and 50% FEV1 <80% predicted
  
III Severe With or without chronic cough or sputum production FEV1/FVC <0.7 and 30% FEV1 <50% predicted
  
IV Very Severe With or without chronic cough or sputum production FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 <30% predicted

or

FEV1 <50% predicted with respiratory failure or signs of right heart failure
 
 


Abbreviation: GOLD, Global Initiative for Lung Disease.

Source: From RA Pauwels et al.
 

Arterial blood gases and oximetry may demonstrate resting or exertional hypoxemia. Arterial blood gases provide additional information about alveolar ventilation and acid-base status by measuring arterial PCO2 and pH. The change in pH with PCO2 is 0.08 units/10 mmHg acutely and 0.03 units/10 mmHg in the chronic state. Knowledge of the arterial pH therefore allows the classification of ventilatory failure, defined as PCO2 >45 mmHg, into acute or chronic conditions. The arterial blood gas is an important component of the evaluation of patients presenting with symptoms of an exacerbation. An elevated hematocrit suggests the presence of chronic hypoxemia, as does the presence of signs of right ventricular hypertrophy.

Radiographic studies may assist in the classification of the type of COPD. Obvious bullae, paucity of parenchymal markings, or hyperlucency suggests the presence of emphysema. Increased lung volumes and flattening of the diaphragm suggest hyperinflation but do not provide information about chronicity of the changes. Computed tomography (CT) scan is the current definitive test for establishing the presence or absence of emphysema in living subjects (Fig. 260-4). From a practical perspective, the CT scan does little to influence therapy of COPD except in those individuals considering surgical therapy for their disease (described below).

Figure 260-4

 
 
 
Chest CT scan of a patient with COPD who underwent a left single-lung transplant. Note the reduced parenchymal markings in the right lung (left side of figure) as compared to the left lung, representing emphysematous destruction of the lung, and mediastinal shift to the left, indicative of hyperinflation.
 
 

Recent guidelines have suggested testing for 1AT deficiency in all subjects with COPD or asthma with chronic airflow obstruction. Measurement of the serum 1AT level is a reasonable initial test. For subjects with low 1AT levels, the definitive diagnosis of 1AT deficiency requires protease inhibitor (PI) type determination. This is typically performed by isoelectric focusing of serum, which reflects the genotype at the PI locus for the common alleles and many of the rare PI alleles as well. Molecular genotyping of DNA can be performed for the common PI alleles (M, S, and Z).

Treatment: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease

Stable Phase COPD

Only three interventions〞smoking cessation, oxygen therapy in chronically hypoxemic patients, and lung volume reduction surgery in selected patients with emphysema〞have been demonstrated to influence the natural history of patients with COPD. There is currently suggestive, but not definitive, evidence that the use of inhaled glucocorticoids may alter mortality rate (but not lung function). All other current therapies are directed at improving symptoms and decreasing the frequency and severity of exacerbations. The institution of these therapies should involve an assessment of symptoms, potential risks, costs, and benefits of therapy. This should be followed by an assessment of response to therapy, and a decision should be made whether or not to continue treatment.

Pharmacotherapy

Smoking Cessation (See Also Chap. 395)

It has been shown that middle-aged smokers who were able to successfully stop smoking experienced a significant improvement in the rate of decline in pulmonary function, returning to annual changes similar to that of nonsmoking patients. Thus, all patients with COPD should be strongly urged to quit and educated about the benefits of quitting. An emerging body of evidence demonstrates that combining pharmacotherapy with traditional supportive approaches considerably enhances the chances of successful smoking cessation. There are three principal pharmacologic approaches to the problem: bupropion, originally developed as an antidepressant medication; nicotine replacement therapy available as gum, transdermal patch, inhaler, and nasal spray; and varenicline, a nicotinic acid receptor agonist/antagonist. Current recommendations from the U.S. Surgeon General are that all adult, nonpregnant smokers considering quitting be offered pharmacotherapy, in the absence of any contraindication to treatment.

Bronchodilators

In general, bronchodilators are used for symptomatic benefit in patients with COPD. The inhaled route is preferred for medication delivery as the incidence of side effects is lower than that seen with the use of parenteral medication delivery.

Anticholinergic Agents

Ipratropium bromide improves symptoms and produces acute improvement in FEV1. Tiotropium, a long-acting anticholinergic, has been shown to improve symptoms and reduce exacerbations. Studies of both ipratropium and tiotropium have failed to demonstrate that either influences the rate of decline in FEV1. In a large randomized clinical trial, there was a trend toward reduced mortality rate in the tiotropium-treated patients that approached, but did not reach, statistical significance. Side effects are minor, and a trial of inhaled anticholinergics is recommended in symptomatic patients with COPD.

Beta Agonists

These provide symptomatic benefit. The main side effects are tremor and tachycardia. Long-acting inhaled  agonists, such as salmeterol, have benefits comparable to ipratropium bromide. Their use is more convenient than short-acting agents. The addition of a  agonist to inhaled anticholinergic therapy has been demonstrated to provide incremental benefit. A recent report in asthma suggests that those patients, particularly African Americans, using a long-acting  agonist without concomitant inhaled corticosteroids have an increased risk of deaths from respiratory causes. The applicability of these data to patients with COPD is unclear.

Inhaled Glucocorticoids

Although a recent trial demonstrated an apparent benefit from the regular use of inhaled glucocorticoids on the rate of decline of lung function, a number of other well-designed randomized trials have not. Patients studied included those with mild to severe airflow obstruction and current and ex-smokers. Patients with significant acute response to inhaled  agonists were excluded from many of these trials, which may impact the generalizability of the findings. Their use has been associated with increased rates of oropharyngeal candidiasis and an increased rate of loss of bone density. Available data suggest that inhaled glucocorticoids reduce exacerbation frequency by ~25%. The impact of inhaled corticosteroids on mortality rates in COPD is controversial. A meta-analysis and several retrospective studies suggest a mortality benefit, but in a recently published randomized trial, differences in mortality rate approached, but did not reach, conventional criteria for statistical significance. A trial of inhaled glucocorticoids should be considered in patients with frequent exacerbations, defined as two or more per year, and in patients who demonstrate a significant amount of acute reversibility in response to inhaled bronchodilators.

Oral Glucocorticoids

The chronic use of oral glucocorticoids for treatment of COPD is not recommended because of an unfavorable benefit/risk ratio. The chronic use of oral glucocorticoids is associated with significant side effects, including osteoporosis, weight gain, cataracts, glucose intolerance, and increased risk of infection. A recent study demonstrated that patients tapered off chronic low-dose prednisone (~10 mg/d) did not experience any adverse effect on the frequency of exacerbations, health-related quality of life, or lung function. On average, patients lost ~4.5 kg (~10 lb) when steroids were withdrawn.

Theophylline

Theophylline produces modest improvements in expiratory flow rates and vital capacity and a slight improvement in arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in patients with moderate to severe COPD. Nausea is a common side effect; tachycardia and tremor have also been reported. Monitoring of blood theophylline levels is typically required to minimize toxicity.

Oxygen

Supplemental O2 is the only pharmacologic therapy demonstrated to unequivocally decrease mortality rates in patients with COPD. For patients with resting hypoxemia (resting O2 saturation 88% or <90% with signs of pulmonary hypertension or right heart failure), the use of O2 has been demonstrated to have a significant impact on mortality rate. Patients meeting these criteria should be on continual oxygen supplementation, as the mortality benefit is proportional to the number of hours/day oxygen is used. Various delivery systems are available, including portable systems that patients may carry to allow mobility outside the home.

Supplemental O2 is commonly prescribed for patients with exertional hypoxemia or nocturnal hypoxemia. Although the rationale for supplemental O2 in these settings is physiologically sound, the benefits of such therapy are not well substantiated.

Other Agents

N-acetyl cysteine has been used in patients with COPD for both its mucolytic and antioxidant properties. A prospective trial failed to find any benefit with respect to decline in lung function or prevention of exacerbations. Specific treatment in the form of IV 1AT augmentation therapy is available for individuals with severe 1AT deficiency. Despite sterilization procedures for these blood-derived products and the absence of reported cases of viral infection from therapy, some physicians recommend hepatitis B vaccination prior to starting augmentation therapy. Although biochemical efficacy of 1AT augmentation therapy has been shown, a randomized controlled trial of 1AT augmentation therapy has not definitively established the efficacy of augmentation therapy in reducing decline of pulmonary function. Eligibility for 1AT augmentation therapy requires a serum 1AT level <11 M (approximately 50 mg/dL). Typically, PiZ individuals will qualify, although other rare types associated with severe deficiency (e.g., null-null) are also eligible. Since only a fraction of individuals with severe 1AT deficiency will develop COPD, 1AT augmentation therapy is not recommended for severely 1AT-deficient persons with normal pulmonary function and a normal chest CT scan.

Nonpharmacologic Therapies

General Medical Care

Patients with COPD should receive the influenza vaccine annually. Polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine is also recommended, although proof of efficacy in this patient population is not definitive.

Pulmonary Rehabilitation

This refers to a treatment program that incorporates education and cardiovascular conditioning. In COPD, pulmonary rehabilitation has been demonstrated to improve health-related quality of life, dyspnea, and exercise capacity. It has also been shown to reduce rates of hospitalization over a 6- to 12-month period.

Lung Volume Reduction Surgery (LVRS)

Surgery to reduce the volume of lung in patients with emphysema was first introduced with minimal success in the 1950s and was reintroduced in the 1990s. Patients are excluded if they have significant pleural disease, a pulmonary artery systolic pressure >45 mmHg, extreme deconditioning, congestive heart failure, or other severe comorbid conditions. Patients with an FEV1 <20% of predicted and either diffusely distributed emphysema on CT scan or diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) <20% of predicted have an increased mortality rate after the procedure and thus are not candidates for LVRS.

The National Emphysema Treatment trial demonstrated that LVRS offers both a mortality benefit and a symptomatic benefit in certain patients with emphysema. The anatomic distribution of emphysema and postrehabilitation exercise capacity are important prognostic characteristics. Patients with upper lobe每predominant emphysema and a low postrehabilitation exercise capacity are most likely to benefit from LVRS.

Lung Transplantation (See Also Chap. 266)

COPD is currently the second leading indication for lung transplantation (Fig. 260-4). Current recommendations are that candidates for lung transplantation should be <65 years; have severe disability despite maximal medical therapy; and be free of comorbid conditions such as liver, renal, or cardiac disease. In contrast to LVRS, the anatomic distribution of emphysema and the presence of pulmonary hypertension are not contraindications to lung transplantation. Unresolved issues concerning lung transplantation and COPD include whether single- or double-lung transplant is the preferred procedure.

Exacerbations of COPD

Exacerbations are a prominent feature of the natural history of COPD. Exacerbations are episodes of increased dyspnea and cough and change in the amount and character of sputum. They may or may not be accompanied by other signs of illness, including fever, myalgias, and sore throat. Self-reported health-related quality of life correlates with frequency of exacerbations more closely than it does with the degree of airflow obstruction. Economic analyses have shown that >70% of COPD-related health care expenditures go to emergency department visits and hospital care; this translates to >$10 billion annually in the United States. The frequency of exacerbations increases as airflow obstruction increases; patients with moderate to severe airflow obstruction [GOLD stages III, IV (Table 260-1)] on average have one to three episodes per year. However, some individuals with very severe airflow obstruction do not have frequent exacerbations; the history of prior exacerbations is a strong predictor of future exacerbations.

The approach to the patient experiencing an exacerbation includes an assessment of the severity of the patient's illness, both acute and chronic components; an attempt to identify the precipitant of the exacerbation; and the institution of therapy.

Precipitating Causes and Strategies to Reduce Frequency of Exacerbations

A variety of stimuli may result in the final common pathway of airway inflammation and increased symptoms that are characteristic of COPD exacerbations. Bacterial infections play a role in many, but by no means all, episodes. Viral respiratory infections are present in approximately one-third of COPD exacerbations. In a significant minority of instances (20每35%), no specific precipitant can be identified.

Despite the frequent implication of bacterial infection, chronic suppressive or "rotating" antibiotics are not beneficial in patients with COPD. This is in contrast to their efficacy in patients with bronchiectasis due to cystic fibrosis, in whom suppressive antibiotics have been shown to reduce frequency of hospital admissions.

The role of pharmacotherapy in reducing exacerbation frequency is less well studied. Chronic oral glucocorticoids are not recommended for this purpose. Inhaled glucocorticoids reduce the frequency of exacerbations by 25每30% in most analyses. The use of inhaled glucocorticoids should be considered in patients with frequent exacerbations or those who have an asthmatic component, i.e., significant reversibility on pulmonary function testing or marked symptomatic improvement after inhaled bronchodilators. Similar magnitudes of reduction have been reported for anticholinergic and long-acting beta-agonist therapy. The influenza vaccine has been shown to reduce exacerbation rates in patients with COPD.

Patient Assessment

An attempt should be made to establish the severity of the exacerbation as well as the severity of preexisting COPD. The more severe either of these two components, the more likely that the patient will require hospital admission. The history should include quantification of the degree of dyspnea by asking about breathlessness during activities of daily living and typical activities for the patient. The patient should be asked about fever; change in character of sputum; any ill contacts; and associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgias, and chills. Inquiring about the frequency and severity of prior exacerbations can provide important information.

The physical examination should incorporate an assessment of the degree of distress of the patient. Specific attention should be focused on tachycardia, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles, signs of perioral or peripheral cyanosis, the ability to speak in complete sentences, and the patient's mental status. The chest examination should establish the presence or absence of focal findings, degree of air movement, presence or absence of wheezing, asymmetry in the chest examination (suggesting large airway obstruction or pneumothorax mimicking an exacerbation), and the presence or absence of paradoxical motion of the abdominal wall.

Patients with severe underlying COPD, who are in moderate or severe distress or those with focal findings should have a chest x-ray. Approximately 25% of x-rays in this clinical situation will be abnormal, with the most frequent findings being pneumonia and congestive heart failure. Patients with advanced COPD, those with a history of hypercarbia, those with mental status changes (confusion, sleepiness), or those in significant distress should have an arterial blood-gas measurement. The presence of hypercarbia, defined as a PCO2 >45 mmHg, has important implications for treatment (discussed below). In contrast to its utility in the management of exacerbations of asthma, measurement of pulmonary function has not been demonstrated to be helpful in the diagnosis or management of exacerbations of COPD.

There are no definitive guidelines concerning the need for inpatient treatment of exacerbations. Patients with respiratory acidosis and hypercarbia, significant hypoxemia, or severe underlying disease or those whose living situation is not conducive to careful observation and the delivery of prescribed treatment should be admitted to the hospital.

Acute Exacerbations

Bronchodilators

Typically, patients are treated with an inhaled  agonist, often with the addition of an anticholinergic agent. These may be administered separately or together, and the frequency of administration depends on the severity of the exacerbation. Patients are often treated initially with nebulized therapy, as such treatment is often easier to administer in older patients or to those in respiratory distress. It has been shown, however, that conversion to metered-dose inhalers is effective when accompanied by education and training of patients and staff. This approach has significant economic benefits and also allows an easier transition to outpatient care. The addition of methylxanthines (such as theophylline) to this regimen can be considered, although convincing proof of its efficacy is lacking. If added, serum levels should be monitored in an attempt to minimize toxicity.

Antibiotics

Patients with COPD are frequently colonized with potential respiratory pathogens, and it is often difficult to identify conclusively a specific species of bacteria responsible for a particular clinical event. Bacteria frequently implicated in COPD exacerbations include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis. In addition, Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Chlamydia pneumoniae are found in 5每10% of exacerbations. The choice of antibiotic should be based on local patterns of antibiotic susceptibility of the above pathogens as well as the patient's clinical condition. Most practitioners treat patients with moderate or severe exacerbations with antibiotics, even in the absence of data implicating a specific pathogen.

Glucocorticoids

Among patients admitted to the hospital, the use of glucocorticoids has been demonstrated to reduce the length of stay, hasten recovery, and reduce the chance of subsequent exacerbation or relapse for a period of up to 6 months. One study demonstrated that 2 weeks of glucocorticoid therapy produced benefit indistinguishable from 8 weeks of therapy. The GOLD guidelines recommend 30每40 mg of oral prednisolone or its equivalent for a period of 10每14 days. Hyperglycemia, particularly in patients with preexisting diagnosis of diabetes, is the most frequently reported acute complication of glucocorticoid treatment.

Oxygen

Supplemental O2 should be supplied to keep arterial saturations 90%. Hypoxemic respiratory drive plays a small role in patients with COPD. Studies have demonstrated that in patients with both acute and chronic hypercarbia, the administration of supplemental O2 does not reduce minute ventilation. It does, in some patients, result in modest increases in arterial PCO2, chiefly by altering ventilation-perfusion relationships within the lung. This should not deter practitioners from providing the oxygen needed to correct hypoxemia.

Mechanical Ventilatory Support

The initiation of noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in patients with respiratory failure, defined as PaCO2 >45 mmHg, results in a significant reduction in mortality rate, need for intubation, complications of therapy, and hospital length of stay. Contraindications to NIPPV include cardiovascular instability, impaired mental status or inability to cooperate, copious secretions or the inability to clear secretions, craniofacial abnormalities or trauma precluding effective fitting of mask, extreme obesity, or significant burns.

Invasive (conventional) mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube is indicated for patients with severe respiratory distress despite initial therapy, life-threatening hypoxemia, severe hypercarbia and/or acidosis, markedly impaired mental status, respiratory arrest, hemodynamic instability, or other complications. The goal of mechanical ventilation is to correct the aforementioned conditions. Factors to consider during mechanical ventilatory support include the need to provide sufficient expiratory time in patients with severe airflow obstruction and the presence of auto-PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure), which can result in patients having to generate significant respiratory effort to trigger a breath during a demand mode of ventilation. The mortality rate of patients requiring mechanical ventilatory support is 17每30% for that particular hospitalization. For patients age >65 admitted to the intensive care unit for treatment, the mortality rate doubles over the next year to 60%, regardless of whether mechanical ventilation was required.
 
Further Readings

American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society Task Force: Standards for the diagnosis and management of patients with COPD [Internet]. Version 1.2. New York: American Thoracic Society; 2004 [updated September 8, 2005]. Available from http://www-test.thoracic.org/copd/ 

 
Fiore MC et al: Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence, Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, June 2000 

 
Hunninghake GM et al: MMP12, lung function, and COPD in high-risk populations. N Engl J Med 361:2599, 2009[PMID: 20018959]  [Full Text]

 
Ito K et al: Decreased histone deacetylase activity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 352:1967, 2005[PMID: 15888697]  [Full Text]

 
Mannino DM, Buist AS: Global burden of COPD: Risk factors, prevalence, and future trends. Lancet 370:765, 2007[PMID: 17765526]  [Full Text]

 
Rabe KF et al: Global strategy for the diagnosis, management and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:532, 2007[PMID: 17507545]  [Full Text]

 
每每每〞et al: Update in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 2006. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:1222, 2007 

 
Sin DD et al: Inhaled corticosteroids and mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 60:992, 2005[PMID: 16227327]  [Full Text]

 
Wise RA, Tashkin DP: Optimizing treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: An assessment of current therapies. Am J Med 120:S4, 2007 
 
 


^^
Interstitial Lung Diseases: Introduction

Patients with interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) come to medical attention mainly because of the onset of progressive exertional dyspnea or a persistent nonproductive cough. Hemoptysis, wheezing, and chest pain may be present. Often, the identification of interstitial opacities on chest x-ray focuses the diagnostic approach on one of the ILDs.

ILDs represent a large number of conditions that involve the parenchyma of the lung〞the alveoli, the alveolar epithelium, the capillary endothelium, and the spaces between those structures〞as well as the perivascular and lymphatic tissues. The disorders in this heterogeneous group are classified together because of similar clinical, roentgenographic, physiologic, or pathologic manifestations. These disorders often are associated with considerable rates of morbidity and mortality, and there is little consensus regarding the best management of most of them.

ILDs have been difficult to classify because >200 known individual diseases are characterized by diffuse parenchymal lung involvement, either as the primary condition or as a significant part of a multiorgan process, as may occur in the connective tissue diseases (CTDs). One useful approach to classification is to separate the ILDs into two groups based on the major underlying histopathology: (1) those associated with predominant inflammation and fibrosis and (2) those with a predominantly granulomatous reaction in interstitial or vascular areas (Table 261-1). Each of these groups can be subdivided further according to whether the cause is known or unknown. For each ILD there may be an acute phase, and there is usually a chronic one as well. Rarely, some are recurrent, with intervals of subclinical disease.

Table 261-1 Major Categories of Alveolar and Interstitial Inflammatory Lung Disease

 
 
Lung Response: Alveolitis, Interstitial Inflammation, and Fibrosis 
Known Cause  
Asbestos

Fumes, gases

Drugs (antibiotics, amiodarone, gold) and chemotherapy drugs

Radiation

Aspiration pneumonia
 Residual of acute respiratory distress syndrome

Smoking-related

Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
Respiratory bronchiolitis每associated interstitial lung disease
Langerhans cell granulomatosis (eosinophilic granuloma of the lung) 
Unknown Cause  
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (usual interstitial pneumonia)
Acute interstitial pneumonia (diffuse alveolar damage)
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia)
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
Connective tissue diseases

Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, systemic sclerosis, Sj?gren's syndrome, polymyositis-dermatomyositis
Pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes

Goodpasture's syndrome, idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis, isolated pulmonary capillaritis Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis

Lymphocytic infiltrative disorders (lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis associated with connective tissue disease)

Eosinophilic pneumonias

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis

Amyloidosis

Inherited diseases

Tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis, Niemann-Pick disease, Gaucher's disease, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
Gastrointestinal or liver diseases (Crohn's disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, chronic active hepatitis, ulcerative colitis)

Graft-versus-host disease (bone marrow transplantation; solid organ transplantation)
 
Lung Response: Granulomatous  
Known Cause  
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (organic dusts) Inorganic dusts: beryllium, silica 
Unknown Cause  
Sarcoidosis

Granulomatous vasculitides

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), allergic granulomatosis of Churg-Strauss
 Bronchocentric granulomatosis

Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
 
 

 

Sarcoidosis (Chap. 329), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and pulmonary fibrosis associated with CTDs (Chaps. 319每326) are the most common ILDs of unknown etiology. Among the ILDs of known cause, the largest group includes occupational and environmental exposures, especially the inhalation of inorganic dusts, organic dusts, and various fumes or gases (Chaps. 255 and 256) (Table 261-2). A clinical diagnosis is possible for many forms of ILD, especially if an occupational and environmental history is pursued aggressively. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scanning improves the diagnostic accuracy and may eliminate the need for tissue examination in many cases, especially in IPF. For other forms, tissue examination, usually obtained by thoracoscopic lung biopsy, is critical to confirmation of the diagnosis.

Table 261-2 Estimated Relative Frequency of the Interstitial Lung Diseases

 
 
Diagnosis Relative Frequency, % 
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias 40 
  Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 55 
  Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia 25 
  Respiratory bronchiolitis〞ILD and desquamative interstitial pneumonia 15 
  Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia 3 
  Acute interstitial pneumonia <1 
Occupational and environmental 26 
Sarcoidosis 10 
Connective tissue diseases 9 
Drug and radiation 1 
Pulmonary hemorrhage syndromes <1 
Other 13 
 


Source: From DB Coultas, R Hubbard, in JP Lynch III (ed): Lung Biology in Health and Disease. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2004; S Garantziotis et al: J Clin Invest 114:319, 2004.
 

Pathogenesis

The ILDs are nonmalignant disorders and are not caused by identified infectious agents. The precise pathway(s) leading from injury to fibrosis is not known. Although there are multiple initiating agent(s) of injury, the immunopathogenic responses of lung tissue are limited, and the mechanisms of repair have common features (Fig. 261-1).

Figure 261-1

 
 
 
Proposed mechanism for the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis. The lung is naturally exposed to repetitive injury from a variety of exogenous and endogenous stimuli. Several local and systemic factors (e.g., fibroblasts, circulating fibrocytes, chemokines, growth factors, and clotting factors) contribute to tissue healing and functional recovery. Dysregulation of this intricate network through genetic predisposition, autoimmune conditions, or superimposed diseases can lead to aberrant wound healing, with the result of pulmonary fibrosis. Alternatively, excessive injury to the lung may overwhelm even intact reparative mechanisms and lead to pulmonary fibrosis. (From S Garantziotis et al: J Clin Invest 114:319, 2004.)
 
 

As mentioned above, the two major histopathologic patterns are a granulomatous pattern and a pattern in which inflammation and fibrosis predominate.

Granulomatous Lung Disease

This process is characterized by an accumulation of T lymphocytes, macrophages, and epithelioid cells organized into discrete structures (granulomas) in the lung parenchyma. The granulomatous lesions can progress to fibrosis. Many patients with granulomatous lung disease remain free of severe impairment of lung function or, when symptomatic, improve after treatment. The main differential diagnosis is between sarcoidosis (Chap. 329) and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 255).

Inflammation and Fibrosis

The initial insult is an injury to the epithelial surface that causes inflammation in the air spaces and alveolar walls (Fig. 261-2). If the disease becomes chronic, inflammation spreads to adjacent portions of the interstitium and vasculature and eventually causes interstitial fibrosis. Important histopathologic patterns found in the ILDs include usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis/desquamative interstitial pneumonia, organizing pneumonia, diffuse alveolar damage (acute or organizing), and lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia. The development of irreversible scarring (fibrosis) of alveolar walls, airways, or vasculature is the most feared outcome in all of these conditions because it is often progressive and leads to significant derangement of ventilatory function and gas exchange.

Figure 261-2

 
 
 
Cellular basis for the pathogenesis of interstitial lung disease. Multiple microinjuries damage and activate alveolar epithelial cells (top left), which in turn induce an antifibrinolytic environment in the alveolar spaces, enhancing wound clot formation. Alveolar epithelial cells secrete growth factors and induce migration and proliferation of fibroblasts and differentiation into myofibroblasts (bottom left). Subepithelial myofibroblasts and alveolar epithelial cells produce gelatinases that may increase basement membrane disruption and allow fibroblast每myofibroblast migration (bottom right). Angiogenic factors induce neovascularization. Both intraalveolar and interstitial myofibroblasts secrete extracellular matrix proteins, mainly collagens. An imbalance between interstitial collagenases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases provokes the progressive deposit of extracellular matrix (top right). Signals responsible for myofibroblast apoptosis seem to be absent or delayed in usual interstitial pneumonia, increasing cell survival. Myofibroblasts produce angiotensinogen that, as angiotensin II, provokes alveolar epithelial cell death, further impairing reepithelialization. Abbreviations: FGF-2, fibroblast growth factor 2; MMPs, metalloproteinases; PAI-1, PAI-2, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, 2; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-, transforming growth factor ; TIMPs, tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases; TNF-, tumor necrosis factor ; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. (From M Selman et al: Ann Intern Med 134:136, 2001, with permission.)
 
 

History

Duration of Illness

Acute presentation (days to weeks), although unusual, occurs with allergy (drugs, fungi, helminths), acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP), eosinophilic pneumonia, and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. These conditions may be confused with atypical pneumonias because of diffuse alveolar opacities on chest x-ray. Subacute presentation (weeks to months) may occur in all ILDs but is seen especially in sarcoidosis, drug-induced ILDs, the alveolar hemorrhage syndromes, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), and the acute immunologic pneumonia that complicates systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or polymyositis. In most ILDs the symptoms and signs form a chronic presentation (months to years). Examples include IPF, sarcoidosis, pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH) (also known as Langerhans cell granulomatosis, eosinophilic granuloma, or histiocytosis X), pneumoconioses, and CTDs. Episodic presentations are unusual and include eosinophilic pneumonia, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP, vasculitides, pulmonary hemorrhage, and Churg-Strauss syndrome.

Age

Most patients with sarcoidosis, ILD associated with CTD, lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), PLCH, and inherited forms of ILD (familial IPF, Gaucher's disease, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome) present between the ages of 20 and 40 years. Most patients with IPF are older than 60 years.

Gender

LAM and pulmonary involvement in tuberous sclerosis occur exclusively in premenopausal women. In addition, ILD in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome and in the CTDs is more common in women; an exception is ILD in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), which is more common in men. IPF is more common in men. Because of occupational exposures, pneumoconioses also occur more frequently in men.

Family History

Familial lung fibrosis has been associated with mutations in three genes: the surfactant protein Cgene, the surfactant protein A2 gene, and the ATP-binding cassette transporter A3 gene. Familial lung fibrosis is characterized by several patterns of interstitial pneumonia, including nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, desquamative interstitial pneumonia, and UIP. Older age, male sex, and a history of cigarette smoking have been identified as risk factors for familial lung fibrosis. Family associations (with an autosomal dominant pattern) have been identified in tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis. Familial clustering has been identified increasingly in sarcoidosis. The genes responsible for several rare ILDs have been identified, i.e., alveolar microlithiasis, Gaucher's disease, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, and Niemann-Pick disease, along with the genes for surfactant homeostasis in pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and for control of cell growth and differentiation in LAM.

Smoking History

Two-thirds to 75% of patients with IPF and familial lung fibrosis have a history of smoking. Patients with PLCH, respiratory bronchiolitis/desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP), Goodpasture's syndrome, respiratory bronchiolitis, and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis are usually current or former smokers.

Occupational and Environmental History

A strict chronologic listing of the patient's lifelong employment must be sought, including specific duties and known exposures. In hypersensitivity pneumonitis (see Fig. 255-1), respiratory symptoms, fever, chills, and an abnormal chest roentgenogram are often temporally related to a hobby (pigeon breeder's disease) or to the workplace (farmer's lung) (Chap. 255). Symptoms may diminish or disappear after the patient leaves the site of exposure for several days; similarly, symptoms may reappear when the patient returns to the exposure site.

Other Important Past History

Parasitic infections may cause pulmonary eosinophilia, and therefore a travel history should be taken in patients with known or suspected ILD. History of risk factors for HIV infection should be elicited because several processes may occur at the time of initial presentation or during the clinical course, e.g., HIV infection, organizing pneumonia, AIP, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis, and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.

Respiratory Symptoms and Signs

Dyspnea is a common and prominent complaint in patients with ILD, especially the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP, sarcoidosis, eosinophilic pneumonias, and PLCH. Some patients, especially patients with sarcoidosis, silicosis, PLCH, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, lipoid pneumonia, or lymphangitis carcinomatosis, may have extensive parenchymal lung disease on chest x-ray without significant dyspnea, especially early in the course of the illness. Wheezing is an uncommon manifestation of ILD but has been described in patients with chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, Churg-Strauss syndrome, respiratory bronchiolitis, and sarcoidosis. Clinically significant chest pain is uncommon in most ILDs. However, substernal discomfort is common in sarcoidosis. Sudden worsening of dyspnea, especially if associated with acute chest pain, may indicate a spontaneous pneumothorax, which occurs in PLCH, tuberous sclerosis, LAM, and neurofibromatosis. Frank hemoptysis and blood-streaked sputum are rarely presenting manifestations of ILD but can be seen in the diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) syndromes, LAM, tuberous sclerosis, and the granulomatous vasculitides. Fatigue and weight loss are common in all ILDs.

Physical Examination

The findings are usually not specific. Most commonly, physical examination reveals tachypnea and bibasilar end-inspiratory dry crackles, which are common in most forms of ILD associated with inflammation but are less likely to be heard in the granulomatous lung diseases. Crackles may be present in the absence of radiographic abnormalities on the chest radiograph. Scattered late inspiratory high-pitched rhonchi〞so-called inspiratory squeaks〞are heard in patients with bronchiolitis. The cardiac examination is usually normal except in the middle or late stages of the disease, when findings of pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale may become evident (Chap. 250). Cyanosis and clubbing of the digits occur in some patients with advanced disease.

Laboratory

Antinuclear antibodies and anti-immunoglobulin antibodies (rheumatoid factors) are identified in some patients, even in the absence of a defined CTD. A raised lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level is a nonspecific finding common to ILDs. Elevation of the serum level of angiotensin-converting enzyme is common in sarcoidosis. Serum precipitins confirm exposure when hypersensitivity pneumonitis is suspected, although they are not diagnostic of the process. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic or anti-basement membrane antibodies are useful if vasculitis is suspected. The electrocardiogram is usually normal unless pulmonary hypertension is present; then it demonstrates right-axis deviation, right ventricular hypertrophy, or right atrial enlargement or hypertrophy. Echocardiography also reveals right ventricular dilation and/or hypertrophy in the presence of pulmonary hypertension.

Chest Imaging Studies

Chest X-Ray

ILD may be first suspected on the basis of an abnormal chest radiograph, which most commonly reveals a bibasilar reticular pattern. A nodular or mixed pattern of alveolar filling and increased reticular markings also may be present. A subgroup of ILDs exhibit nodular opacities with a predilection for the upper lung zones [sarcoidosis, PLCH, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, berylliosis, RA (necrobiotic nodular form), ankylosing spondylitis]. The chest x-ray correlates poorly with the clinical or histopathologic stage of the disease. The radiographic finding of honeycombing correlates with pathologic findings of small cystic spaces and progressive fibrosis; when present, it portends a poor prognosis. In most cases, the chest radiograph is nonspecific and usually does not allow a specific diagnosis.

Computed Tomography

High-resolution computed tomography is superior to the plain chest x-ray for early detection and confirmation of suspected ILD (Fig. 261-3). In addition, HRCT allows better assessment of the extent and distribution of disease, and it is especially useful in the investigation of patients with a normal chest radiograph. Coexisting disease is often best recognized on HRCT scanning, e.g., mediastinal adenopathy, carcinoma, or emphysema. In the appropriate clinical setting HRCT may be sufficiently characteristic to preclude the need for lung biopsy in IPF, sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, asbestosis, lymphangitic carcinoma, and PLCH. When a lung biopsy is required, HRCT scanning is useful for determining the most appropriate area from which biopsy samples should be taken.

Figure 261-3

 
 
 
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. High-resolution CT image shows bibasal, peripheral predominant reticular abnormality with traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing. The lung biopsy showed the typical features of usual interstitial pneumonia.
 
 

Pulmonary Function Testing

Spirometry and Lung Volumes

Measurement of lung function is important in assessing the extent of pulmonary involvement in patients with ILD. Most forms of ILD produce a restrictive defect with reduced total lung capacity (TLC), functional residual capacity, and residual volume (Chap. 252). Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) are reduced, but these changes are related to the decreased TLC. The FEV1/FVC ratio is usually normal or increased. Lung volumes decrease as lung stiffness worsens with disease progression. A few disorders produce interstitial opacities on chest x-ray and obstructive airflow limitation on lung function testing (uncommon in sarcoidosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis but common in tuberous sclerosis and LAM). Pulmonary function studies have been proved to have prognostic value in patients with idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, particularly IPF and nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP).

Diffusing Capacity

A reduction in the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DlCO) is a common but nonspecific finding in most ILDs. This decrease is due in part to effacement of the alveolar capillary units but, more important, to mismatching of ventilation and perfusion (V./Q.). Lung regions with reduced compliance due to either fibrosis or cellular infiltration may be poorly ventilated but may still maintain adequate blood flow, and the ventilation-perfusion mismatch in these regions acts like true venous admixture. The severity of the reduction in DlCO does not correlate with disease stage.

Arterial Blood Gas

The resting arterial blood gas may be normal or reveal hypoxemia (secondary to a mismatching of ventilation to perfusion) and respiratory alkalosis. A normal arterial O2 tension (or saturation by oximetry) at rest does not rule out significant hypoxemia during exercise or sleep. Carbon dioxide (CO2) retention is rare and is usually a manifestation of end-stage disease.

Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing

Because hypoxemia at rest is not always present and because severe exercise-induced hypoxemia may go undetected, it is useful to perform exercise testing with measurement of arterial blood gases to detect abnormalities of gas exchange. Arterial oxygen desaturation, a failure to decrease dead space appropriately with exercise [i.e., a high Vd/Vt (dead space/tidal volume) ratio (Chap. 252)], and an excessive increase in respiratory rate with a lower than expected recruitment of tidal volume provide useful information about physiologic abnormalities and extent of disease. Serial assessment of resting and exercise gas exchange is an excellent method for following disease activity and responsiveness to treatment, especially in patients with IPF. Increasingly, the 6-min walk test is used to obtain a global evaluation of submaximal exercise capacity in patients with ILD. The walk distance and level of oxygen desaturation tend to correlate with the patient's baseline lung function and mirror the patient's clinical course.

Fiberoptic Bronchoscopy and Bronchoalveolar Lavage (BAL)

In selected diseases (e.g., sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, DAH syndrome, cancer, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis), cellular analysis of BAL fluid may be useful in narrowing the differential diagnostic possibilities among various types of ILD (Table 261-3). The role of BAL in defining the stage of disease and assessment of disease progression or response to therapy remains poorly understood, and the usefulness of BAL in the clinical assessment and management remains to be established.

Table 261-3 Diagnostic Value of Bronchoalveolar Lavage in Interstitial Lung Disease

 
 
Condition Bronchoalveolar Lavage Finding 
Sarcoidosis Lymphocytosis; CD4:CD8 ratio >3.5 most specific of diagnosis 
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis Marked lymphocytosis (>50%) 
Organizing pneumonia Foamy macrophages; mixed pattern of increased cells characteristic; decreased CD4:CD8 ratio 
Eosinophilic lung disease Eosinophils >25% 
Diffuse alveolar bleeding Hemosiderin-laden macrophages, red blood cells 
Diffuse alveolar damage, drug toxicity Atypical hyperplastic type II pneumocytes 
Opportunistic infections Pneumocystis carinii, fungi, cytomegalovirus-transformed cells  
Lymphangitic carcinomatosis, alveolar cell carcinoma, pulmonary lymphoma Malignant cells 
Alveolar proteinosis Milky effluent, foamy macrophages and lipoproteinaceous intraalveolar material (periodic acid每Schiff stain每positive) 
Lipoid pneumonia Fat globules in macrophages 
Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis Increased CD1+ Langerhans cells, electron microscopy demonstrating Birbeck granule in lavaged macrophage (expensive and difficult to perform) 
Asbestos-related pulmonary disease Dust particles, ferruginous bodies 
Berylliosis Positive lymphocyte transformation test to beryllium 
Silicosis Dust particles by polarized light microscopy 
Lipoidosis Accumulation of specific lipopigment in alveolar macrophages 
 

 

Tissue and Cellular Examination

Lung biopsy is the most effective method for confirming the diagnosis and assessing disease activity. The findings may identify a more treatable process than originally suspected, particularly chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, COP, respiratory bronchiolitis每associated ILD, or sarcoidosis. Biopsy should be obtained before the initiation of treatment. A definitive diagnosis avoids confusion and anxiety later in the clinical course if the patient does not respond to therapy or experiences serious side effects from it.

Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with multiple transbronchial lung biopsies (four to eight biopsy samples) is often the initial procedure of choice, especially when sarcoidosis, lymphangitic carcinomatosis, eosinophilic pneumonia, Goodpasture's syndrome, or infection is suspected. If a specific diagnosis is not made by transbronchial biopsy, surgical lung biopsy by video-assisted thoracic surgery or open thoracotomy is indicated. Adequate-sized biopsies from multiple sites, usually from two lobes, should be obtained. Relative contraindications to lung biopsy include serious cardiovascular disease, honeycombing and other roentgenographic evidence of diffuse end-stage disease, severe pulmonary dysfunction, and other major operative risks, especially in the elderly.

Treatment: Interstitial Lung Disease

Although the course of ILD is variable, progression is common and often insidious. All treatable possibilities should be carefully considered. Since therapy does not reverse fibrosis, the major goals of treatment are permanent removal of the offending agent, when known, and early identification and aggressive suppression of the acute and chronic inflammatory process, thereby reducing further lung damage. Hypoxemia (PaO2 <55 mmHg) at rest and/or with exercise should be managed with supplemental oxygen. Management of cor pulmonale may be required as the disease progresses (Chaps. 234 and 250). Pulmonary rehabilitation has been shown to improve the quality of life in patients with ILD.

Drug Therapy

Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy for suppression of the alveolitis present in ILD, but the success rate is low. There have been no placebo-controlled trials of glucocorticoids in ILD, and so there is no direct evidence that steroids improve survival in many of the diseases for which they are commonly used. Glucocorticoid therapy is recommended for symptomatic ILD patients with eosinophilic pneumonias, COP, CTD, sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, acute inorganic dust exposures, acute radiation pneumonitis, DAH, and drug-induced ILD. In organic dust disease, glucocorticoids are recommended for both the acute and chronic stages.

The optimal dose and proper length of therapy with glucocorticoids in the treatment of most ILDs are not known. A common starting dose is prednisone, 0.5每1 mg/kg in a once-daily oral dose (based on the patient's lean body weight). This dose is continued for 4每12 weeks, at which time the patient is reevaluated. If the patient is stable or improved, the dose is tapered to 0.25每0.5 mg/kg and is maintained at this level for an additional 4每12 weeks, depending on the course. Rapid tapering or a shortened course of glucocorticoid treatment can result in recurrence. If the patient's condition continues to decline on glucocorticoids, a second agent (see below) often is added and the prednisone dose is lowered to or maintained at 0.25 mg/kg per d.

Cyclophosphamide and azathioprine (1每2 mg/kg lean body weight per day), with or without glucocorticoids, have been tried with variable success in IPF, vasculitis, progressive systemic sclerosis, and other ILDs. An objective response usually requires at least 8每12 weeks to occur. In situations in which these drugs have failed or could not be tolerated, other agents, including methotrexate, colchicine, penicillamine, and cyclosporine, have been tried. However, their role in the treatment of ILDs remains to be determined.

Many cases of ILD are chronic and irreversible despite the therapy discussed above, and lung transplantation may then be considered (Chap. 266).
 
Individual Forms of Ild

Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

IPF is the most common form of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. Separating IPF from other forms of lung fibrosis is an important step in the evaluation of all patients presenting with ILD. IPF has a distinctly poor response to therapy and a bad prognosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Exertional dyspnea, a nonproductive cough, and inspiratory crackles with or without digital clubbing may be present on physical examination. HRCT lung scans typically show patchy, predominantly basilar, subpleural reticular opacities, often associated with traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing (Fig. 261-3). Atypical findings that should suggest an alternative diagnosis include extensive ground-glass abnormality, nodular opacities, upper or midzone predominance, and prominent hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Pulmonary function tests often reveal a restrictive pattern, a reduced DlCO, and arterial hypoxemia that is exaggerated or elicited by exercise.

Histologic Findings

Confirmation of the presence of the UIP pattern on histologic examination is essential to confirm this diagnosis. Transbronchial biopsies are not helpful in making the diagnosis of UIP, and surgical biopsy usually is required. The histologic hallmark and chief diagnostic criterion of UIP is a heterogeneous appearance at low magnification with alternating areas of normal lung, interstitial inflammation, foci of proliferating fibroblasts, dense collagenfibrosis, and honeycomb changes. These histologic changes affect the peripheral, subpleural parenchyma most severely. The interstitial inflammation is usually patchy and consists of a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in the alveolar septa, associated with hyperplasia of type 2 pneumocytes. The fibrotic zones are composed mainly of dense collagen, although scattered foci of proliferating fibroblasts are a consistent finding. The extent of fibroblastic proliferation is predictive of disease progression. Areas of honeycomb change are composed of cystic fibrotic air spaces that frequently are lined by bronchiolar epithelium and filled with mucin. Smooth-muscle hyperplasia is commonly seen in areas of fibrosis and honeycomb change. A fibrotic pattern with some features similar to UIP may be found in the chronic stage of several specific disorders, such as pneumoconioses (e.g., asbestosis), radiation injury, certain drug-induced lung diseases (e.g., nitrofurantoin), chronic aspiration, sarcoidosis, chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, organized chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, and PLCH. Commonly, other histopathologic features are present in these situations, thus allowing separation of these lesions from the UIP-like pattern. Consequently, the term usual interstitial pneumonia is used for patients in whom the lesion is idiopathic and not associated with another condition.

Treatment: Management Issues in Patients with Ipf

Untreated patients with IPF show continued progression of their disease and have a high mortality rate. There is no effective therapy for IPF. Chronic microaspiration secondary to gastroesophageal reflux may play a role in the pathogenesis and natural history of IPF. Patients with IPF and coexisting emphysema [combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE)] are more likely to require long-term oxygen therapy and develop pulmonary hypertension and may have a more dismal outcome than those without emphysema.

Patients with IPF may have acute deterioration secondary to infections, pulmonary embolism, or pneumothorax. Heart failure and ischemic heart disease are common problems in patients with IPF, accounting for nearly one-third of deaths. These patients also commonly experience an accelerated phase of rapid clinical decline that is associated with a poor prognosis (so-called acute exacerbations of IPF). These acute exacerbations are defined by worsening of dyspnea within a few days to 4 weeks; newly developing diffuse ground-glass abnormality and/or consolidation superimposed on a background reticular or honeycomb pattern consistent with the UIP pattern; worsening hypoxemia; and absence of infectious pneumonia, heart failure, and sepsis. The rate of these acute exacerbations ranges from 10每57%, apparently depending on the length of follow-up. During these episodes, the histopathologic pattern of diffuse alveolar damage is often found on the background of UIP. No therapy has been found to be effective in the management of acute exacerbations of IPF. Often mechanical ventilation is required, but it is usually not successful, with a hospital mortality rate of up to three-fourths of patients. In those who survive, a recurrence of acute exacerbation is common and usually results in death at those times.

Lung transplantation should be considered for patients who experience progressive deterioration despite optimal medical management and who meet the established criteria (Chap. 266).

Nonspecific Interstitial Pneumonia

This condition defines a subgroup of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias that can be distinguished clinically and pathologically from UIP, DIP, AIP, and idiopathic BOOP. Importantly, many cases with this histopathologic pattern occur in the context of an underlying disorder, such as a connective tissue disease, drug-induced ILD, or chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Patients with idiopathic NSIP have clinical, serologic, radiographic, and pathologic characteristics highly suggestive of autoimmune disease and meet the criteria for undifferentiated connective tissue disease. Idiopathic NSIP is a subacute restrictive process with a presentation similar to that of IPF but usually at a younger age, most commonly in women who have never smoked. It is often associated with a febrile illness. HRCT shows bilateral, subpleural ground-glass opacities, often associated with lower lobe volume loss (Fig. 261-4). Patchy areas of airspace consolidation and reticular abnormalities may be present, but honeycombing is unusual. The key histopathologic feature of NSIP is the uniformity of interstitial involvement across the biopsy section, and this may be predominantly cellular or fibrosing. There is less temporal and spatial heterogeneity than in UIP, and little or no honeycombing is found. The cellular variant is rare. Unlike patients with IPF (UIP), the majority of patients with NSIP have a good prognosis (5-year mortality rate estimated at <15%), with most showing improvement after treatment with glucocorticoids, often used in combination with azathioprine.

Figure 261-4

 
 
 
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia. High-resolution CT through the lower lung shows volume loss with extensive ground-glass abnormality, reticular abnormality, and traction bronchiectasis. There is sparing on the lung immediately adjacent to the pleura. Histology showed a combination of inflammation and mild fibrosis.
 
 

Acute Interstitial Pneumonia (Hamman-Rich Syndrome)

AIP is a rare, fulminant form of lung injury characterized histologically by diffuse alveolar damage on lung biopsy. Most patients are older than 40 years. AIP is similar in presentation to the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Chap. 268) and probably corresponds to the subset of cases of idiopathic ARDS. The onset is usually abrupt in a previously healthy individual. A prodromal illness, usually lasting 7每14 days before presentation, is common. Fever, cough, and dyspnea are common manifestations at presentation. Diffuse, bilateral, air-space opacification is present on the chest radiograph. HRCT scans show bilateral, patchy, symmetric areas of ground-glass attenuation. Bilateral areas of air-space consolidation also may be present. A predominantly subpleural distribution may be seen. The diagnosis of AIP requires the presence of a clinical syndrome of idiopathic ARDS and pathologic confirmation of organizing diffuse alveolar damage. Therefore, lung biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis. Most patients have moderate to severe hypoxemia and develop respiratory failure. Mechanical ventilation is often required. The mortality rate is high (>60%), with most patients dying within 6 months of presentation. Recurrences have been reported. However, those who recover often have substantial improvement in lung function. The main treatment is supportive. It is not clear that glucocorticoid therapy is effective.

Cryptogenic Organizing Pneumonia

COP is a clinicopathologic syndrome of unknown etiology. The onset is usually in the fifth and sixth decades. The presentation may be of a flulike illness with cough, fever, malaise, fatigue, and weight loss. Inspiratory crackles are frequently present on examination. Pulmonary function is usually impaired, with a restrictive defect and arterial hypoxemia being most common. The roentgenographic manifestations are distinctive, revealing bilateral, patchy, or diffuse alveolar opacities in the presence of normal lung volume. Recurrent and migratory pulmonary opacities are common. HRCT shows areas of air-space consolidation, ground-glass opacities, small nodular opacities, and bronchial wall thickening and dilation. These changes occur more frequently in the periphery of the lung and in the lower lung zone. Lung biopsy shows granulation tissue within small airways, alveolar ducts, and airspaces, with chronic inflammation in the surrounding alveoli. Glucocorticoid therapy induces clinical recovery in two-thirds of patients. A few patients have rapidly progressive courses with fatal outcomes despite glucocorticoids.

Foci of organizing pneumonia is a nonspecific reaction to lung injury found adjacent to other pathologic processes or as a component of other primary pulmonary disorders [e.g., cryptococcosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), lymphoma, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and eosinophilic pneumonia]. Consequently, the clinician must carefully reevaluate any patient found to have this histopathologic lesion to rule out these possibilities.

Ild Associated with Cigarette Smoking

Desquamative Interstitial Pneumonia

DIP is a rare but distinct clinical and pathologic entity found almost exclusively in cigarette smokers. The histologic hallmark is the extensive accumulation of macrophages in intraalveolar spaces with minimal interstitial fibrosis. The peak incidence is in the fourth and fifth decades. Most patients present with dyspnea and cough. Lung function testing shows a restrictive pattern with reduced DlCO and arterial hypoxemia. The chest x-ray and HRCT scans usually show diffuse hazy opacities. Clinical recognition of DIP is important because the process is associated with a better prognosis (10-year survival rate is ~70%) in response to smoking cessation. There are no clear data showing that systemic glucocorticoids are effective in DIP.

Respiratory Bronchiolitis每Associated Ild

Respiratory bronchiolitis每associated ILD (RB-ILD) is considered to be a subset of DIP and is characterized by the accumulation of macrophages in peribronchial alveoli. The clinical presentation is similar to that of DIP. Crackles are often heard on chest examination and occur throughout inspiration; sometimes they continue into expiration. The process is best seen on HRCT lung scanning, which shows bronchial wall thickening, centrilobularnodules, ground-glass opacity, and emphysema with air trapping. RB-ILD appears to resolve in most patients after smoking cessation alone.

Pulmonary Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis

This is a rare, smoking-related, diffuse lung disease that primarily affects men between the ages of 20 and 40 years. The clinical presentation varies from an asymptomatic state to a rapidly progressive condition. The most common clinical manifestations at presentation are cough, dyspnea, chest pain, weight loss, and fever. Pneumothorax occurs in ~25% of patients. Hemoptysis and diabetes insipidus are rare manifestations. The radiographic features vary with the stage of the disease. The combination of ill-defined or stellate nodules (2每10 mm in diameter), reticular or nodular opacities, bizarre-shaped upper zone cysts, preservation of lung volume, and sparing of the costophrenic angles are characteristics of PLCH. HRCT that reveals a combination of nodules and thin-walled cysts is virtually diagnostic of PLCH. The most common pulmonary function abnormality is a markedly reduced DlCO, although varying degrees of restrictive disease, airflow limitation, and diminished exercise capacity may occur. The characteristic histopathologic finding in PLCH is the presence of nodular sclerosing lesions that contain Langerhans cells accompanied by mixed cellular infiltrates. The nodular lesions are poorly defined and are distributed in a bronchiolocentric fashion with intervening normal lung parenchyma. As the disease advances, fibrosis progresses to involve adjacent lung tissue, leading to pericicatricial air space enlargement, which accounts for the concomitant cystic changes. Discontinuance of smoking is the key treatment, resulting in clinical improvement in one-third of patients. Most patients with PLCH experience persistent or progressive disease. Death due to respiratory failure occurs in ~10% of patients.

Ild Associated with Connective Tissue Disorders

Clinical findings suggestive of a CTD (musculoskeletal pain, weakness, fatigue, fever, joint pain or swelling, photosensitivity, Raynaud's phenomenon, pleuritis, dry eyes, dry mouth) should be sought in any patient with ILD. The CTDs may be difficult to rule out since the pulmonary manifestations occasionally precede the more typical systemic manifestations by months or years. The most common form of pulmonary involvement is the nonspecific interstitial pneumonia histopathologic pattern. However, determining the precise nature of lung involvement in most of the CTDs is difficult due to the high incidence of lung involvement caused by disease-associated complications of esophageal dysfunction (predisposing to aspiration and secondary infections), respiratory muscle weakness (atelectasis and secondary infections), complications of therapy (opportunistic infections), and associated malignancies.

Progressive Systemic Sclerosis (Pss)

(See also Chap. 323) Clinical evidence of ILD is present in about one-half of patients with PSS, and pathologic evidence in three-quarters. Pulmonary function tests show a restrictive pattern and impaired diffusing capacity, often before any clinical or radiographic evidence of lung disease appears. Pulmonary vascular disease alone or in association with pulmonary fibrosis, pleuritis, or recurrent aspiration pneumonitis is strikingly resistant to current modes of therapy.

Rheumatoid Arthritis

(See also Chap. 321) ILD associated with RA is more common in men. Pulmonary manifestations of RA include pleurisy with or without effusion, ILD in up to 20% of cases, necrobiotic nodules (nonpneumoconiotic intrapulmonary rheumatoid nodules) with or without cavities, Caplan's syndrome (rheumatoid pneumoconiosis), pulmonary hypertension secondary to rheumatoid pulmonary vasculitis, organized pneumonia, and upper airway obstruction due to crico-arytenoid arthritis.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

(See also Chap. 319) Lung disease is a common complication in SLE. Pleuritis with or without effusion is the most common pulmonary manifestation. Other lung manifestations include the following: atelectasis, diaphragmatic dysfunction with loss of lung volumes, pulmonary vascular disease, pulmonary hemorrhage, uremic pulmonary edema, infectious pneumonia, and organized pneumonia. Acute lupus pneumonitis characterized by pulmonary capillaritis leading to alveolar hemorrhage is uncommon. Chronic, progressive ILD is uncommon. It is important to exclude pulmonary infection. Although pleuropulmonary involvement may not be evident clinically, pulmonary function testing, particularly DlCO, reveals abnormalities in many patients with SLE.

Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis (PM/DM)

(See also Chap. 388) ILD occurs in ~10% of patients with PM/DM. Diffuse reticular or nodular opacities with or without an alveolar component occur radiographically, with a predilection for the lung bases. ILD occurs more commonly in the subgroup of patients with an anti-Jo-1 antibody that is directed to histidyl tRNA synthetase. Weakness of respiratory muscles contributing to aspiration pneumonia may be present. A rapidly progressive illness characterized by diffuse alveolar damage may cause respiratory failure.

Sj?gren's Syndrome

(See also Chap. 324) General dryness and lack of airway secretion cause the major problems of hoarseness, cough, and bronchitis. Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis, lymphoma, pseudolymphoma, bronchiolitis, and bronchiolitis obliterans are associated with this condition. Lung biopsy is frequently required to establish a precise pulmonary diagnosis. Glucocorticoids have been used in the management of ILD associated with Sj?gren's syndrome with some degree of clinical success.

Drug-Induced Ild

Many classes of drugs have the potential to induce diffuse ILD, which is manifest most commonly as exertional dyspnea and nonproductive cough. A detailed history of the medications taken by the patient is needed to identify drug-induced disease, including over-the-counter medications, oily nose drops, and petroleum products (mineral oil). In most cases, the pathogenesis is unknown, although a combination of direct toxic effects of the drug (or its metabolite) and indirect inflammatory and immunologic events are likely. The onset of the illness may be abrupt and fulminant, or it may be insidious, extending over weeks to months. The drug may have been taken for several years before a reaction develops (e.g., amiodarone), or the lung disease may occur weeks to years after the drug has been discontinued (e.g., carmustine). The extent and severity of disease are usually dose-related. Treatment consists of discontinuation of any possible offending drug and supportive care.

Eosinophilic Pneumonia

(See Chap. 255)

Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis (Pap)

Although not strictly an ILD, PAP resembles and is therefore considered with these conditions. It has been proposed that a defect in macrophage function, more specifically an impaired ability to process surfactant, may play a role in the pathogenesis of PAP. This diffuse disease is characterized by the accumulation of an amorphous, periodic acid每Schiff-positive lipoproteinaceous material in the distal air spaces. There is little or no lung inflammation, and the underlying lung architecture is preserved. PAP is an autoimmune disease with a neutralizing antibody of immunoglobulin G isotype against granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). These findings suggest that neutralization of GM-CSF bioactivity by the antibody causes dysfunction of alveolar macrophages, which results in reduced surfactant clearance. There are three distinct classes of PAP: acquired (>90% of all cases), congenital, and secondary. Congenital PAP is transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by homozygosity for a frameshift mutation (121ins2) in the SP-B gene, which leads to an unstable SP-B mRNA, reduced protein levels, and secondary disturbances of SP-C processing. Secondary PAP is rare among adults and is caused by lysinuric protein intolerance, acute silicosis and other inhalational syndromes, immunodeficiency disorders, and malignancies (almost exclusively of hematopoietic origin) and hematopoietic disorders.

The typical age of presentation is 30每50 years, and males predominate. The clinical presentation is usually insidious and is manifested by progressive exertional dyspnea, fatigue, weight loss, and low-grade fever. A nonproductive cough is common, but occasionally expectoration of "chunky" gelatinous material may occur. Polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and increased LDH levels are common. Markedly elevated serum levels of lung surfactant proteins A and D have been found in PAP. In the absence of any known secondary cause of PAP, an elevated serum anti-GM-CSF titer is highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of acquired PAP. BAL fluid levels of anti-GM-CSF antibodies correlate better with the severity of PAP than do serum titers. Radiographically, bilateral symmetric alveolar opacities located centrally in middle and lower lung zones result in a "bat-wing" distribution. HRCT shows a ground-glass opacification and thickened intralobular structures and interlobular septa. Whole-lung lavage(s) through a double-lumen endotracheal tube provides relief to many patients with dyspnea or progressive hypoxemia and also may provide long-term benefit.

Pulmonary Lymphangioleiomyomatosis

Pulmonary LAM is a rare condition that afflicts premenopausal women and should be suspected in young women with "emphysema," recurrent pneumothorax, or chylous pleural effusion. It is often misdiagnosed as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Pathologically, LAM is characterized by the proliferation of atypical pulmonary interstitial smooth muscle and cyst formation. The immature-appearing smooth-muscle cells react with monoclonal antibody HMB45, which recognizes a 100-kDa glycoprotein (gp100) originally found in human melanoma cells. Whites are affected much more commonly than are members of other racial groups. The disease accelerates during pregnancy and abates after oophorectomy. Common complaints at presentation are dyspnea, cough, and chest pain. Hemoptysis may be life threatening. Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in 50% of patients; it may be bilateral and necessitate pleurodesis. Meningioma and renal angiomyolipomas (hamartomas), characteristic findings in the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis, are also common in patients with LAM. Chylothorax, chyloperitoneum (chylous ascites), chyluria, and chylopericardium are other complications. Pulmonary function testing usually reveals an obstructive or mixed obstructive-restrictive pattern, and gas exchange is often abnormal. HRCT shows thin-walled cysts surrounded by normal lung without zonal predominance. Progression is common, with a median survival of 8每10 years from diagnosis. No therapy is of proven benefit in LAM. Progesterone (10 mg/d), luteinizing hormone每releasing hormone analogues, and sirolimus have been used. Oophorectomy is no longer recommended, and estrogen-containing drugs should be discontinued. Lung transplantation offers the only hope for cure despite reports of recurrent disease in the transplanted lung.

Syndromes of Ild with Diffuse Alveolar Hemorrhage

Injury to arterioles, venules, and the alveolar septal (alveolar wall or interstitial) capillaries can result in hemoptysis secondary to disruption of the alveolar-capillary basement membrane. This results in bleeding into the alveolar spaces, which characterizes DAH. Pulmonary capillaritis, characterized by a neutrophilic infiltration of the alveolar septae, may lead to necrosis of these structures, loss of capillary structural integrity, and the pouring of red blood cells into the alveolar space. Fibrinoid necrosis of the interstitium and red blood cells within the interstitial space are sometimes seen. Bland pulmonary hemorrhage (i.e., DAH without inflammation of the alveolar structures) also may occur.

The clinical onset is often abrupt, with cough, fever, and dyspnea. Severe respiratory distress requiring ventilatory support may be evident at initial presentation. Although hemoptysis is expected, it can be absent at the time of presentation in one-third of the cases. For patients without hemoptysis, new alveolar opacities, a falling hemoglobin level, and hemorrhagic BAL fluid point to the diagnosis. The chest radiograph is nonspecific and most commonly shows new patchy or diffuse alveolar opacities. Recurrent episodes of DAH may lead to pulmonary fibrosis, resulting in interstitial opacities on the chest radiograph. An elevated white blood cell count and falling hematocrit are common. Evidence for impaired renal function caused by focal segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis, usually with crescent formation, also may be present.

Varying degrees of hypoxemia may occur and are often severe enough to require ventilatory support. DlCO may be increased, resulting from the increased hemoglobin within the alveoli compartment. Evaluation of either lung or renal tissue by immunofluorescent techniques indicates an absence of immune complexes (pauci-immune) in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), microscopic polyangiitis pauci-immune glomerulonephritis, and isolated pulmonary capillaritis. A granular pattern is found in the CTDs, particularly SLE, and a characteristic linear deposition is found in Goodpasture's syndrome. Granular deposition of IgA-containing immune complexes is present in Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura.

The mainstay of therapy for the DAH associated with systemic vasculitis, CTD, Goodpasture's syndrome, and isolated pulmonary capillaritis is IV methylprednisolone, 0.5每2 g daily in divided doses for up to 5 days, followed by a gradual tapering, and then maintenance on an oral preparation. Prompt initiation of therapy is important, particularly in the face of renal insufficiency, since early initiation of therapy has the best chance of preserving renal function. The decision to start other immunosuppressive therapy (cyclophosphamide or azathioprine) acutely depends on the severity of illness.

Goodpasture's Syndrome

Pulmonary hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis are features in most patients with this disease. Autoantibodies to renal glomerular and lung alveolar basement membranes are present. This syndrome can present and recur as DAH without an associated glomerulonephritis. In such cases, circulating anti-basement membrane antibody is often absent, and the only way to establish the diagnosis is by demonstrating linear immunofluorescence in lung tissue. The underlying histology may be bland hemorrhage or DAH associated with capillaritis. Plasmapheresis has been recommended as adjunctive treatment.

Inherited Disorders Associated with Ild

Pulmonary opacities and respiratory symptoms typical of ILD can develop in related family members and in several inherited diseases. These diseases include the phakomatoses, tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis (Chap. 379), and the lysosomal storage diseases, Niemann-Pick disease and Gaucher disease (Chap. 361). The Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder in which granulomatous colitis and ILD may occur. It is characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, bleeding diathesis secondary to platelet dysfunction, and the accumulation of a chromolipid, lipofuscin material in cells of the reticuloendothelial system. A fibrotic pattern is found on lung biopsy, but the alveolar macrophages may contain cytoplasmic ceroid-like inclusions.

Ild with a Granulomatous Response in Lung Tissue or Vascular Structures

Inhalation of organic dusts, which cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or of inorganic dust, such as silica, which elicits a granulomatous inflammatory reaction leading to ILD, produces diseases of known etiology (Table 261-1) that are discussed in Chaps. 255 and 256. Sarcoidosis (Chap. 329) is prominent among granulomatous diseases of unknown cause in which ILD is an important feature.

Granulomatous Vasculitides

(See also Chap. 326) The granulomatous vasculitides are characterized by pulmonary angiitis (i.e., inflammation and necrosis of blood vessels) with associated granuloma formation (i.e., infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells, epithelioid cells, or histiocytes, with or without the presence of multinucleated giant cells, sometimes with tissue necrosis). The lungs are almost always involved, although any organ system may be affected. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) and allergic angiitis and granulomatosis (Churg-Strauss syndrome) primarily affect the lung but are associated with a systemic vasculitis as well. The granulomatous vasculitides generally limited to the lung include necrotizing sarcoid granulomatosis and benign lymphocytic angiitis and granulomatosis. Granulomatous infection and pulmonary angiitis due to irritating embolic material (e.g., talc) are important known causes of pulmonary vasculitis.

Lymphocytic Infiltrative Disorders

This group of disorders features lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration of the lung parenchyma. The disorders either are benign or can behave as low-grade lymphomas. Included are angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy with dysproteinemia, a rare lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by diffuse lymphadenopathy, fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and hemolytic anemia, with ILD in some cases.

Lymphocytic Interstitial Pneumonitis

This rare form of ILD occurs in adults, some of whom have an autoimmune disease or dysproteinemia. It has been reported in patients with Sj?gren's syndrome and HIV infection.

Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis

This multisystem disorder of unknown etiology is an angiocentric malignant (T cell) lymphoma characterized by a polymorphic lymphoid infiltrate, an angiitis, and granulomatosis. Although it may affect virtually any organ, it is most frequently characterized by pulmonary, skin, and central nervous system involvement.

Bronchocentric Granulomatosis

Rather than a specific clinical entity, bronchocentric granulomatosis (BG) is a descriptive histologic term that is applied to an uncommon and nonspecific pathologic response to a variety of airway injuries. There is evidence that BG is caused by a hypersensitivity reaction to Aspergillus or other fungi in patients with asthma. About one-half of the patients described have had chronic asthma with severe wheezing and peripheral blood eosinophilia. In patients with asthma, BG probably represents one pathologic manifestation of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis or another allergic mycosis. In patients without asthma, BG has been associated with RA and a variety of infections, including tuberculosis, echinococcosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and nocardiosis. The chest roentgenogram reveals irregularly shaped nodular or mass lesions with ill-defined margins, which are usually unilateral and solitary, with upper lobe predominance. Glucocorticoids are the treatment of choice, often with an excellent outcome, although recurrences may occur as therapy is tapered or stopped.

Global Considerations

Limited epidemiologic data exist describing the prevalence or incidence of ILD in the general population. With a few exceptions, e.g., sarcoidosis and certain occupational and environmental exposures, there appear to be no significant differences in the prevalence or incidence of ILD among various populations. For sarcoidosis, there are important environmental, racial, and genetic differences (Chap. 329).
 
Further Readings

American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Diagnosis and treatment: International consensus statement. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161:646, 2000 

 
〞〞〞: International multidisciplinary consensus classification of the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165:277, 2002 

 
COLLARD HR et al: Acute exacerbations of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:636, 2007[PMID: 17585107]  [Full Text]

 
EL-ZAMMAR OA, KATZENSTEIN AL: Pathological diagnosis of granulomatous lung disease: A review. Histopathology 50:289, 2007[PMID: 17257125]  [Full Text]

 
KINDER BW et al: Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia: Lung manifestation of undifferentiated connective tissue disease? Am J Respir Crit Care Med176:691, 2007[PMID: 17556720]  [Full Text]

 
KING TE JR: Clinical advances in the diagnosis and therapy of the interstitial lung diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 172:268, 2005[PMID: 15879420]  [Full Text]

 
KLINGSBERG RC et al: Current clinical trials for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respirology 15:19, 2010[PMID: 20199632]  [Full Text]

 
KOTTMANN RM et al: Determinants of initiation and progression of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respirology 14:917, 2009[PMID: 19740254]  [Full Text]

 
RAGHU G et al: An Official TS/ERS/JRS/ALAT Statement: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis: Evidence-based Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 183:788, 2011[PMID: 21471066]  [Full Text]

 
SELMAN M et al: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Prevailing and evolving hypotheses about its pathogenesis and implications for therapy. Ann Intern Med 134:136, 2001[PMID: 11177318]  [Full Text]

 
SEYMOUR JF, PRESNEILL JJ: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: Progress in the first 44 years. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 166:215, 2002[PMID: 12119235]  [Full Text]

 
TRAVIS WD et al: Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia: Report of an American Thoracic Society project. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 177:1338, 2008[PMID: 18388353]  [Full Text]

 
WELLS AU et al: Interstitial lung disease guideline. Thorax 63:v1, 2008 
 
 


^^
Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Thromboembolism: Introduction

Epidemiology

Venous thromboembolism (VTE), which encompasses deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), is one of the three major cardiovascular causes of death, along with myocardial infarction and stroke. VTE can cause death from PE or, among survivors, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension and postphlebitic syndrome. The U.S. Surgeon General has declared that PE is the most common preventable cause of death among hospitalized patients. Medicare has labeled PE and DVT occurring after total hip or knee replacement as unacceptable "never events" and no longer reimburses hospitals for the incremental expenses associated with treating this postoperative complication. New nonprofit organizations have begun educating health care professionals and the public on the medical consequences of VTE, along with risk factors and warning signs.

Between 100,000 and 300,000 VTE-related deaths occur annually in the United States. Mortality rates and length of hospital stay are decreasing as charges for hospital care increase. Approximately three of four symptomatic VTE events occur in the community, and the remainder are hospital acquired. Approximately 14 million (M) hospitalized patients are at moderate to high risk for VTE in the United States annually: 6 M major surgery patients and 8 M medical patients with comorbidities such as heart failure, cancer, and stroke. The prophylaxis paradigm has changed from voluntary to mandatory compliance with guidelines to prevent VTE among hospitalized patients. With an estimated 370,000 PE-related deaths annually in Europe, the projected direct cost for VTE-associated care exceeds 3 billion euros per year. In Japan, as the lifestyle becomes more westernized, the rate of VTE appears to be increasing.

The long-term effects of nonfatal VTE lower the quality of life. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension is often disabling and causes breathlessness. A late effect of DVT is postphlebitic syndrome, which eventually occurs in more than one-half of DVT patients. Postphlebitic syndrome (also known as postthrombotic syndrome or chronic venous insufficiency) is a delayed complication of DVT that causes the venous valves of the leg to become incompetent and exude interstitial fluid. Patients complain of chronic ankle or calf swelling and leg aching, especially after prolonged standing. In its most severe form, postphlebitic syndrome causes skin ulceration, especially in the medial malleolus of the leg. There is no effective medical therapy for this condition.

Prothrombotic States

Thrombophilia contributes to the risk of venous thrombosis. The two most common autosomal dominant genetic mutations are factor V Leiden, which causes resistance to activated protein C (which inactivates clotting factors V and VIII), and the prothrombin gene mutation, which increases the plasma prothrombin concentration (Chaps. 58 and 117). Antithrombin, protein C, and protein S are naturally occurring coagulation inhibitors. Deficiencies of these inhibitors are associated with VTE but are rare. Hyperhomocysteinemia can increase the risk of VTE, but lowering the homocysteine level with folate, vitamin B6, or vitamin B12 does not reduce the incidence of VTE. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is the most common acquired cause of thrombophilia and is associated with venous or arterial thrombosis. Other common predisposing factors include cancer, systemic arterial hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, long-haul air travel, air pollution, obesity, cigarette smoking, eating large amounts of red meat, oral contraceptives, pregnancy, postmenopausal hormone replacement, surgery, and trauma.

Pathophysiology

Embolization

When venous thrombi are dislodged from their site of formation, they embolize to the pulmonary arterial circulation or, paradoxically, to the arterial circulation through a patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect. About one-half of patients with pelvic vein thrombosis or proximal leg DVT develop PE, which is often asymptomatic. Isolated calf vein thrombi pose a much lower risk of PE but are the most common source of paradoxical embolism. These tiny thrombi can traverse a patent foramen ovale or atrial septal defect, unlike larger, more proximal leg thrombi. With increased use of chronic indwelling central venous catheters for hyperalimentation and chemotherapy, as well as more frequent insertion of permanent pacemakers and internal cardiac defibrillators, upper extremity venous thrombosis is becoming a more common problem. These thrombi rarely embolize and cause PE.

Physiology

The most common gas exchange abnormalities are hypoxemia (decreased arterial PO2) and an increased alveolar-arterial O2 tension gradient, which represents the inefficiency of O2 transfer across the lungs. Anatomic dead space increases because breathed gas does not enter gas exchange units of the lung. Physiologic dead space increases because ventilation to gas exchange units exceeds venous blood flow through the pulmonary capillaries.

Other pathophysiologic abnormalities include the following:

Increased pulmonary vascular resistance due to vascular obstruction or platelet secretion of vasoconstricting neurohumoral agents such as serotonin. Release of vasoactive mediators can produce ventilation-perfusion mismatching at sites remote from the embolus, thereby accounting for a potential discordance between a small PE and a large alveolar-arterial O2 gradient.

Impaired gas exchange due to increased alveolar dead space from vascular obstruction, hypoxemia from alveolar hypoventilation relative to perfusion in the nonobstructed lung, right-to-left shunting, and impaired carbon monoxide transfer due to loss of gas exchange surface.

Alveolar hyperventilation due to reflex stimulation of irritant receptors.

Increased airway resistance due to constriction of airways distal to the bronchi.

Decreased pulmonary compliance due to lung edema, lung hemorrhage, or loss of surfactant.

Right-Ventricular (Rv) Dysfunction

Progressive right heart failure is the usual cause of death from PE. As pulmonary vascular resistance increases, RV wall tension rises and causes further RV dilation and dysfunction. RV contraction continues even after the left ventricle (LV) starts relaxing at end-systole. Consequently, the interventricular septum bulges into and compresses an intrinsically normal left ventricle. Diastolic LV impairment develops, attributable to septal displacement, and results in reduced LV distensibility and impaired LV filling during diastole. Increased RV wall tension also compresses the right coronary artery, diminishes subendocardial perfusion, limits myocardial oxygen supply, and may precipitate myocardial ischemia and RV infarction. Underfilling of the LV may lead to a fall in left-ventricular cardiac output and systemic arterial pressure, thereby provoking myocardial ischemia due to compromised coronary artery perfusion. Eventually, circulatory collapse and death may ensue.

Diagnosis

Clinical Evaluation

VTE mimics other illnesses, and PE is known as "the Great Masquerader," making diagnosis difficult. Occult PE is especially hard to detect when it occurs concomitantly with overt heart failure or pneumonia. In such circumstances, clinical improvement often fails to occur despite standard medical treatment of the concomitant illness. This scenario is a clinical clue to the possible coexistence of PE.

For patients who have DVT, the most common history is a cramp in the lower calf that persists for several days and becomes more uncomfortable as time progresses. For patients who have PE, the most common history is unexplained breathlessness.

In evaluating patients with possible VTE, the initial task is to decide on the clinical likelihood of the disorder. Patients with a low likelihood of DVT or a low-to-moderate likelihood of PE can undergo initial diagnostic evaluation with d-dimer testing alone (see "Blood tests") without obligatory imaging tests (Fig. 262-1). If the d-dimer is abnormally elevated, imaging tests are the next step.

Figure 262-1

 
 
 
How to decide whether diagnostic imaging is needed. For assessment of clinical likelihood, see Table 262-1.
 
 

Point score methods are useful for estimating the clinical likelihood of DVT and PE (Table 262-1).

Table 262-1 Clinical Decision Rules

 
 
Low Clinical Likelihood of DVT if Point Score Is Zero or Less; Moderate-Likelihood Score Is 1 to 2; High-Likelihood Score Is 3 or Greater  
Clinical Variable Score 
Active cancer 1 
Paralysis, paresis, or recent cast 1 
Bedridden for >3 days; major surgery <12 weeks 1 
Tenderness along distribution of deep veins 1 
Entire leg swelling 1 
Unilateral calf swelling >3 cm 1 
Pitting edema 1 
Collateral superficial nonvaricose veins 1 
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT 每2 
High Clinical Likelihood of PE if Point Score Exceeds 4  
Clinical Variable Score 
Signs and symptoms of DVT 3.0 
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE 3.0 
Heart rate >100/min 1.5 
Immobilization >3 days; surgery within 4 weeks 1.5 
Prior PE or DVT 1.5 
Hemoptysis 1.0 
Cancer 1.0 
 

 

Clinical Syndromes

The differential diagnosis is critical because not all leg pain is due to DVT and not all dyspnea is due to PE (Table 262-2). Sudden, severe calf discomfort suggests a ruptured Baker's cyst. Fever and chills usually herald cellulitis rather than DVT, though DVT may be present concomitantly. Physical findings, if present at all, may consist only of mild palpation discomfort in the lower calf. Massive DVT is much easier to recognize. The patient presents with marked thigh swelling and tenderness during palpation of the common femoral vein. In extreme cases, patients are unable to walk or may require a cane, crutches, or a walker.

Table 262-2 Differential Diagnosis

 
 
DVT

    Ruptured Baker's cyst

    Cellulitis

    Postphlebitic syndrome/venous insufficiency
 
PE

    Pneumonia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

    Congestive heart failure

    Pericarditis

    Pleurisy: "viral syndrome," costochondritis, musculoskeletal discomfort

    Rib fracture, pneumothorax

    Acute coronary syndrome

    Anxiety
 
 

 

If the leg is diffusely edematous, DVT is unlikely. More probable is an acute exacerbation of venous insufficiency due to postphlebitic syndrome. Upper extremity venous thrombosis may present with asymmetry in the supraclavicular fossa or in the circumference of the upper arms. A prominent superficial venous pattern may be evident on the anterior chest wall.

Patients with massive PE present with systemic arterial hypotension and usually have anatomically widespread thromboembolism. Those with moderate to large PE have RV hypokinesis on echocardiography but normal systemic arterial pressure. Patients with small to moderate PE have both normal right heart function and normal systemic arterial pressure. They have an excellent prognosis with adequate anticoagulation.

The presence of pulmonary infarction usually indicates a small PE but one that is exquisitely painful because it lodges peripherally, near the innervation of pleural nerves. Pleuritic chest pain is more common with small, peripheral emboli. However, larger, more central PEs can occur concomitantly with peripheral pulmonary infarction.

Nonthrombotic PE may be easily overlooked. Possible etiologies include fat embolism after pelvic or long bone fracture, tumor embolism, bone marrow, and air embolism. Cement embolism and bony fragment embolism can occur after total hip or knee replacement. Intravenous drug users may inject themselves with a wide array of substances that can embolize such as hair, talc, and cotton. Amniotic fluid embolism occurs when fetal membranes leak or tear at the placental margin. Pulmonary edema in this syndrome probably is due to alveolar capillary leakage.

Dyspnea is the most common symptom of PE, and tachypnea is the most common sign. Dyspnea, syncope, hypotension, or cyanosis indicates a massive PE, whereas pleuritic pain, cough, or hemoptysis often suggests a small embolism situated distally near the pleura. On physical examination, young and previously healthy individuals may appear anxious but otherwise seem well, even with an anatomically large PE. They may have dyspnea only with moderate exertion. They often lack "classic" signs such as tachycardia, low-grade fever, neck vein distention, and an accentuated pulmonic component of the second heart sound. Sometimes paradoxical bradycardia occurs.

Nonimaging Diagnostic Modalities

Nonimaging tests are best utilized in combination with clinical likelihood assessment of DVT or PE (Fig. 262-1).

Blood Tests

The quantitative plasma d-dimer enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) rises in the presence of DVT or PE because of the breakdown of fibrin by plasmin. Elevation of d-dimer indicates endogenous although often clinically ineffective thrombolysis. The sensitivity of the d-dimer is >80% for DVT (including isolated calf DVT) and >95% for PE. The d-dimer is less sensitive for DVT than for PE because the DVT thrombus size is smaller. The d-dimer is a useful "rule out" test. More than 95% of patients with a normal (<500 ng/mL) d-dimer do not have PE. The d-dimer assay is not specific. Levels increase in patients with myocardial infarction, pneumonia, sepsis, cancer, and the postoperative state and those in the second or third trimester of pregnancy. Therefore, d-dimer rarely has a useful role among hospitalized patients, because levels are frequently elevated due to systemic illness.

Contrary to classic teaching, arterial blood gases lack diagnostic utility for PE, even though both PO2 and Pco2 often decrease. Among patients suspected of having PE, neither the room air arterial PO2 nor calculation of the alveolar-arterial O2 gradient can reliably differentiate or triage patients who actually have PE at angiography.

Elevated Cardiac Biomarkers

Serum troponin and plasma heart-type fatty acid每binding protein levels increase because of RV microinfarction. Myocardial stretch results in elevation of brain natriuretic peptide or NT-pro-brain natriuretic peptide. Elevated cardiac biomarkers predict an increase in major complications and mortality from PE.

Electrocardiogram

The most frequently cited abnormality, in addition to sinus tachycardia, is the S1Q3T3 sign: an S wave in lead I, a Q wave in lead III, and an inverted T wave in lead III (Chap. 228). This finding is relatively specific but insensitive. Perhaps the most common abnormality is T-wave inversion in leads V1 to V4.

Noninvasive Imaging Modalities

Venous Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography of the deep venous system (Table 262-3) relies on loss of vein compressibility as the primary criterion for DVT. When a normal vein is imaged in cross-section, it readily collapses with gentle manual pressure from the ultrasound transducer. This creates the illusion of a "wink." With acute DVT, the vein loses its compressibility because of passive distention by acute thrombus. The diagnosis of acute DVT is even more secure when thrombus is directly visualized. It appears homogeneous and has low echogenicity (Fig. 262-2). The vein itself often appears mildly dilated, and collateral channels may be absent.

Table 262-3 Ultrasonography of the Deep Leg Veins

 
 
Criteria for Establishing the Diagnosis of Acute DVT  
Lack of vein compressibility (principal criterion)

Vein does not "wink" when gently compressed in cross-section

Failure to appose walls of vein due to passive distention
 
Direct Visualization of Thrombus  
Homogeneous

Low echogenicity
 
Abnormal Doppler Flow Dynamics  
Normal response: calf compression augments Doppler flow signal and confirms vein patency proximal and distal to Doppler

Abnormal response: flow blunted rather than augmented with calf compression
 
 

 
Figure 262-2

 
 
 
Acute popliteal DVT on venous ultrasound in a 56-year-old man receiving chemotherapy for lung cancer.
 
 

Venous flow dynamics can be examined with Doppler imaging. Normally, manual calf compression causes augmentation of the Doppler flow pattern. Loss of normal respiratory variation is caused by an obstructing DVT or by any obstructive process within the pelvis. Because DVT and PE are so closely related and are both treated with anticoagulation (see "Treatment Deep Venous Thrombosis") confirmed DVT is usually an adequate surrogate for PE. In contrast, a normal venous ultrasound does not exclude PE. About one-half of patients with PE have no imaging evidence of DVT, probably because the clot already has embolized to the lung or is in the pelvic veins, where ultrasonography is usually inadequate. In patients without DVT, the ultrasound examination may identify other reasons for leg discomfort, such as a Baker's cyst (also known as a popliteal or synovial cyst) or a hematoma. For patients with a technically poor or nondiagnostic venous ultrasound, one should consider alternative imaging modalities for DVT, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging.

Chest Roentgenography

A normal or nearly normal chest x-ray often occurs in PE. Well-established abnormalities include focal oligemia (Westermark's sign), a peripheral wedged-shaped density above the diaphragm (Hampton's hump), and an enlarged right descending pulmonary artery (Palla's sign).

Chest CT

Computed tomography of the chest with intravenous contrast is the principal imaging test for the diagnosis of PE (Fig. 262-3). Multidetector-row spiral CT acquires all chest images with 1 mm of resolution during a short breath hold. This generation of CT scanners can image small peripheral emboli. Sixth-order branches can be visualized with resolution superior to that of conventional invasive contrast pulmonary angiography. The CT scan also obtains excellent images of the RV and LV and can be used for risk stratification along with its use as a diagnostic tool. In patients with PE, RV enlargement on chest CT indicates an increased likelihood of death within the next 30 days compared with PE patients who have normal RV size on chest CT. When imaging is continued below the chest to the knee, pelvic and proximal leg DVT also can be diagnosed by CT scanning. In patients without PE, the lung parenchymal images may establish alternative diagnoses not apparent on chest x-ray that explain the presenting symptoms and signs such as pneumonia, emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary mass, and aortic pathology. Sometimes asymptomatic early-stage lung cancer is diagnosed incidentally.

Figure 262-3

 
 
 
Large bilateral proximal PE on a coronal chest CT image in a 54-year-old man with lung cancer and brain metastases. He had developed sudden onset of chest heaviness and shortness of breath while at home. There are filling defects in the main and segmental pulmonary arteries bilaterally (white arrows). Only the left upper lobe segmental artery is free of thrombus.
 
 

Lung Scanning

Lung scanning has become a second-line diagnostic test for PE, used mostly for patients who cannot tolerate intravenous contrast. Small particulate aggregates of albumin labeled with a gamma-emitting radionuclide are injected intravenously and are trapped in the pulmonary capillary bed. The perfusion scan defect indicates absent or decreased blood flow, possibly due to PE. Ventilation scans, obtained with a radiolabeled inhaled gas such as xenon or krypton, improve the specificity of the perfusion scan. Abnormal ventilation scans indicate abnormal nonventilated lung, thereby providing possible explanations for perfusion defects other than acute PE, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A high-probability scan for PE is defined as one that indicates two or more segmental perfusion defects in the presence of normal ventilation.

The diagnosis of PE is very unlikely in patients with normal and nearly normal scans but is about 90% certain in patients with high-probability scans. Unfortunately, most patients have nondiagnostic scans, and fewer than one-half of patients with angiographically confirmed PE have a high probability scan. As many as 40% of patients with high clinical suspicion for PE and "low-probability" scans do, in fact, have PE at angiography.

Magnetic Resonance (MR) (Contrast-Enhanced)

When ultrasound is equivocal, MR venography with gadolinium contrast is an excellent imaging modality to diagnose DVT. MR imaging should be considered for suspected VTE patients with renal insufficiency or contrast dye allergy. MR pulmonary angiography may detect large proximal PE but is not reliable for smaller segmental and subsegmental PE.

Echocardiography

Echocardiography is not a reliable diagnostic imaging tool for acute PE because most patients with PE have normal echocardiograms. However, echocardiography is a very useful diagnostic tool for detecting conditions that may mimic PE, such as acute myocardial infarction, pericardial tamponade, and aortic dissection.

Transthoracic echocardiography rarely images thrombus directly. The best-known indirect sign of PE on transthoracic echocardiography is McConnell's sign: hypokinesis of the RV free wall with normal motion of the RV apex.

One should consider transesophageal echocardiography when CT scanning facilities are not available or when a patient has renal failure or severe contrast allergy that precludes administration of contrast despite premedication with high-dose steroids. This imaging modality can identify saddle, right main, or left main PE.

Invasive Diagnostic Modalities

Pulmonary Angiography

Chest CT with contrast (see above) has virtually replaced invasive pulmonary angiography as a diagnostic test. Invasive catheter-based diagnostic testing is reserved for patients with technically unsatisfactory chest CTs and those in whom an interventional procedure such as catheter-directed thrombolysis or embolectomy is planned. A definitive diagnosis of PE depends on visualization of an intraluminal filling defect in more than one projection. Secondary signs of PE include abrupt occlusion ("cut-off") of vessels, segmental oligemia or avascularity, a prolonged arterial phase with slow filling, and tortuous, tapering peripheral vessels.

Contrast Phlebography

Venous ultrasonography has virtually replaced contrast phlebography as the diagnostic test for suspected DVT.

Integrated Diagnostic Approach

An integrated diagnostic approach (Fig. 262-1) streamlines the workup of suspected DVT and PE (Fig. 262-4).

Figure 262-4

 
 
 
Imaging tests to diagnose DVT and PE.
 
 

Treatment: Deep Venous Thrombosis

Primary Therapy versus Secondary Prevention

Primary therapy consists of clot dissolution with thrombolysis or removal of PE by embolectomy. Anticoagulation with heparin and warfarin or placement of an inferior vena caval filter constitutes secondary prevention of recurrent PE rather than primary therapy.

Risk Stratification

Rapid and accurate risk stratification is critical in determining the optimal treatment strategy. The presence of hemodynamic instability, RV dysfunction, RV enlargement, or elevation of the troponin level due to RV microinfarction can identify high-risk patients. RV hypokinesis on echocardiography, RV enlargement on chest CT, and troponin elevation predict an increased mortality rate from PE.

Primary therapy should be reserved for patients at high risk of an adverse clinical outcome. When RV function remains normal in a hemodynamically stable patient, a good clinical outcome is highly likely with anticoagulation alone (Fig. 262-5).

Figure 262-5

 
 
 
Acute management of pulmonary thromboembolism. RV, right ventricular; IVC, inferior vena cava.
 
 

Treatment: Massive Pulmonary Embolism

Anticoagulation

Anticoagulation is the foundation for successful treatment of DVT and PE (Table 262-4). Immediately effective anticoagulation is initiated with a parenteral drug: unfractionated heparin (UFH), low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), or fondaparinux. One should use a direct thrombin inhibitor〞argatroban, lepirudin, or bivalirudin〞in patients with proven or suspected heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Parenteral agents are continued as a transition or "bridge" to stable, long-term anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist (exclusively warfarin in the United States). Warfarin requires 5每7 days to achieve a therapeutic effect. During that period, one should overlap the parenteral and oral agents. After 5每7 days of anticoagulation, residual thrombus begins to endothelialize in the vein or pulmonary artery. However, anticoagulants do not directly dissolve thrombus that already exists.

Table 262-4 Anticoagulation of VTE

 
 
Immediate Parenteral Anticoagulation  
Unfractionated heparin, bolus and continuous infusion, to achieve aPTT two to three times the upper limit of the laboratory normal, or 
Enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily with normal renal function, or Dalteparin 200 U/kg once daily or 100 U/kg twice daily, with normal renal function, or

Tinzaparin 175 U/kg once daily with normal renal function, or

Fondaparinux weight-based once daily; adjust for impaired renal function
 
Warfarin Anticoagulation  
Usual start dose is 5 mg

Titrate to INR, target 2.0每3.0

Continue parenteral anticoagulation for a minimum of 5 days and until two sequential INR values, at least 1 day apart, achieve the target INR range.
 
 

 

Unfractionated Heparin

Unfractionated heparin anticoagulates by binding to and accelerating the activity of antithrombin, thus preventing additional thrombus formation and permitting endogenous fibrinolytic mechanisms to lyse clot that already has formed. UFH is dosed to achieve a target activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) that is 2每3 times the upper limit of the laboratory normal. This is usually equivalent to an aPTT of 60每80 s. For UFH, a typical intravenous bolus is 5000每10,000 units followed by a continuous infusion of 1000每1500 U/h. Nomograms based on a patient's weight may assist in adjusting the dose of heparin. The most popular nomogram utilizes an initial bolus of 80 U/kg, followed by an initial infusion rate of 18/kg per h.

The major advantage of UFH is its short half-life. This is especially useful if the patient may undergo an invasive procedure such as embolectomy. The major disadvantage of UFH is that achieving the target aPTT is empirical and may require repeated blood sampling and heparin dose adjustment every 4每6 hours. Furthermore, patients are at risk of developing heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

Low-Molecular-Weight Heparins

These fragments of UFH exhibit less binding to plasma proteins and endothelial cells and consequently have greater bioavailability, a more predictable dose response, and a longer half-life than does UFH. No monitoring or dose adjustment is needed unless the patient is markedly obese or has chronic kidney disease.

There are two commonly used LMWH preparations in the United States: enoxaparin and dalteparin. Enoxaparin is approved as a bridge to warfarin for VTE. Dalteparin is also approved as monotherapy without warfarin for symptomatic VTE patients with cancer in a dose of 200 U/kg once daily for 30 days, followed by 150 U/kg once daily for months 2每6. These weight-adjusted LMWH doses must be reduced in patients with chronic kidney disease because the kidneys metabolize LMWH.

Fondaparinux

Fondaparinux, an anti-Xa pentasaccharide, is administered as a once-daily subcutaneous injection in a prefilled syringe to treat DVT and PE as a "bridge" to warfarin. No laboratory monitoring is required. Patients weighing <50 kg receive 5 mg, patients weighing 50每100 kg receive 7.5 mg, and patients weighing >100 kg receive 10 mg. Fondaparinux is synthesized in a laboratory and, unlike LMWH or UFH, is not derived from animal products. It does not cause heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. The dose must be adjusted downward for patients with renal dysfunction because the kidneys metabolize the drug.

Warfarin

This vitamin K antagonist prevents carboxylation activation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X. The full effect of warfarin requires at least 5 days even if the prothrombin time, used for monitoring, becomes elevated more rapidly. If warfarin is initiated as monotherapy during an acute thrombotic illness, a paradoxical exacerbation of hypercoagulability can increase the likelihood of thrombosis rather than prevent it. Overlapping UFH, LMWH, or fondaparinux with warfarin for at least 5 days can counteract the early procoagulant effect of unopposed warfarin.

Warfarin Dosing

In an average-size adult, warfarin usually is initiated in a dose of 5 mg. Doses of 7.5 or 10 mg can be used in obese or large-framed young patients who are otherwise healthy. Patients who are malnourished or who have received prolonged courses of antibiotics are probably deficient in vitamin K and should receive smaller initial doses of warfarin, such as 2.5 mg. The prothrombin time is standardized by calculating the international normalized ratio (INR), which assesses the anticoagulant effect of warfarin (Chap. 58). The target INR is usually 2.5, with a range of 2.0每3.0.

The warfarin dose is titrated to achieve the target INR. Proper dosing is difficult because hundreds of drug-drug and drug-food interactions affect warfarin metabolism. Variables such as increasing age and comorbidities such as systemic illness reduce the required warfarin dose. Pharmacogenomics may provide more precise initial dosing of warfarin, especially for patients who require unusually large or small doses. CYP2C9 variant alleles impair the hydroxylation of S-warfarin, thereby lowering the dose requirement. Variants in the gene encoding the vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) can predict whether patients require low, moderate, or high warfarin doses. Nevertheless, more than half of warfarin dosing variability is caused by clinical factors such as age, sex, weight, concomitant drugs, and comorbid illnesses.

Nomograms have been developed (www.warfarindosing.org) to help clinicians initiate warfarin dosing based on clinical information and, if available, pharmacogenetic data. However, most practitioners utilize empirical dosing with an "educated guess." Centralized anticoagulation clinics have improved the efficacy and safety of warfarin dosing. Patients maintain a therapeutic INR more often if they self-monitor their INR with a home point-of-care fingerstick machine rather than obtaining a coagulation laboratory INR. The patient subgroup with the best results self-adjusts warfarin doses as well as self-tests INRs.

Novel Anticoagulants

Novel oral anticoagulants are administered in a fixed dose, establish effective anticoagulation within hours of administration, require no laboratory coagulation monitoring, and have few of the drug-drug or drug-food interactions that make warfarin so difficult to dose. Rivaroxaban, a factor Xa inhibitor, and dabigatran, a direct thrombin inhibitor, are approved in Canada and Europe for prevention of VTE after total hip and total knee replacement. In a large-scale trial of acute VTE treatment, dabigatran was as effective as warfarin and had less nonmajor bleeding. Because of these drugs' rapid onset of action and relatively short half-life compared with warfarin, "bridging" with a parenteral anticoagulant is not required.

Complications of Anticoagulants

The most serious adverse effect of anticoagulation is hemorrhage. For life-threatening or intracranial hemorrhage due to heparin or LMWH, protamine sulfate can be administered. There is no specific antidote for bleeding caused by fondaparinux or direct thrombin inhibitors.

Major bleeding from warfarin is best managed with prothrombin complex concentrate. With non-life threatening bleeding in a patient who can tolerate large volume, fresh-frozen plasma can be used. Recombinant human coagulation factor VIIa (rFVIIa), FDA-approved for bleeding in hemophiliacs, is an off-label option to manage catastrophic bleeding from warfarin. For minor bleeding or to manage an excessively high INR in the absence of bleeding, oral vitamin K may be administered.

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) and osteopenia are far less common with LMWH than with UFH. Thrombosis due to HIT should be managed with a direct thrombin inhibitor: argatroban for patients with renal insufficiency and lepirudin for patients with hepatic failure. In the setting of percutaneous coronary intervention, one should administer bivalirudin.

During pregnancy, warfarin should be avoided if possible because of warfarin embryopathy, which is most common with exposure during the sixth through twelfth week of gestation. However, women can take warfarin postpartum and breast-feed safely. Warfarin can also be administered safely during the second trimester.

Duration of Hospital Stay

Acute DVT patients with good family and social support, permanent residence, telephone service, and no hearing or language impairment often can be managed as outpatients. They, a family member, or a visiting nurse must administer a parenteral anticoagulant. Warfarin dosing can be titrated to the INR and adjusted on an outpatient basis.

Acute PE patients, who traditionally have required hospital stays of 5每7 days for intravenous heparin as a "bridge" to warfarin, can be considered for abbreviated hospitalization if they have a reliable support system at home and an excellent prognosis. Criteria include clinical stability, absence of chest pain or shortness of breath, normal RV size and function, and normal levels of cardiac biomarkers.

Duration of Anticoagulation

Patients with PE after surgery, trauma, or estrogen exposure (from oral contraceptives, pregnancy, or postmenopausal therapy) ordinarily have a low rate of recurrence after 3每6 months of anticoagulation. For DVT isolated to an upper extremity or calf that has been provoked by surgery, trauma, estrogen, or an indwelling central venous catheter or pacemaker, 3 months of anticoagulation suffices. For provoked proximal leg DVT or PE, 3 to 6 months of anticoagulation is sufficient. For patients with cancer and VTE, the consensus is to prescribe 3每6 months of LMWH as monotherapy without warfarin and to continue anticoagulation indefinitely unless the patient is rendered cancer-free. However, there is uncertainty whether subsequent anticoagulation should continue with LMWH or whether the patient should be placed on warfarin.

Among patients with idiopathic, unprovoked VTE, the recurrence rate is high after cessation of anticoagulation. VTE that occurs during long-haul air travel is considered unprovoked. It appears that unprovoked VTE is often a chronic illness, with latent periods between flares of recurrent episodes. American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines recommend considering anticoagulation for an indefinite duration with a target INR between 2 and 3 for patients with idiopathic VTE. An alternative approach after the first 6 months of anticoagulation is to reduce the intensity of anticoagulation and to lower the target INR range to between 1.5 and 2.

Counterintuitively, the presence of genetic mutations such as heterozygous factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene mutation do not appear to increase the risk of recurrent VTE. However, patients with moderate or high levels of anticardiolipin antibodies probably warrant indefinite-duration anticoagulation even if the initial VTE was provoked by trauma or surgery.

Inferior Vena Caval (IVC) Filters

The two principal indications for insertion of an IVC filter are (1) active bleeding that precludes anticoagulation and (2) recurrent venous thrombosis despite intensive anticoagulation. Prevention of recurrent PE in patients with right heart failure who are not candidates for fibrinolysis and prophylaxis of extremely high-risk patients are "softer" indications for filter placement. The filter itself may fail by permitting the passage of small- to medium-size clots. Large thrombi may embolize to the pulmonary arteries via collateral veins that develop. A more common complication is caval thrombosis with marked bilateral leg swelling.

Paradoxically, by providing a nidus for clot formation, filters double the DVT rate over the ensuing 2 years after placement. Retrievable filters can now be placed for patients with an anticipated temporary bleeding disorder or for patients at temporary high risk of PE, such as individuals undergoing bariatric surgery who have a prior history of perioperative PE. The filters can be retrieved up to several months after insertion unless thrombus forms and is trapped within the filter. The retrievable filter becomes permanent if it remains in place or if, for technical reasons such as rapid endothelialization, it cannot be removed.

Maintaining Adequate Circulation

For patients with massive PE and hypotension, one should administer 500 mL of normal saline. Additional fluid should be infused with extreme caution because excessive fluid administration exacerbates RV wall stress, causes more profound RV ischemia, and worsens LV compliance and filling by causing further interventricular septal shift toward the LV. Dopamine and dobutamine are first-line inotropic agents for treatment of PE-related shock. There should be a low threshold for initiating these pressors. Often, a "trial-and-error" approach works best; one should consider norepinephrine, vasopressin, or phenylephrine.

Fibrinolysis

Successful fibrinolytic therapy rapidly reverses right heart failure and may result in a lower rate of death and recurrent PE by (1) dissolving much of the anatomically obstructing pulmonary arterial thrombus, (2) preventing the continued release of serotonin and other neurohumoral factors that exacerbate pulmonary hypertension, and (3) lysing much of the source of the thrombus in the pelvic or deep leg veins, thereby decreasing the likelihood of recurrent PE.

The preferred fibrinolytic regimen is 100 mg of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) administered as a continuous peripheral intravenous infusion over 2 hours. Patients appear to respond to fibrinolysis for up to 14 days after the PE has occurred.

Contraindications to fibrinolysis include intracranial disease, recent surgery, and trauma. The overall major bleeding rate is about 10%, including a 1每3% risk of intracranial hemorrhage. Careful screening of patients for contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy (Chap. 245) is the best way to minimize bleeding risk.

The only FDA-approved indication for PE fibrinolysis is massive PE. For patients with preserved systolic blood pressure and submassive PE with moderate or severe RV dysfunction, ACCP guidelines for fibrinolysis recommend individual patient risk assessment of the thrombotic burden versus the bleeding risk.

Pulmonary Embolectomy

The risk of intracranial hemorrhage with fibrinolysis has prompted a renaissance of surgical embolectomy. More prompt referral before the onset of irreversible cardiogenic shock and multisystem organ failure and improved surgical technique have resulted in a high survival rate. A possible alternative to open surgical embolectomy is catheter embolectomy. New-generation catheters are under development.

Pulmonary Thromboendarterectomy

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension occurs in 2每4% of acute PE patients. Therefore, PE patients who have initial pulmonary hypertension (usually diagnosed with Doppler echocardiography) should be followed up at about 6 weeks with a repeat echocardiogram to determine whether pulmonary arterial pressure has normalized. Patients impaired by dyspnea due to chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension should be considered for pulmonary thromboendarterectomy, which, if successful, can markedly reduce, and at times even cure, pulmonary hypertension (Chap. 250). The operation requires median sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass, deep hypothermia, and periods of hypothermic circulatory arrest. The mortality rate at experienced centers is approximately 5%.

Emotional Support

Patients with VTE may feel overwhelmed when they learn that they are susceptible to recurrent PE or DVT. They worry about the health of their families and the genetic implications of their illness. Those who are advised to discontinue warfarin after 3每6 months of therapy may feel especially vulnerable. At Brigham and Woman's Hospital a physican-nurse每facilitated PE support group has been maintained for patients and has met monthly for more than 15 years.

Prevention of Postphlebitic Syndrome

Daily use of below-knee 30- to 40-mmHg vascular compression stockings will halve the rate of developing postphlebitic syndrome. These stockings should be prescribed as soon as DVT is diagnosed and should be fitted carefully to maximize their benefit. When patients are in bed, the stockings need not be worn.

Prevention of VTE

Prophylaxis (Table 262-5) is of paramount importance because VTE is difficult to detect and poses a profound medical and economic burden. Computerized reminder systems can increase the use of preventive measures and at Brigham and Women's Hospital have reduced the symptomatic VTE rate by more than 40%. Patients who have undergone total hip or knee replacement or cancer surgery will benefit from extended pharmacologic prophylaxis for a total of 4每5 weeks.

Table 262-5 Prevention of Venous Thromboembolism

 
 
Condition Prophylaxis Strategy 
High-risk general surgery Mini-UFH or LMWH 
Thoracic surgery Mini-UFH + IPC 
Cancer surgery, including gynecologic cancer surgery LMWH, consider 1 month of prophylaxis 
Total hip replacement, total knee replacement, hip fracture surgery LMWH, fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide) 2.5 mg SC, once daily, or (except for total knee replacement) warfarin (target INR 2.5); rivaroxaban or dalteparin in countries where it is approved 
Neurosurgery IPC 
Neurosurgery for brain tumor Mini-UFH or LMWH, + IPC + predischarge venous ultrasonography 
Benign gynecologic surgery Mini-UFH 
Medically ill patients Mini-UFH or LMWH 
Anticoagulation contraindicated IPC 
Long-haul air travel Consider LMWH for very high-risk patients 
 


Note: Mini-UFH, mini-dose unfractionated heparin, 5000 units subcutaneously twice (less effective) or three times daily (more effective); LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin, typically in the United States enoxaparin, 40 mg once daily, or dalteparin, 2500 or 5000 units once daily; IPC, intermittent pneumatic compression devices.
 
 
Further Readings

AGENO W et al: Cardiovascular risk factors and venous thromboembolism: A meta-analysis. Circulation 117:93, 2008[PMID: 18086925]  [Full Text]

 
DALEN JE: Should patients with venous thromboembolism be screened for thrombophilia? Am J Med 121:458, 2008[PMID: 18501222]  [Full Text]

 
DENNIS M et al: Effectiveness of thigh-length graduated compression stockings to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis after stroke (CLOTS trial 1): A multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 373:1958, 2009[PMID: 19477503]  [Full Text]

 
DENTALI F et al: Meta-analysis: Anticoagulant prophylaxis to prevent symptomatic venous thromboembolism in hospitalized medical patients. Ann Intern Med 146:278, 2007[PMID: 17310052]  [Full Text]

 
GEERTS WH et al: Prevention of venous thromboembolism: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th ed). Chest 133:381S, 2008 

 
GLYNN RJ et al: A randomized trial of rosuvastatin in the prevention of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med 360:1851, 2009[PMID: 19329822]  [Full Text]

 
KUCHER N, GOLDHABER SZ: Management of massive pulmonary embolism. Circulation 112:e28, 2005 

 
PARK B et al: Recent trends in clinical outcomes and resource utilization for pulmonary embolism in the United States: Findings from the nationwide inpatient sample. Chest 136: 983, 2009[PMID: 19525357]  [Full Text]

 
PIAZZA G, GOLDHABER SZ: The acutely decompensated right ventricle. Chest 128:1836, 2005[PMID: 16162794]  [Full Text]

 
PRANDONI P et al: Residual thrombosis on ultrasonography to guide the duration of anticoagulation in patients with deep venous thrombosis: A randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 150:577, 2009[PMID: 19414836]  [Full Text]

 
SPENCER FA et al: Venous thromboembolism in the outpatient setting. Arch Intern Med 167:1471, 2007[PMID: 17646600]  [Full Text]

 
TODD JL, TAPSON VF: Thrombolytic therapy for acute pulmonary embolism: A critical appraisal. Chest 135:1321, 2009[PMID: 19420199]  [Full Text]

 
TORBICKI A et al: Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Acute Pulmonary Embolism of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 29:2276, 2008[PMID: 18757870]  [Full Text]

 
VAN BELLE A et al: Effectiveness of managing suspected pulmonary embolism using an algorithm combining clinical probability, D-dimer testing, and computed tomography. JAMA 295:172, 2006 
 
 

^^
Disorders of the Pleura

Pleural Effusion

The pleural space lies between the lung and the chest wall and normally contains a very thin layer of fluid, which serves as a coupling system. A pleural effusion is present when there is an excess quantity of fluid in the pleural space.

Etiology

Pleural fluid accumulates when pleural fluid formation exceeds pleural fluid absorption. Normally, fluid enters the pleural space from the capillaries in the parietal pleura and is removed via the lymphatics in the parietal pleura. Fluid also can enter the pleural space from the interstitial spaces of the lung via the visceral pleura or from the peritoneal cavity via small holes in the diaphragm. The lymphatics have the capacity to absorb 20 times more fluid than is formed normally. Accordingly, a pleural effusion may develop when there is excess pleural fluid formation (from the interstitial spaces of the lung, the parietal pleura, or the peritoneal cavity) or when there is decreased fluid removal by the lymphatics.

Diagnostic Approach

When a patient is found to have a pleural effusion, an effort should be made to determine the cause (Fig. 263-1). The first step is to determine whether the effusion is a transudate or an exudate. A transudative pleural effusion occurs when systemic factors that influence the formation and absorption of pleural fluid are altered. The leading causes of transudative pleural effusions in the United States are left-ventricular failure and cirrhosis. An exudative pleural effusion occurs when local factors that influence the formation and absorption of pleural fluid are altered. The leading causes of exudative pleural effusions are bacterial pneumonia, malignancy, viral infection, and pulmonary embolism. The primary reason for making this differentiation is that additional diagnostic procedures are indicated with exudative effusions to define the cause of the local disease.

Figure 263-1

 
 
 
Approach to the diagnosis of pleural effusions. CHF, congestive heart failure; CT, computed tomography; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PE, pulmonary embolism; TB, tuberculosis; PF, pleural fluid.
 
 

Transudative and exudative pleural effusions are distinguished by measuring the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and protein levels in the pleural fluid. Exudative pleural effusions meet at least one of the following criteria, whereas transudative pleural effusions meet none:

Pleural fluid protein/serum protein >0.5

Pleural fluid LDH/serum LDH >0.6

Pleural fluid LDH more than two-thirds normal upper limit for serum

These criteria misidentify ~25% of transudates as exudates. If one or more of the exudative criteria are met and the patient is clinically thought to have a condition producing a transudative effusion, the difference between the protein levels in the serum and the pleural fluid should be measured. If this gradient is >31 g/L (3.1 g/dL), the exudative categorization by these criteria can be ignored because almost all such patients have a transudative pleural effusion.

If a patient has an exudative pleural effusion, the following tests on the pleural fluid should be obtained: description of the appearance of the fluid, glucose level, differential cell count, microbiologic studies, and cytology.

Effusion Due to Heart Failure

The most common cause of pleural effusion is left-ventricular failure. The effusion occurs because the increased amounts of fluid in the lung interstitial spaces exit in part across the visceral pleura; this overwhelms the capacity of the lymphatics in the parietal pleura to remove fluid. In patients with heart failure, a diagnostic thoracentesis should be performed if the effusions are not bilateral and comparable in size, if the patient is febrile, or if the patient has pleuritic chest pain to verify that the patient has a transudative effusion. Otherwise the patient's heart failure is treated. If the effusion persists despite therapy, a diagnostic thoracentesis should be performed. A pleural fluid N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) >1500 pg/mL is virtually diagnostic of an effusion secondary to congestive heart failure.

Hepatic Hydrothorax

Pleural effusions occur in ~5% of patients with cirrhosis and ascites. The predominant mechanism is the direct movement of peritoneal fluid through small openings in the diaphragm into the pleural space. The effusion is usually right-sided and frequently is large enough to produce severe dyspnea.

Parapneumonic Effusion

Parapneumonic effusions are associated with bacterial pneumonia, lung abscess, or bronchiectasis and are probably the most common cause of exudative pleural effusion in the United States. Empyema refers to a grossly purulent effusion.

Patients with aerobic bacterial pneumonia and pleural effusion present with an acute febrile illness consisting of chest pain, sputum production, and leukocytosis. Patients with anaerobic infections present with a subacute illness with weight loss, a brisk leukocytosis, mild anemia, and a history of some factor that predisposes them to aspiration.

The possibility of a parapneumonic effusion should be considered whenever a patient with bacterial pneumonia is initially evaluated. The presence of free pleural fluid can be demonstrated with a lateral decubitus radiograph, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, or ultrasound. If the free fluid separates the lung from the chest wall by >10 mm, a therapeutic thoracentesis should be performed. Factors indicating the likely need for a procedure more invasive than a thoracentesis (in increasing order of importance) include the following:

Loculated pleural fluid

Pleural fluid pH <7.20

Pleural fluid glucose <3.3 mmol/L (<60 mg/dL)

Positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural fluid

Presence of gross pus in the pleural space

If the fluid recurs after the initial therapeutic thoracentesis and if any of these characteristics are present, a repeat thoracentesis should be performed. If the fluid cannot be completely removed with the therapeutic thoracentesis, consideration should be given to inserting a chest tube and instilling a fibrinolytic agent (e.g., tissue plasminogen activator, 10 mg) or performing a thoracoscopy with the breakdown of adhesions. Decortication should be considered when these measures are ineffective.

Effusion Secondary to Malignancy

Malignant pleural effusions secondary to metastatic disease are the second most common type of exudative pleural effusion. The three tumors that cause ~75% of all malignant pleural effusions are lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, and lymphoma. Most patients complain of dyspnea, which is frequently out of proportion to the size of the effusion. The pleural fluid is an exudate, and its glucose level may be reduced if the tumor burden in the pleural space is high.

The diagnosis usually is made via cytology of the pleural fluid. If the initial cytologic examination is negative, thoracoscopy is the best next procedure if malignancy is strongly suspected. At the time of thoracoscopy, a procedure such as pleural abrasion should be performed to effect a pleurodesis. An alternative to thoracoscopy is CT- or ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of pleural thickening or nodules. Patients with a malignant pleural effusion are treated symptomatically for the most part, since the presence of the effusion indicates disseminated disease and most malignancies associated with pleural effusion are not curable with chemotherapy. The only symptom that can be attributed to the effusion itself is dyspnea. If the patient's lifestyle is compromised by dyspnea and if the dyspnea is relieved with a therapeutic thoracentesis, one of the following procedures should be considered: (1) insertion of a small indwelling catheter or (2) tube thoracostomy with the instillation of a sclerosing agent such as doxycycline, 500 mg.

Mesothelioma

Malignant mesotheliomas are primary tumors that arise from the mesothelial cells that line the pleural cavities; most are related to asbestos exposure. Patients with mesothelioma present with chest pain and shortness of breath. The chest radiograph reveals a pleural effusion, generalized pleural thickening, and a shrunken hemithorax. Thoracoscopy or open pleural biopsy is usually necessary to establish the diagnosis. Chest pain should be treated with opiates, and shortness of breath with oxygen and/or opiates.

Effusion Secondary to Pulmonary Embolization

The diagnosis most commonly overlooked in the differential diagnosis of a patient with an undiagnosed pleural effusion is pulmonary embolism. Dyspnea is the most common symptom. The pleural fluid is almost always an exudate. The diagnosis is established by spiral CT scan or pulmonary arteriography (Chap. 262). Treatment of a patient with a pleural effusion secondary to pulmonary embolism is the same as it is for any patient with pulmonary emboli. If the pleural effusion increases in size after anticoagulation, the patient probably has recurrent emboli or another complication, such as a hemothorax or a pleural infection.

Tuberculous Pleuritis

(See also Chap. 165) In many parts of the world, the most common cause of an exudative pleural effusion is tuberculosis (TB), but tuberculous effusions are relatively uncommon in the United States. Tuberculous pleural effusions usually are associated with primary TB and are thought to be due primarily to a hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculous protein in the pleural space. Patients with tuberculous pleuritis present with fever, weight loss, dyspnea, and/or pleuritic chest pain. The pleural fluid is an exudate with predominantly small lymphocytes. The diagnosis is established by demonstrating high levels of TB markers in the pleural fluid (adenosine deaminase >40 IU/L or interferon  >140 pg/mL). Alternatively, the diagnosis can be established by culture of the pleural fluid, needle biopsy of the pleura, or thoracoscopy. The recommended treatments of pleural and pulmonary TB are identical (Chap. 165).

Effusion Secondary to Viral Infection

Viral infections are probably responsible for a sizable percentage of undiagnosed exudative pleural effusions. In many series, no diagnosis is established for ~20% of exudative effusions, and these effusions resolve spontaneously with no long-term residua. The importance of these effusions is that one should not be too aggressive in trying to establish a diagnosis for the undiagnosed effusion, particularly if the patient is improving clinically.

Chylothorax

A chylothorax occurs when the thoracic duct is disrupted and chyle accumulates in the pleural space. The most common cause of chylothorax is trauma (most frequently thoracic surgery), but it also may result from tumors in the mediastinum. Patients with chylothorax present with dyspnea, and a large pleural effusion is present on the chest radiograph. Thoracentesis reveals milky fluid, and biochemical analysis reveals a triglyceride level that exceeds 1.2 mmol/L (110 mg/dL). Patients with chylothorax and no obvious trauma should have a lymphangiogram and a mediastinal CT scan to assess the mediastinum for lymph nodes. The treatment of choice for most chylothoraxes is insertion of a chest tube plus the administration of octreotide. If these modalities fail, a pleuroperitoneal shunt should be placed unless the patient has chylous ascites. An alternative treatment is ligation of the thoracic duct. Patients with chylothoraxes should not undergo prolonged tube thoracostomy with chest tube drainage because this will lead to malnutrition and immunologic incompetence.

Hemothorax

When a diagnostic thoracentesis reveals bloody pleural fluid, a hematocrit should be obtained on the pleural fluid. If the hematocrit is more than one-half of that in the peripheral blood, the patient is considered to have a hemothorax. Most hemothoraxes are the result of trauma; other causes include rupture of a blood vessel or tumor. Most patients with hemothorax should be treated with tube thoracostomy, which allows continuous quantification of bleeding. If the bleeding emanates from a laceration of the pleura, apposition of the two pleural surfaces is likely to stop the bleeding. If the pleural hemorrhage exceeds 200 mL/h, consideration should be given to thoracoscopy or thoracotomy.

Miscellaneous Causes of Pleural Effusion

There are many other causes of pleural effusion (Table 263-1). Key features of some of these conditions are as follows: If the pleural fluid amylase level is elevated, the diagnosis of esophageal rupture or pancreatic disease is likely. If the patient is febrile, has predominantly polymorphonuclear cells in the pleural fluid, and has no pulmonary parenchymal abnormalities, an intraabdominal abscess should be considered.

Table 263-1 Differential Diagnoses of Pleural Effusions

 
 
Transudative Pleural Effusions    
1. Congestive heart failure

2. Cirrhosis

3. Pulmonary embolization

4. Nephrotic syndrome
 5. Peritoneal dialysis

6. Superior vena cava obstruction

7. Myxedema

8. Urinothorax
 
Exudative Pleural Effusions    
1. Neoplastic diseases

    a. Metastatic disease

    b. Mesothelioma

2. Infectious diseases

    a. Bacterial infections

    b. Tuberculosis

    c. Fungal infections

    d. Viral infections

    e. Parasitic infections

3. Pulmonary embolization

4. Gastrointestinal disease

    a. Esophageal perforation

    b. Pancreatic disease

    c. Intraabdominal abscesses

    d. Diaphragmatic hernia

    e. After abdominal surgery

    f. Endoscopic variceal sclerotherapy

    g. After liver transplant

5. Collagen vascular diseases

    a. Rheumatoid pleuritis

    b. Systemic lupus erythematosus

    c. Drug-induced lupus

    d. Immunoblastic lymphadenopathy

    e. Sj?gren's syndrome

    f. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)

    g. Churg-Strauss syndrome
 6. Post-coronary artery bypass surgery

7. Asbestos exposure

8. Sarcoidosis

9. Uremia

10. Meigs' syndrome

11. Yellow nail syndrome

12. Drug-induced pleural disease

    a. Nitrofurantoin

    b. Dantrolene

    c. Methysergide

    d. Bromocriptine

    e. Procarbazine

    f. Amiodarone

    g. Dasatinib

13. Trapped lung

14. Radiation therapy

15. Post-cardiac injury syndrome

16. Hemothorax

17. Iatrogenic injury

18. Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome

19. Pericardial disease

20. Chylothorax
 
 

 

The diagnosis of an asbestos pleural effusion is one of exclusion. Benign ovarian tumors can produce ascites and a pleural effusion (Meigs' syndrome), as can the ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Several drugs can cause pleural effusion; the associated fluid is usually eosinophilic. Pleural effusions commonly occur after coronary artery bypass surgery. Effusions occurring within the first weeks are typically left-sided and bloody, with large numbers of eosinophils, and respond to one or two therapeutic thoracenteses. Effusions occurring after the first few weeks are typically left-sided and clear yellow, with predominantly small lymphocytes, and tend to recur. Other medical manipulations that induce pleural effusions include abdominal surgery; radiation therapy; liver, lung, or heart transplantation; and the intravascular insertion of central lines.

Pneumothorax

Pneumothorax is the presence of gas in the pleural space. A spontaneous pneumothorax is one that occurs without antecedent trauma to the thorax. A primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the absence of underlying lung disease, whereas a secondary pneumothorax occurs in its presence. A traumatic pneumothorax results from penetrating or nonpenetrating chest injuries. A tension pneumothorax is a pneumothorax in which the pressure in the pleural space is positive throughout the respiratory cycle.

Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax

Primary spontaneous pneumothoraxes are usually due to rupture of apical pleural blebs, small cystic spaces that lie within or immediately under the visceral pleura. Primary spontaneous pneumothoraxes occur almost exclusively in smokers; this suggests that these patients have subclinical lung disease. Approximately one-half of patients with an initial primary spontaneous pneumothorax will have a recurrence. The initial recommended treatment for primary spontaneous pneumothorax is simple aspiration. If the lung does not expand with aspiration or if the patient has a recurrent pneumothorax, thoracoscopy with stapling of blebs and pleural abrasion is indicated. Thoracoscopy or thoracotomy with pleural abrasion is almost 100% successful in preventing recurrences.

Secondary Pneumothorax

Most secondary pneumothoraxes are due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but pneumothoraxes have been reported with virtually every lung disease. Pneumothorax in patients with lung disease is more life-threatening than it is in normal individuals because of the lack of pulmonary reserve in these patients. Nearly all patients with secondary pneumothorax should be treated with tube thoracostomy. Most should also be treated with thoracoscopy or thoracotomy with the stapling of blebs and pleural abrasion. If the patient is not a good operative candidate or refuses surgery, pleurodesis should be attempted by the intrapleural injection of a sclerosing agent such as doxycycline.

Traumatic Pneumothorax

Traumatic pneumothoraxes can result from both penetrating and nonpenetrating chest trauma. Traumatic pneumothoraxes should be treated with tube thoracostomy unless they are very small. If a hemopneumothorax is present, one chest tube should be placed in the superior part of the hemithorax to evacuate the air and another should be placed in the inferior part of the hemithorax to remove the blood. Iatrogenic pneumothorax is a type of traumatic pneumothorax that is becoming more common. The leading causes are transthoracic needle aspiration, thoracentesis, and the insertion of central intravenous catheters. Most can be managed with supplemental oxygen or aspiration, but if these measures are unsuccessful, a tube thoracostomy should be performed.

Tension Pneumothorax

This condition usually occurs during mechanical ventilation or resuscitative efforts. The positive pleural pressure is life-threatening both because ventilation is severely compromised and because the positive pressure is transmitted to the mediastinum, resulting in decreased venous return to the heart and reduced cardiac output.

Difficulty in ventilation during resuscitation or high peak inspiratory pressures during mechanical ventilation strongly suggest the diagnosis. The diagnosis is made by physical examination showing an enlarged hemithorax with no breath sounds, hyperresonance to percussion, and shift of the mediastinum to the contralateral side. Tension pneumothorax must be treated as a medical emergency. If the tension in the pleural space is not relieved, the patient is likely to die from inadequate cardiac output or marked hypoxemia. A large-bore needle should be inserted into the pleural space through the second anterior intercostal space. If large amounts of gas escape from the needle after insertion, the diagnosis is confirmed. The needle should be left in place until a thoracostomy tube can be inserted.
 
Disorders of the Mediastinum

The mediastinum is the region between the pleural sacs. It is separated into three compartments. The anterior mediastinum extends from the sternum anteriorly to the pericardium and brachiocephalic vessels posteriorly. It contains the thymus gland, the anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, and the internal mammary arteries and veins. The middle mediastinum lies between the anterior and posterior mediastina and contains the heart; the ascending and transverse arches of the aorta; the venae cavae; the brachiocephalic arteries and veins; the phrenic nerves; the trachea, the main bronchi, and their contiguous lymph nodes; and the pulmonary arteries and veins. The posterior mediastinum is bounded by the pericardium and trachea anteriorly and the vertebral column posteriorly. It contains the descending thoracic aorta, the esophagus, the thoracic duct, the azygos and hemiazygos veins, and the posterior group of mediastinal lymph nodes.

Mediastinal Masses

The first step in evaluating a mediastinal mass is to place it in one of the three mediastinal compartments, since each has different characteristic lesions. The most common lesions in the anterior mediastinum are thymomas, lymphomas, teratomatous neoplasms, and thyroid masses. The most common masses in the middle mediastinum are vascular masses, lymph node enlargement from metastases or granulomatous disease, and pleuropericardial and bronchogenic cysts. In the posterior mediastinum, neurogenic tumors, meningoceles, meningomyeloceles, gastroenteric cysts, and esophageal diverticula are commonly found.

CT scanning is the most valuable imaging technique for evaluating mediastinal masses and is the only imaging technique that should be done in most instances. Barium studies of the gastrointestinal tract are indicated in many patients with posterior mediastinal lesions, since hernias, diverticula, and achalasia are readily diagnosed in this manner. An 131I scan can efficiently establish the diagnosis of intrathoracic goiter.

A definite diagnosis can be obtained with mediastinoscopy or anterior mediastinotomy in many patients with masses in the anterior or middle mediastinal compartments. A diagnosis can be established without thoracotomy via percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy or endoscopic transesophageal or endobronchial ultrasound-guided biopsy of mediastinal masses in most cases. Alternative ways to establish the diagnosis are video-assisted thoracoscopy, mediastinoscopy, and mediastinotomy. In many cases the diagnosis can be established and the mediastinal mass removed with video-assisted thoracoscopy.

Acute Mediastinitis

Most cases of acute mediastinitis either are due to esophageal perforation or occur after median sternotomy for cardiac surgery. Patients with esophageal rupture are acutely ill with chest pain and dyspnea due to the mediastinal infection. The esophageal rupture can occur spontaneously or as a complication of esophagoscopy or the insertion of a Blakemore tube. Appropriate treatment consists of exploration of the mediastinum with primary repair of the esophageal tear and drainage of the pleural space and the mediastinum.

The incidence of mediastinitis after median sternotomy is 0.4每5.0%. Patients most commonly present with wound drainage. Other presentations include sepsis and a widened mediastinum. The diagnosis usually is established with mediastinal needle aspiration. Treatment includes immediate drainage, debridement, and parenteral antibiotic therapy, but the mortality rate still exceeds 20%.

Chronic Mediastinitis

The spectrum of chronic mediastinitis ranges from granulomatous inflammation of the lymph nodes in the mediastinum to fibrosing mediastinitis. Most cases are due to histoplasmosis or TB, but sarcoidosis, silicosis, and other fungal diseases are at times causative. Patients with granulomatous mediastinitis are usually asymptomatic. Those with fibrosing mediastinitis usually have signs of compression of a mediastinal structure such as the superior vena cava or large airways, phrenic or recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis, or obstruction of the pulmonary artery or proximal pulmonary veins. Other than antituberculous therapy for tuberculous mediastinitis, no medical or surgical therapy has been demonstrated to be effective for mediastinal fibrosis.

Pneumomediastinum

In this condition, there is gas in the interstices of the mediastinum. The three main causes are (1) alveolar rupture with dissection of air into the mediastinum, (2) perforation or rupture of the esophagus, trachea, or main bronchi, and (3) dissection of air from the neck or the abdomen into the mediastinum. Typically, there is severe substernal chest pain with or without radiation into the neck and arms. The physical examination usually reveals subcutaneous emphysema in the suprasternal notch and Hamman's sign, which is a crunching or clicking noise synchronous with the heartbeat and is best heard in the left lateral decubitus position. The diagnosis is confirmed with the chest radiograph. Usually no treatment is required, but the mediastinal air will be absorbed faster if the patient inspires high concentrations of oxygen. If mediastinal structures are compressed, the compression can be relieved with needle aspiration.
 
Further Readings

GILBERT S et al: Endobronchial ultrasound as a diagnostic tool in patients with mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Ann Thorac Surg 88:896, 2009[PMID: 19699917]  [Full Text]

 
LIGHT RW: Pleural effusion. N Engl J Med 346:1971, 2002[PMID: 12075059]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞: Pleural Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006 

 
PORCEL JM et al: Biomarkers of heart failure in pleural fluid. Chest 163:671, 2009. 

 
〞〞〞: Pleural fluid tests to identify complicated parapneumonic effusions. Curr Opin Pulm Med 16:357, 2010 

 
WARREN WH et al: Identification of clinical factors predicting Pleurx catheter removal in patients treated for malignant pleural effusion. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 33:89, 2008[PMID: 17983758]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Definition and Physiology

In health the arterial level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) is maintained between 37 and 43 mmHg at sea level. All disorders of ventilation result in abnormal measurements of PaCO2. This chapter reviews chronic ventilatory disorders that are reflected in abnormal PaCO2.

The continuous production of CO2 by cellular metabolism necessitates its efficient elimination by the respiratory system. The relationship between CO2 production and PaCO2 is described by the equation, PaCO2 = (k)(V.CO2)/V. A, where V. CO2 represents the carbon dioxide production, k is a constant and V. A is fresh gas alveolar ventilation (Chap. 252). V. A can be calculated as minute ventilation x(1-Vd/Vt), where the dead space fraction Vd/Vt represents the portion of a tidal breath that remains within the conducting airways at the conclusion of inspiration and does not, therefore, contribute to alveolar ventilation. As such, all disturbances of PaCO2 must reflect altered CO2 production, minute ventilation, or dead space fraction.

Diseases that alter V. CO2 are often acute (sepsis, burns, or pyrexia, for example), and their contribution to ventilatory abnormalities and/or respiratory failure is reviewed elsewhere. Chronic ventilatory disorders typically involve inappropriate levels of minute ventilation or increased dead space fraction. Characterization of these disorders requires a review of the normal respiratory cycle.

The spontaneous cycle of inspiration and expiration is automatically generated in the brainstem. Two groups of neurons located within the medulla are particularly important: the dorsal respiratory group (DRG) and the ventral respiratory column (VRC). These neurons have widespread projections, including the descending projections into the contralateral spinal cord, where they perform many functions. They initiate activity in the phrenic nerve/diaphragm, project to the upper airway muscle groups and spinal respiratory neurons, and innervate the intercostal and abdominal muscles that participate in normal respiration. The DRG acts as the initial integration site for many of the afferent nerves relaying information about the partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2), PaCO2, pH, and blood pressure from the carotid and aortic chemoreceptors and baroreceptors to the central nervous system (CNS). In addition, the vagus nerve relays information from stretch receptors and juxtapulmonary-capillary receptors in the lung parenchyma and chest wall to the DRG. The respiratory rhythm is generated within the VRC, as well as the more rostrally located parafacial respiratory group (pFRG), which is particularly important for the generation of active expiration. One particularly important area within the VRC is the so-called pre-B?tzinger complex. This area is responsible for the generation of various forms of inspiratory activity, and lesioning of the pre-B?tzinger complex leads to the complete cessation of breathing. The neural output of these medullary respiratory networks can be voluntarily suppressed or augmented by input from higher brain centers and the autonomic nervous system. During normal sleep there is an attenuated response to hypercapnia and hypoxemia resulting in mild nocturnal hypoventilation that corrects upon awakening.

Once neural input has been delivered to the respiratory pump muscles, normal gas exchange requires an adequate amount of respiratory muscle strength to overcome the elastic and resistive loads of the respiratory system (Fig. 264-1A, Chap. 252). In health, the strength of the respiratory muscles readily accomplishes this, and normal respiration continues indefinitely. Reduction in respiratory drive or neuromuscular competence or substantial increase in respiratory load can diminish minute ventilation, resulting in hypercapnia (Fig. 264-1B). Alternatively, if normal respiratory muscle strength is coupled with excessive respiratory drive, then alveolar hyperventilation ensues and leads to hypocapnia (Fig. 264-1C).

Figure 264-1

 
 
 
 
 
Examples of balance between respiratory system strength and load.A. Excess respiratory muscle strength in health. B. Load greater than strength. C. Increased drive with acceptable strength.
 
 
 
Hypoventilation

Clinical Features

Diseases that reduce minute ventilation or increase dead space fall into four major categories: parenchymal lung and chest wall disease, sleep disordered breathing, neuromuscular disease, and respiratory drive disorders (Fig. 264-1B). The clinical manifestations of hypoventilation syndromes are nonspecific (Table 264-1) and vary depending on the severity of hypoventilation, the rate at which hypercapnia develops, the degree of compensation for respiratory acidosis, and the underlying disorder. Patients with parenchymal lung or chest wall disease typically present with shortness of breath and diminished exercise tolerance. Episodes of increased dyspnea and sputum production are hallmarks of obstructive lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), whereas progressive dyspnea and cough are common in interstitial lung diseases. Excessive daytime somnolence, poor quality sleep, and snoring are common among patients with sleep-disordered breathing. Sleep disturbance and orthopnea are also described in neuromuscular disorders. As neuromuscular weakness progresses, the respiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, are placed at a mechanical disadvantage in the supine position due to the upward movement of the abdominal contents. New-onset orthopnea is frequently a sign of reduced respiratory muscle force generation. More commonly, however, extremity weakness or bulbar symptoms develop prior to sleep disturbance in neuromuscular diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or muscular dystrophy. Patients with respiratory drive disorders do not have symptoms distinguishable from other causes of chronic hypoventilation.

Table 264-1 Signs and Symptoms of Hypoventilation

 
 
Dyspnea during activities of daily living 
Orthopnea in diseases affecting diaphragm function 
Poor quality sleep 
Daytime hypersomnolence 
Early morning headaches 
Anxiety 
Impaired cough in neuromuscular diseases 
 

 

The clinical course of patients with chronic hypoventilation from neuromuscular or chest wall disease follows a characteristic sequence: An asymptomatic stage where daytime PaO2 and PaCO2 are normal, followed by nocturnal hypoventilation, initially during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and later in non-REM sleep. Finally, if vital capacity drops further, daytime hypercapnia develops. Symptoms can develop at any point along this time course and often depend on the pace of respiratory muscle functional decline. Regardless of cause, the hallmark of all alveolar hypoventilation syndromes is an increase in alveolar PCO2 (PACO2) and, therefore, in PaCO2. The resulting respiratory acidosis eventually leads to a compensatory increase in plasma bicarbonate concentration. The increase in PACO2 results in an obligatory decrease in PAO2, often resulting in hypoxemia. If severe, the hypoxemia manifests clinically as cyanosis and can stimulate erythropoiesis, thereby inducing secondary erythrocytosis. The combination of chronic hypoxemia and hypercapnia may also induce pulmonary vasoconstriction, leading eventually to pulmonary hypertension, right-ventricular hypertrophy, and right heart failure.

Diagnosis

Elevated plasma bicarbonate in the absence of volume depletion is suggestive of hypoventilation. An arterial blood gas demonstrating elevated PaCO2 with a normal pH confirms chronic alveolar hypoventilation. The subsequent evaluation to identify an etiology should initially focus on whether the patient has lung disease or chest wall abnormalities. Physical examination, imaging studies (chest x-ray and/or CT scan), and pulmonary function tests are sufficient to identify most lung/chest wall disorders leading to hypercapnia. If these evaluations are unrevealing, then the clinician should screen for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), the most frequent sleep disorder leading to chronic hypoventilation. Several screening tools have been developed to identify patients at risk for OSA. The Berlin Questionnaire has been validated in a primary care setting and identifies patients likely to have OSA. The Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the STOP-Bang questionnaire have not been validated in outpatient primary care settings but are quick and easy to use. The ESS measures daytime sleepiness, with a score of 10 identifying individuals who warrant additional investigation. The STOP-Bang survey has been used in preoperative clinics to identify patients at risk of having OSA. In this population, it has 93% sensitivity and 90% negative predictive value.

If the ventilatory apparatus (lung, airways, chest wall) is not responsible for chronic hypercapnia, then the focus should shift to respiratory drive and neuromuscular disorders. There is an attenuated increase in minute ventilation in response to elevated CO2 and/or low O2 in respiratory drive disorders. These diseases are difficult to diagnose and should be suspected when patients with hypercapnia are found to have normal respiratory muscle strength, normal pulmonary function, and normal alveolar-arterial PO2 difference. Hypoventilation is more marked during sleep in patients with respiratory drive defects, and polysomnography often reveals central apneas, hypopneas, or hypoventilation. Brain imaging (CT scan or MRI) can sometimes identify structural abnormalities in the pons or medulla that result in hypoventilation. Chronic narcotic use or significant hypothyroidism can depress the central respiratory drive and lead to chronic hypercapnia, as well.

Respiratory muscle weakness has to be profound before lung volumes are compromised and hypercapnia develops. Typically, physical examination reveals decreased strength in major muscle groups prior to the development of hypercapnia. Measurement of maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures or forced vital capacity (FVC) can be used to monitor for respiratory muscle involvement in diseases with progressive muscle weakness. These patients also have increased risk for sleep-disordered breathing, including hypopneas, central and obstructive apneas, and hypoxemia. Nighttime oximetry and polysomnography are helpful in better characterizing sleep disturbances in this patient population.

Treatment: Hypoventilation

Nocturnal noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) has been used successfully in the treatment of hypoventilation and apneas, both central and obstructive, in patients with neuromuscular and chest wall disorders. Nocturnal NIPPV has been shown to improve daytime hypercapnia, prolong survival, and improve health-related quality of life when daytime hypercapnia is documented. ALS guidelines recommend nocturnal NIPPV if symptoms of hypoventilation exist AND one of the following criteria is present: Paco2 45 mmHg; nocturnal oximetry demonstrates oxygen saturation 88% for 5 consecutive minutes; maximal inspiratory pressure <60 cm H2O; and FVC <50% predicted. However, at present there is inconclusive evidence to support preemptive nocturnal NIPPV use in all patients with neuromuscular and chest wall disorders who demonstrate nocturnal, but not daytime, hypercapnia. Nevertheless, at some point the institution of full-time ventilatory support with either pressure or volume-preset modes is required in progressive neuromuscular disorders. There is less evidence to direct the timing of this decision, but ventilatory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and chest infections related to ineffective cough are frequent triggers for the institution of full-time ventilatory support.

Treatment of chronic hypoventilation from lung or neuromuscular diseases should be directed at the underlying disorder. Pharmacologic agents that stimulate respiration, such as medroxyprogesterone and acetazolamide, have been poorly studied in chronic hypoventilation and should not replace treatment of the underlying disease process. Regardless of the cause, excessive metabolic alkalosis should be corrected, as plasma bicarbonate levels elevated out of proportion to the degree of chronic respiratory acidosis can result in additional hypoventilation. When indicated, administration of supplemental oxygen is effective in attenuating hypoxemia, polycythemia, and pulmonary hypertension.

Phrenic nerve or diaphragm pacing is a potential therapy for patients with hypoventilation from high cervical spinal cord lesions or respiratory drive disorders. Prior to surgical implantation, patients should have nerve conduction studies to ensure normal bilateral phrenic nerve function. Small case series suggest that effective diaphragmatic pacing can improve quality of life in these patients.
 
Hypoventilation Syndromes

Obesity Hypoventilation Syndrome

The diagnosis of obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) requires: body mass index (BMI) 30 kg/m2, sleep-disordered breathing and chronic daytime alveolar hypoventilation, defined as PaCO2 45 mmHg, and PaO2 < 70 mmHg in the absence of other known causes of hypercapnia. In almost 90% of cases, the sleep-disordered breathing is in the form of OSA. Several international studies in different populations confirm that the overall prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, defined by an apnea hypopnea index 5 AND daytime sleepiness, is approximately 3每4% in middle-aged men and 2% in middle-aged women. Thus, the population at risk for the development of OHS continues to rise as the worldwide obesity epidemic persists. Although no population-based prevalence studies of OHS have been performed, some estimates suggest there may be as many as 500,000 individuals with OHS in the United States.

Several studies suggest that severe obesity (BMI >40 kg/m2) and severe OSA apnea-hypopnea index [(AHI) >30 events per hour] are risk factors for the development of OHS. The pathogenesis of hypoventilation in these patients is multifactorial and incompletely understood. Defects in central respiratory drive have been demonstrated in OHS patients but often improve with treatment. This suggests central defects may not be the primary disturbance that leads to chronic hypercapnia. The treatment of OHS is similar to that for OSA: weight reduction and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy during sleep. CPAP improves daytime hypercapnia and hypoxemia in the majority of patients with OHS. There is not conclusive evidence to suggest that bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) is superior to CPAP. Bilevel positive airway pressure should be reserved for patients not able to tolerate high levels of CPAP support or patients that remain hypoxemic despite resolution of obstructive respiratory events.

Central Hypoventilation Syndrome

This syndrome can present later in life or in the neonatal period where it is often called Ondine's curse or congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS). Abnormalities in the gene encoding PHOX2b, a transcription factor with a role in neuronal development, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. Regardless of the age of onset, these patients have absent respiratory response to hypoxia or hypercapnia, mildly elevated PaCO2 while awake, and markedly elevated PaCO2 during non-REM sleep. Interestingly, these patients are able to augment their ventilation and "normalize" PaCO2 during exercise. These patients typically require NIPPV or mechanical ventilation as therapy and should be considered for phrenic nerve or diaphragmatic pacing at centers with experience performing these procedures.
 
Hyperventilation

Clinical Features

Hyperventilation is defined as ventilation in excess of metabolic requirements (CO2 production) leading to a reduction in PaCO2. The physiology of patients with chronic hyperventilation is poorly understood, and there is no typical clinical presentation. Symptoms can include dyspnea, paresthesias, tetany, headache, dizziness, visual disturbances, and atypical chest pain. Because symptoms can be so diverse, patients with chronic hyperventilation present to a variety of health care providers, including internists, neurologists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and pulmonologists.

It is helpful to think of hyperventilation as having initiating and sustaining factors. Some investigators believe that an initial event leads to increased alveolar ventilation and a drop in PaCO2 to 20 mmHg. The ensuing onset of chest pain, breathlessness, paresthesia, or altered consciousness can be alarming. The resultant increase in minute volume to relieve these acute symptoms only serves to exacerbate symptoms that are often misattributed by the patient and health care workers to cardiopulmonary disorders. An unrevealing evaluation for causes of these symptoms often results in patients being anxious and fearful of additional attacks. It is important to note that anxiety disorders and panic attacks are NOT synonymous with hyperventilation. Anxiety can be both an initiating and sustaining factor in the pathogenesis of chronic hyperventilation, but these are not necessary for the development of chronic hypocapnia.

Diagnosis

Respiratory symptoms associated with acute hyperventilation can be the initial manifestation of systemic illnesses such as diabetic ketoacidosis. Causes of acute hyperventilation need to be excluded before a diagnosis of chronic hyperventilation is considered. Arterial blood gas sampling that demonstrates a compensated respiratory alkalosis with a near-normal pH, low PaCO2 and low calculated bicarbonate are necessary to confirm chronic hyperventilation. Other causes of respiratory alkalosis, such as mild asthma, need to be diagnosed and treated before chronic hyperventilation can be considered. A high index of suspicion is required as increased minute ventilation can be difficult to detect on physical examination. Once chronic hyperventilation is established, a sustained 10% increase in alveolar ventilation is enough to perpetuate hypocapnia. This increase can be accomplished with subtle changes in the respiratory pattern, such as occasional sigh breaths or yawning two to three times per minute.

Treatment: Hyperventilation

There are few well-controlled treatment studies of chronic hyperventilation because of its diverse features and the lack of a universally accepted diagnostic process. Clinicians often spend considerable time identifying initiating factors, excluding alternative diagnoses and discussing the patient's concerns and fears. In some patients, reassurance and frank discussion about hyperventilation can be liberating. Identifying and eliminating habits that perpetuate hypocapnia, such as frequent yawning or sigh breathing, can be helpful. Some evidence suggests that breathing exercises and diaphragmatic retraining may be beneficial for some patients. The evidence for using medications to treat hyperventilation is scant. Beta-blockers may be helpful in patients with sympathetically mediated symptoms, such as palpitations and tremors.
 
Acknowledgment

We would like to acknowledge Eliot A Eliot A. Phillipson for earlier versions of this chapter and Jan-Marino Ramirez for his careful critique and helpful suggestions.
 
Further Readings

CHUNG F et al: STOP Questionnaire: A tool to screen patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 108:812, 2008[PMID: 18431116]  [Full Text]

 
DOUGLAS IS et al: Acute-on-chronic respiratory failure, in Principles of Critical Care, 3rd ed, JB Hall et al (eds). McGraw-Hill, 2005 

 
GARDNER WN: The pathophysiology of hyperventilation disorders. Chest 109:516, 1996[PMID: 8620731]  [Full Text]

 
LAFFEY JG, KAVANAGH BP: Hypocapnia. N Engl J Med 347:43, 2002[PMID: 12097540]  [Full Text]

 
LITTLETON SW, MOKHLESI B: The Pickwickian syndrome-obesity hypoventilation syndrome. Clin Chest Med 30:467, 2009[PMID: 19700045]  [Full Text]

 
SIMONDS AK: Recent advances in respiratory care for neuromuscular disease. Chest 130:1879, 2006[PMID: 17167012]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Obstructive Sleep Apnea

Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) is one of the most important medical conditions identified in the last 50 years. It is a major cause of morbidity, a significant cause of mortality, and the most common medical cause of daytime sleepiness. Central sleep apnea is a rare clinical problem. Other sleep disorders are discussed in Chap. 27.

Definition

OSAHS is defined as the coexistence of unexplained excessive daytime sleepiness with at least five obstructed breathing events (apnea or hypopnea) per hour of sleep (Table 265-1). This event threshold may have to be increased in the elderly. Apneas are defined in adults as breathing pauses lasting 10 s and hypopneas as events 10 s in which there is continued breathing but ventilation is reduced by at least 50% from the previous baseline during sleep. As a syndrome, OSAHS is the association of a clinical picture with specific abnormalities on testing; asymptomatic individuals with abnormal breathing during sleep should not be labeled as having OSAHS.

Table 265-1 Clinical Indicators in the Sleepy Patient

 
 
  OSAHS Narcolepsy IHS 
Age of onset (years) 35每60 10每30 10每30 
Cataplexy No Yes No 
Night sleep       
  Duration Normal Normal Long 
  Awakenings Occasional Frequent Rare 
  Snoring Yes, loud Occasional Occasional 
  Morning drunkenness Occasional Occasional Common 
Daytime naps       
  Frequency Usually few Many Few 
  Time of day Afternoon/evening Afternoon/evening Morning 
  Duration <1 h <1 h >1 h 
 


Note: Features suggesting obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS), narcolepsy, or idiopathic hypersomnolence (IHS).
 

Mechanism of Obstruction

Apneas and hypopneas are caused by the airway being sucked closed on inspiration during sleep. This occurs as the upper-airway dilating muscles〞like all striated muscles〞relax during sleep. In patients with OSAHS, the dilating muscles fail to oppose negative pressure within the airway during inspiration. The primary defect is not in the upper-airway muscles, which function normally in OSAHS patients when awake. These patients have narrow upper airways already during wakefulness, but when they are awake, their airway dilating muscles have increased activity, which ensures airway patency. However, during sleep, muscle tone falls and the airway narrows; snoring may commence before the airway occludes, and apnea results. Apneas and hypopneas terminate when the subject arouses, i.e., wakens briefly, from sleep. This arousal is sometimes too subtle to be seen on the electroencephalogram but may be detected by cardiac acceleration, blood pressure elevation, or increase in sympathetic tone. The arousal results in return of upper-airway dilating muscle tone, and thus airway patency is resumed.

Factors predisposing to OSAHS by narrowing the pharynx include obesity〞in Western populations around 50% of OSAHS patients have a body mass index (BMI) >30 kg/m2〞and shortening of the mandible and/or maxilla. This change in jaw shape may be subtle and can be familial. Hypothyroidism and acromegaly predispose to OSAHS by narrowing the upper airway with tissue infiltration. Other predisposing factors for OSAHS include male sex and middle age (40每65 years), myotonic dystrophy, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and, perhaps, smoking.

Epidemiology

OSAHS occurs in around 1每4% of middle-aged males and is about half as common in women. The syndrome also occurs in childhood〞usually associated with tonsil or adenoid enlargement〞and in the elderly, although the frequency is slightly lower in old age. Irregular breathing during sleep without daytime sleepiness is much more common, occurring in perhaps a quarter of the middle-aged male population. As these individuals are asymptomatic, they do not have OSAHS, but there is increasing epidemiologic evidence of an association of irregular breathing during sleep with increased vascular risk even in the nonsleepy.

Clinical Features

Randomized controlled treatment trials have shown that OSAHS causes daytime sleepiness; impaired vigilance, cognitive performance and driving; depression; disturbed sleep; and hypertension. Daytime sleepiness may range from mild to irresistible and can be indistinguishable from that in narcolepsy (Chap. 27). The sleepiness may cause inability to work effectively, damage interpersonal relationships, and prevent socializing. The somnolence is dangerous, with a three- to sixfold risk of road accidents. Experiments with normal subjects repeatedly aroused from sleep indicate that the sleepiness results, at least in part, from the repetitive sleep disruption associated with the breathing abnormality. Other symptoms include difficulty concentrating, unrefreshing nocturnal sleep, nocturnal choking, nocturia, and decreased libido. Partners report nightly loud snoring in all postures, which may be punctuated by the silence of apneas.

Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Events

OSAHS raises 24-h mean blood pressure. The increase is greater in those with recurrent nocturnal hypoxemia, is at least 4每5 mmHg, and may be as great as 10 mmHg in those with >20% arterial oxygen desaturations per hour of sleep. This rise probably results from a combination of surges in blood pressure accompanying each arousal at apnea/hypopnea termination and from the associated 24-h increases in sympathetic tone.

Epidemiologic data in normal populations indicate that this rise in blood pressure would increase the risk of myocardial infarction by around 20% and that of stroke by about 40%. Although there are no long-term randomized controlled trials to indicate whether this is true in OSAHS patients〞such studies would be unethical〞observational studies suggest an increase in cardiovascular and stroke risk in patients with untreated OSAHS. Furthermore, epidemiologic studies suggest increased vascular risk in normal subjects with raised apneas and hypopneas during sleep. Patients with recent stroke have a high frequency of apneas and hypopneas during sleep. These seem largely to be a consequence, not a cause, of the stroke and to decline over the weeks after the vascular event. There is no evidence that treating the apneas and hypopneas improves stroke outcome.

Diabetes Mellitus

The association of OSAHS with diabetes mellitus is not due only to the fact that obesity is common in both conditions. Increased apneas and hypopneas during sleep are associated with insulin resistance independent of obesity. In addition, uncontrolled trials suggest OSAHS can aggravate diabetes and that treating OSAHS in patients who also have diabetes decreases their insulin requirements.

Liver

Hepatic dysfunction also has been associated with irregular breathing during sleep. Non-alcohol-drinking subjects with apneas and hypopneas during sleep were found to have raised liver enzymes and more steatosis and fibrosis on liver biopsy, independent of body weight.

Anesthestic Risk

Patients with OSAHS are at increased risk perioperatively as their upper airways may obstruct during the recovery period or as a consequence of sedation. Patients whom anesthesiologists have difficulty intubating are much more likely to have irregular breathing during sleep. Anesthesiologists should thus take preoperative sleep histories and take the appropriate precautions with patients who might have OSAHS.

Differential Diagnosis

(See also Chap. 27) Causes of sleepiness that may need to be distinguished include (Table 265-1) the following:

Insufficient sleep: this usually can be diagnosed by history.
Shift work: a major cause of sleepiness, especially in those >40 years old.
Psychological psychiatric causes: depression is a major cause of sleepiness.
Drugs: both stimulant and sedative drugs can produce sleepiness.
Narcolepsy: around 50 times less common than OSAHS, narcolepsy is usually evident from childhood or the teens and is associated with cataplexy.
Idiopathic hypersomnolence: this is an ill-defined condition typified by long sleep duration and sleepiness.
Phase alteration syndromes: both the phase delay and the less common phase advancement syndromes are characterized by sleepiness at the appropriate time of day.
WHO to Refer for Diagnosis

Anyone whose troublesome sleepiness is not readily explained and rectified by considering the differential diagnosis above should be referred to a sleep specialist. The guideline the author uses for patients with troublesome sleepiness includes those with an Epworth Sleepiness Score >11 (Table 265-2) and also those whose sleepiness during work or driving poses problems. The Epworth Score is not a perfect measure for detecting sleepiness, as many whose lives are troubled by frequently fighting sleepiness but who never doze will correctly give themselves a low Epworth Score. The patient and his or her partner often give divergent scores for the patient's sleepiness, and in such cases the higher of the two scores should be used.

Table 265-2 Epworth Sleepiness Score

 
 
How often are you likely to doze off or fall asleep in the following situations, in contrast to feeling just tired? This refers to your usual way of life in recent times. Even if you have not done some of these things recently, try to work out how they would have affected you. Use the following scale to choose the most appropriate number for each situation:  
0 = would never doze  
1 = slight chance of dozing  
2 = moderate chance of dozing  
3 = high chance of dozing  
Sitting and reading ...... 
Watching TV ....... 
Sitting, inactive in a public place (e.g., a theater or a meeting) ...... 
As a passenger in a car for an hour without a break ...... 
Lying down to rest in the afternoon when circumstances permit ...... 
Sitting and talking to someone ...... 
Sitting quietly after lunch without alcohol ...... 
In a car, while stopped for a few minutes in traffic ...... 
TOTAL ...... 
 


Source: From MW Johns: Sleep 14:540, 1991.
 

Diagnosis

OSAHS requires lifelong treatment, and the diagnosis has to be made or excluded with certainty. This will hinge on obtaining a good sleep history from the patient and partner, with both completing sleep questionnaires, including the Epworth Sleepiness Score (Table 265-2). Physical examination must include assessment of obesity, jaw structure, the upper airway, blood pressure, and possible predisposing causes, including hypothyroidism and acromegaly (see above).

In those with appropriate clinical features, the diagnostic test must demonstrate recurrent breathing pauses during sleep. This may be full polysomnography with recording of multiple respiratory and neurophysiologic signals during sleep (Chap. 27). Increasingly, especially outside the United States, most diagnostic tests are "limited studies"〞recording respiratory and oxygenation patterns overnight without neurophysiologic recording. Such approaches in expert hands produce good patient outcomes and are cost-effective. It is sensible to use such limited sleep studies as the first-line diagnostic test and then allow positively diagnosed patients to proceed to treatment. A reasonable approach at present is for patients with troublesome sleepiness but negative limited studies to have polysomnography to exclude or confirm OSAHS.

Treatment: Obstructive Sleep Apnea

Whom to Treat

There is evidence from robust randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that treatment improves symptoms, sleepiness, driving, cognition, mood, quality of life, and blood pressure in patients who have an Epworth Score >11, troublesome sleepiness while driving or working, and >15 apneas + hypopneas per hour of sleep. For those with similar degrees of sleepiness and 5每15 events per hour of sleep, RCTs indicate improvements in symptoms, including subjective sleepiness, with less strong evidence indicating gains in cognition and quality of life. There is no evidence of blood pressure improvements in this group. There is no robust evidence that treating nonsleepy subjects improves their symptoms, function, or blood pressure, and so treatment cannot be advocated for this large group, although this may change with further RCTs or less obtrusive therapy.

How to Treat

All patients diagnosed with OSAHS should have the condition and its significance explained to them and their partners. This should be accompanied by written and/or Web-based information and a discussion of the implications of the local driving regulations. Rectifiable predispositions should be discussed; this often includes weight loss and alcohol reduction both to reduce weight and because alcohol acutely decreases upper-airway dilating muscle tone, thus predisposing to obstructed breathing. Sedative drugs, which also impair airway tone, should be carefully withdrawn.

Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)

CPAP therapy works by blowing the airway open during sleep, usually with pressures of 5每20 mmHg. CPAP has been shown in randomized placebo-controlled trials to improve breathing during sleep, sleep quality, sleepiness, blood pressure, vigilance, cognition, and driving ability as well as mood and quality of life in patients with OSAHS. However, this is obtrusive therapy, and care must be taken to explain the need for the treatment to patients and their partners and to intensively support patients on CPAP with telephone or Web support and regular follow-up. Initiation should include finding the most comfortable mask from the ranges of several manufacturers and trying the system for at least 30 min during the day to prepare for the overnight trial. An overnight monitored trial of CPAP is used to identify the pressure required to keep the patient's airway patent. The development of pressure-varying CPAP machines has made an in-lab CPAP night trial unnecessary, but treatment must be initiated in a supportive environment. Thereafter, patients can be treated with fixed-pressure CPAP machines set at the determined pressure or with a self-adjusting intelligent CPAP device. The main side effect of CPAP is airway drying, which can be countered by using an integral heated humidifier. CPAP use is imperfect, but around 94% of patients with severe OSAHS are still using their therapy after 5 years on objective monitoring.

Mandibular Repositioning Splint (Mrs)

Also called oral devices, MRSs work by holding the lower jaw and the tongue forward, thereby widening the pharyngeal airway. MRSs have been shown in RCTs to improve OSAHS patients' breathing during sleep, daytime somnolence, and blood pressure. As there are many devices with differing designs with unknown relative efficacy, these results cannot be generalized to all MRSs. Self-reports of the use of devices long-term suggest high dropout rates.

Surgery

Four forms of surgery have a role in OSAHS, although it must be remembered that these patients have a raised perioperative risk. Bariatric surgery can be curative in the morbidly obese. Tonsillectomy can be highly effective in children but rarely in adults. Tracheostomy is curative but rarely used because of the associated morbidity rate but should not be overlooked in severe cases. Jaw advancement surgery〞particularly maxillomandibular osteotomy〞is effective in those with retrognathia (posterior displacement of the mandible) and should be considered particularly in young and thin patients. There is no robust evidence that pharyngeal surgery, including uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (whether by scalpel, laser, or thermal techniques) helps OSAHS patients.

Drugs

Unfortunately, no drugs are clinically useful in the prevention or reduction of apneas and hypopneas. A marginal improvement in sleepiness in patients who remain sleepy despite CPAP can be produced by modafinil, but the clinical value is debatable and the financial cost is significant.

Choice of Treatment

CPAP and MRS are the two most widely used and best evidence-based therapies. Direct comparisons in RCTs indicate better outcomes with CPAP in terms of apneas and hypopneas, nocturnal oxygenation, symptoms, quality of life, mood, and vigilance. Adherence to CPAP is generally better than that to an MRS, and there is evidence that CPAP improves driving, whereas there are no such data on MRSs. Thus, CPAP is the current treatment of choice. However, MRSs are evidence-based second-line therapy in those who fail CPAP. In younger, thinner patients, maxillomandibular advancement should be considered.

Health Resources

Untreated OSAHS patients are heavy users of health care and dangerous drivers; they also work beneath their potential. Treatment of OSAHS with CPAP is cost-effective in terms of reducing the health care costs of associated illness and associated accidents.
 
Central Sleep Apnea

Central sleep apneas (CSAs) are respiratory pauses caused by lack of respiratory effort. They occur occasionally in normal subjects, particularly at sleep onset and in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and are transiently increased after ascent to altitude. Recurrent CSA is most commonly found in the presence of cardiac failure or neurologic disease, especially stroke. Spontaneous central sleep syndrome is rare and can be classified on the basis of the arterial Pco2.

Hypercapnic CSA occurs in conjunction with diminished ventilatory drive in Ondine's curse (central alveolar hypoventilation). Patients with normocapnic spontaneous CSA have a normal or low arterial Pco2 when awake, with brisk ventilatory responses to hypercapnia. This combination results in unstable ventilatory control, with subjects breathing close to or below their apneic threshold for Pco2 during sleep; this apneic tendency is compounded by cycles of arousal-induced hyperventilation, inducing further hypocapnia.

Clinical Features

Patients may present with sleep maintenance insomnia, which is relatively unusual in OSAHS. Daytime sleepiness may occur.

Investigation

Many apneas previously labeled central because of absent thoracoabdominal movement are actually obstructive, identification of movement being particularly difficult in the very obese. CSA can be identified with certainty only if either esophageal pressure or respiratory muscle electromyography is recorded and shown to be absent during the events.

Treatment: Central Sleep Apnea

Patients with underlying cardiac failure should have their failure treated appropriately. CPAP may improve outcome but is difficult to initiate and has not been shown to improve survival. Patients with spontaneous normocapnic CSA may be treated with acetazolamide. In a minority of patients, CPAP is effective, perhaps because in some patients with OSAHS, pharyngeal collapse initiates reflex inhibition of respiration, and this is prevented by CPAP. Oxygen and nocturnal nasal positive-pressure ventilation also may be tried.
 
Further Readings

BRADLEY TD et al: Obstructive sleep apnoea and its cardiovascular consequences. Lancet 373:82, 2009[PMID: 19101028]  [Full Text]

 
ECKERT DJ et al: Central sleep apnea: Pathophysiology and treatment. Chest 131:595, 2007[PMID: 17296668]  [Full Text]

 
ENGLEMAN HM et al: Randomized crossover trial of two treatments for sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome: Continuous positive airway pressure and mandibular repositioning splint. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165:855, 2002 

 
MARIN JM et al: Long-term cardiovascular outcomes in men with obstructive sleep apnoea-hypopnoea with or without treatment with continuous positive airway pressure: An observational study. Lancet 365:1046, 2005[PMID: 15781100]  [Full Text]

 
PACK AL et al: Risk factors for excessive sleepiness in older adults. Ann Neurol 59:893, 2006[PMID: 16718691]  [Full Text]

 
SOMERS VK et al: Sleep apnea and vascular disease. Circulation 118:1080, 2008[PMID: 18725495]  [Full Text]

 
SUNDARAM S et al: Surgery for obstructive sleep apnoea in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008, CD001004 

 
WHITELAW WA et al: Clinical usefulness of home oximetry compared with polysomnography for assessment of sleep apnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:188, 2005[PMID: 15486338]  [Full Text]

 
YAGGI HK et al: Obstructive sleep apnea as a risk factor for stroke and death. N Engl J Med 353:2034, 2005[PMID: 16282178]  [Full Text]

 
YOUNG T et al: Sleep disordered breathing and mortality: Eighteen-year follow-up of the Wisconsin sleep cohort. Sleep 31:1071, 2008[PMID: 18714778]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Lung Transplantation: Introduction

Lung transplantation is a therapeutic consideration for many patients with nonmalignant end-stage lung disease, and it prolongs survival and improves quality of life in appropriately selected recipients. Since 1985 more than 25,000 procedures have been recorded worldwide, and ~2200 transplants have been reported annually in recent years.

Indications

The indications span the gamut of lung diseases. The most common indications in the last few years have been chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ~30%; idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), ~30%; cystic fibrosis (CF), ~15%; 1-antitrypsin deficiency emphysema, ~3%; and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH), ~2%. Other diseases have accounted for the balance of primary indications, and retransplantation has accounted for ~4% of procedures.

Recipient Selection

Transplantation should be considered when other therapeutic options have been exhausted and when the patient's prognosis is expected to improve as a result of the procedure. Survival rates after transplantation can be compared with predictive indices for the patient's disease, but each patient's clinical course must be integrated into the assessment, too. Moreover, quality of life is a primary motive for transplantation for many patients, and the prospect of improved quality-adjusted survival is often attractive even if the survival advantage itself may be marginal.

Disease-specific consensus guidelines for referring patients for evaluation and for proceeding with transplantation are summarized in Table 266-1 and are linked to clinical, physiologic, radiographic, and pathologic features that influence the prognosis of the respective diseases. Candidates for lung transplantation are also thoroughly screened for comorbidities that might affect the outcome adversely. Conditions such as systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, gastroesophageal reflux, and osteoporosis are not unusual, but if uncomplicated and adequately managed, they do not disqualify patients from transplantation. The upper age limit is ~65每70 years at most centers.

Table 266-1 Disease-Specific Guidelines for Referral and Transplantation

 
 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
Referral

    BODE index >5
 
Transplantation

    BODE index 7每10

    or

    any of the following criteria:

        Hospitalization for exacerbation, with PaCO2 >50 mmHg

        Pulmonary hypertension or cor pulmonale despite oxygen therapy

        FEV1<20% with either DLCO <20% or diffuse emphysema
 
Cystic Fibrosis/Bronchiectasis  
Referral

    FEV1<30% or rapidly declining FEV1

    Hospitalization in ICU for exacerbation

    Increasing frequency of exacerbations

    Refractory or recurrent pneumothorax

    Recurrent hemoptysis not controlled by bronchial artery embolization
 
Transplantation

    Oxygen-dependent respiratory failure

    Hypercapnia

    Pulmonary hypertension
 
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis  
Referral

    Pathologic or radiographic evidence of UIP regardless of vital capacity
 
Transplantation

    Pathologic or radiographic evidence of UIP

    and

    any of the following criteria

    DLCO <39%

    Decrement in FVC 10% during 6 months of follow-up

    Decrease in SpO2 below 88% during a 6-min walk test

    Honeycombing on HRCT (fibrosis score >2)
 
Idiopathic Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension  
Referral

    NYHA functional class III or IV regardless of therapy

    Rapidly progressive disease
 
Transplantation

    Failing therapy with intravenous epoprostenol (or equivalent drug)

    Persistent NYHA functional class III or IV on maximal medical therapy

    Low (<350 m) or declining 6-min walk test

    Cardiac index <2 L/min/m2

    Right atrial pressure >15 mmHg
 
 


Abbreviations: BODE, body-mass index (B), airflow obstruction (O), dyspnea (D), exercise capacity (E); FVC, forced vital capacity; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; DLCO, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood; SpO2, arterial oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry; ICU, intensive care unit; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonitis; HRCT, high-resolution computed tomography; NYHA, New York Heart Association.

Source: Summarized from Orens et al. For BODE index, BR Celli et al: N Engl J Med 350:1005, 2004.
 

Standard exclusions include HIV infection, chronic active hepatitis B or C infection, uncontrolled or untreatable pulmonary or extrapulmonary infection, uncured malignancy, active cigarette smoking, drug or alcohol dependency, irreversible physical deconditioning, chronic nonadherence with medical care, significant disease of another vital organ (e.g., heart, liver, or kidney), and psychiatric or psychosocial situations that could substantially interfere with posttransplantation management. Other problems that may compromise the outcome constitute relative contraindications. Some typical issues are ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, previous thoracic surgical procedures, obesity, and coronary artery disease. Chronic infection with antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas species, Burkholderia species, Aspergillus species, or nontuberculous mycobacteria is a unique concern in some patients with CF. The potential impact of these and other factors has to be judged in clinical context to determine an individual candidate's suitability for transplantation.

Waiting List and Organ Allocation

Organ allocation policies are influenced by medical, ethical, geographic, and political factors, with systems varying from country to country. Regardless of the system, potential recipients are placed on a waiting list and must be matched for blood group compatibility and, with some latitude, for lung size with an acceptable donor. Most lungs are procured from deceased donors after brain death, but only ~15每17% of brain-death organ donors yield either one or two lungs suitable for transplantation. Lungs from donors after cardiac death have been utilized to a limited extent.

A priority algorithm for allocating donor lungs was implemented in the United States in 2005. A lung allocation score that is based on the patient's risk of death on the waiting list and likelihood of survival after transplantation determines priority. The score can range from zero to 100, and precedence for transplantation is ranked from highest to lowest scores. Both the lung disease and its severity affect a patient's score; parameters in the score must be updated biannually but can be submitted for calculation of a new score whenever the patient's condition changes. The median score for all candidates on the waiting list is usually ~34每35, but the distribution of scores tends to be higher among patients with IPF and CF than among patients with COPD and IPAH.

Under this priority system, the median waiting time for transplantation has fallen to <6 months, and the annual number of deaths on the waiting list has dropped by ~50%. The main indication for transplantation has also shifted from COPD to IPF. Overall survival rates in the first two years after transplantation have not changed substantially under this system; however, recipients with lung allocation scores >60 have had lower survival rates in the first two years compared with recipients with lower scores.

Transplant Procedure

Bilateral transplantation is mandatory for CF and other forms of bronchiectasis because the risk of spillover infection from a remaining native lung precludes single-lung transplantation. Heart-lung transplantation is obligatory for Eisenmenger syndrome with complex anomalies that cannot be readily repaired in conjunction with lung transplantation and for concomitant end-stage lung and heart disease. However, cardiac replacement is not necessary for cor pulmonale because right ventricular function will recover when pulmonary vascular afterload is normalized by lung transplantation.

Either bilateral or single-lung transplantation is an option for other diseases unless there is a special consideration, but bilateral transplantation has been utilized increasingly for most indications. Recently, ~65% of procedures in the United States have been bilateral, and in the international registry, ~55% of transplants for COPD, ~50% for IPF, and ~90% for IPAH have been bilateral.

Living donor lobar transplantation has a limited role in adult lung transplantation. It has been performed predominantly in teenagers or young adults with CF, and it usually has been reserved for patients who were unlikely to survive the wait for a deceased organ donor.

Posttransplantation Management

Induction therapy with an antilymphocyte globulin or an interleukin 2 receptor antagonist is utilized by ~50% of centers, and a three-drug maintenance immunosuppressive regimen that includes a calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus), a purine synthesis antagonist (azathioprine or a mycophenolic acid precursor), and prednisone is traditional. Subsequently, other drugs, such as sirolimus, may be substituted into the regimen for various reasons. Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia is standard, and prophylaxis against cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection and fungal infection is part of many protocols. The dose of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and sirolimus is adjusted by blood-level monitoring. All these agents are metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system, and interactions with medications that affect this pathway can significantly alter the clearance and blood level of these drugs.

Routine management focuses on monitoring the allograft, regulating immunosuppressive therapy, and detecting problems or complications expeditiously. Regular contact with a nurse coordinator, physician follow-up, chest radiographs, blood tests, and spirometry are customary, and periodic surveillance bronchoscopies are employed in some programs. If recovery is uncomplicated, lung function rapidly improves and then stabilizes by 3每6 months after transplantation. Subsequently, the variation in spirometric measurements is small, and a sustained decline of 10每15% signals a potentially significant problem.

Outcomes

Survival

Major registries publish survival (Table 266-2) and other outcomes annually (www.ishlt.org; www.ustransplant.org). In the international registry, survival half-life for the main indications is in the range of 4每6 years; however, age and transplant procedure have a significant impact on outcome. For recipients 18每59 years of age, the survival half-life is 5每6 years, but it decreases to 4 years for those 60每65 years old and to 3 years for those >65 years old. Survival over 10 years has been significantly better after bilateral transplantation than after unilateral transplantation for COPD, 1-antitrypsin deficiency emphysema, IPF, and IPAH.

Table 266-2 Recipient Survival, by Pretransplantation Diagnosis (1990每2006)

 
 
  Survival Rate, % 
Diagnosis n  3 Months 1 Year 3 Years 5 Years 10 Years 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

    Bilateral

    Single
 2444

5316
 93

90
 85

81
 69

63
 57

47
 31

19
 
1-Antitrypsin deficiency emphysema

    Bilateral

    Single
 956

969
 88

87
 79

77
 67

61
 58

51
 36

28
 
Cystic fibrosis 3275 90 82 66 56 39 
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

    Bilateral

    Single
 1290

2641
 81

85
 72

73
 59

56
 48

43
 28

19
 
Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension

    Bilateral

    Single
 710

260
 75

71
 69

61
 59

51
 51

41
 33

24
 
Sarcoidosis 506 83 70 56 51 31 
 


Source: Data from www.ishlt.org/registries/slides.asp?slides=heartLungRegistry.
 

The main sources of perioperative mortality include technical complications of the operation, primary graft dysfunction, and infections. Acute rejection and CMV infection are common problems in the first year, but neither is usually fatal. Beyond the first year, chronic rejection and non-CMV infections cause the majority of deaths.

Function

Regardless of the disease, successful transplantation impressively restores cardiopulmonary function. After bilateral transplantation, pulmonary function tests are typically normal; after unilateral transplantation, a mild abnormality characteristic of the remaining diseased lung is still apparent. Formal exercise testing usually demonstrates some impairment in maximum work rate and maximum oxygen uptake, but few recipients report any limitation to activities of daily living.

Quality of Life

Both overall and health-related quality of life are enhanced. With multidimensional profiles, improvements extend across most domains and are sustained longitudinally unless chronic rejection or another complication develops. Other problems that detract from quality of life include renal dysfunction and drug side effects.

Cost

The cost of transplantation depends on the health care system, other health care policies, and economic factors that vary from country to country. In the United States in 2008 the average billed charge per transplant for the period 30 days before transplantation through 180 days after the transplant admission was $450,400 for single-lung transplantation and $657,800 for bilateral lung transplantation. For bilateral transplantation, the total cost included the following charges: all care during 30 days before transplantation, $20,700; donor organ procurement, $96,500; hospital transplant admission, $344,700; physician fees during transplant admission, $59,300; all inpatient and outpatient care during 180 days after transplant admission, $113,800; and all outpatient drugs, including immunosuppressants, from discharge for the transplant to 180 days after transplant admission, $22,800.

Complications

Lung transplantation can be complicated by a variety of problems (Table 266-3). Aside from predicaments that are unique to transplantation, side effects and toxicities of the immunosuppressive medications can cause new medical problems or aggravate preexisting conditions.

Table 266-3 Major Potential Complications of Lung Transplantation and Immunosuppression

 
 
Category Complication 
Allograft Primary graft dysfunction; anastomotic dehiscence or stenosis; ischemic airway injury with bronchostenosis or bronchomalacia; rejection; infection; recurrence of primary disease (sarcoidosis, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, giant cell interstitial pneumonitis, diffuse panbronchiolitis, pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis) 
Thoracic Phrenic nerve injury〞diaphragmatic dysfunction; recurrent laryngeal nerve injury〞vocal cord dysfunction; cervical ganglia injury〞Horner's syndrome; pneumothorax; pleural effusion; chylothorax; empyema 
Cardiovascular Intraoperative or perioperative air embolism; postoperative pericarditis; perioperative myocardial injury/infarction; venous thromboembolism; supraventricular dysrhythmias; systemic hypertension 
Gastrointestinal Esophagitis [especially Candida, herpes, or cytomegalovirus (CMV)]; gastroparesis; gastroesophageal reflux; diarrhea (Clostridium difficile; medications, especially mycophenolate mofetil and sirolimus); colitis (C. difficile; CMV?)  
Hepatobiliary Hepatitis (especially CMV or medications); acalculous cholecystitis 
Renal Calcineurin inhibitor nephropathy; hemolytic-uremic syndrome (thrombotic microangiopathy) 
Neurologic Tremors; seizures; reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy; headaches 
Musculoskeletal Steroid myopathy; rhabdomyolysis (cyclosporine + HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor treatment); osteoporosis; avascular necrosis 
Metabolic Obesity; diabetes mellitus; hyperlipidemia; idiopathic hyperammonemia 
Hematologic Anemia; leukopenia; thrombocytopenia; thrombotic microangiopathy 
Oncologic Lymphoproliferative disease and lymphoma; skin cancers; other malignancies 
 

 

Graft Dysfunction

Primary graft dysfunction (PGD) is an acute lung injury that is a manifestation of multiple potential insults to the donor organ inherent in the transplantation process. The principal clinical features are diffuse pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia within 72 h of transplantation; however, the presentation can be mimicked by pulmonary venous obstruction, hyperacute rejection, pulmonary edema, and pneumonia.

The severity is variable, and a standardized grading system has been established. Up to 50% of recipients may have some degree of PGD, and ~10每20% have severe PGD. The treatment follows the conventional, supportive paradigm for acute lung injury. Inhaled nitric oxide and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have been used in severe cases; retransplantation also has been performed, but retransplantation in the first 30 days has a poor survival rate (~30% at 1 year). Most recipients with mild PGD recover, but the mortality rate for severe PGD has been ~40每60%. PGD also is associated with longer postoperative ventilator support, longer intensive care unit and hospital stays, higher costs, and excess morbidity rates and severe PGD is probably a risk factor for the later development of chronic rejection.

Airway Complications

The bronchial blood supply to the donor lung is disrupted during procurement. Bronchial revascularization during transplantation is technically feasible in some cases, but it is not widely practiced. Consequently, after implantation the donor bronchus is dependent on retrograde bronchial blood flow from the pulmonary circulation and is vulnerable to ischemia.

The spectrum of airway problems includes anastomotic necrosis and dehiscence, occlusive granulation tissue, anastomotic or bronchial stenosis, and bronchomalacia. The incidence has been in the range of 7每18%, but the associated mortality rate has been low. These problems usually can be managed bronchoscopically with techniques such as simple endoscopic debridement, laser photoresection, balloon dilatation, and bronchial stenting.

Rejection

Rejection is the main limitation to better medium- and long-term survival. It is an immunologic response to alloantigen recognition, and both cell-mediated and antibody-mediated (humoral) cascades can play a role. Cellular rejection is effected by T lymphocyte interactions with donor alloantigens, mainly in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), whereas humoral rejection is driven by antibodies to donor MHC alloantigens or possibly to non-MHC antigens on epithelial or endothelial cells.

Rejection often is categorized as acute or chronic without mention of the mechanism. Acute rejection is cell-mediated, and its incidence is highest in the first 6每12 months after transplantation. In contrast, chronic rejection generally emerges later, and both alloimmune and nonalloimmune fibroproliferative reactions may contribute to its pathogenesis.

Acute Cellular Rejection

With current immunosuppressive regimens, ~25每40% of recipients have acute rejection in the first year. Acute cellular rejection (ACR) can be clinically silent, or it can be manifested by nonspecific symptoms or signs that may include cough, low-grade fever, dyspnea, hypoxemia, inspiratory crackles, interstitial infiltrates, and declining lung function; however, clinical impression is not reliable. The diagnosis is confirmed by transbronchial biopsies showing the characteristic lymphocytic infiltrates around arterioles or bronchioles, and a standardized pathologic scheme is used to grade the biopsies.

Minimal ACR on a surveillance biopsy in a clinically stable recipient often is left untreated, but higher grades generally are treated regardless of the clinical situation. Treatment usually includes a short course of high-dose steroid therapy and adjustment of the maintenance immunosuppressive regimen. Most episodes respond to this approach; however, more intensive therapy is sometimes necessary for persistent or recurrent episodes.

Chronic Rejection

This complication is the main impediment to better long-term survival rates, and it is the source of substantial morbidity rates because of its impact on lung function and quality of life. Clinically, it is characterized physiologically by airflow limitation and pathologically by bronchiolitis obliterans; the process is denoted bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS). Transbronchial biopsies are relatively insensitive for detecting bronchiolitis obliterans, and pathologic confirmation is not required for diagnosis. Thus, after other causes of graft dysfunction have been excluded, the diagnosis of BOS is based primarily on a sustained decrement (20%) in forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), although smaller declines in FEV1 (10%) or in forced expiratory flow FEF25每75% may presage BOS. Spirometric criteria for diagnosis and staging of BOS have been standardized.

The prevalence of BOS approaches 50% by 5 years after transplantation. Antecedent ACR is the main risk factor, but PGD, CMV pneumonitis, other community-acquired respiratory viral infections, and gastroesophageal reflux have been implicated as well. BOS can present acutely and imitate infectious bronchitis, or it can manifest as an insidious decline in lung function. The chest radiograph is typically unchanged; computed tomography may reveal mosaic perfusion, air trapping, ground-glass opacities, or bronchiolectasis. Bronchoscopy is indicated to eliminate other processes, but transbronchial biopsies identify bronchiolitis obliterans in a minority of cases.

BOS usually is treated with augmented immunosuppression, but there is no consensus about therapy. Strategies include changes in the maintenance drug regimen, including the addition of azithromycin, antilymphocyte globulin, photopheresis, and total lymphoid irradiation. Although therapy may stabilize lung function, the overall results of treatment have been disappointing; median survival after onset has been ~3每4 years. Retransplantation is a consideration if clinical circumstances and other comorbidities are not prohibitive, but survival has been inferior to that with primary transplantation.

Humoral Rejection

The role of antibody-mediated rejection is still evolving. Hyperacute rejection is caused by preformed human leukocyte (HLA) antibodies in the recipient, but it is minimized by pretransplantation antibody screening coupled with virtual or direct cross-matching with any potential donor. Donor-specific HLA antibodies develop after transplantation in up to 50% of recipients, and their presence has been associated with an increased risk of both ACR and BOS and with poorer overall survival. However, the mechanisms by which these antibodies could contribute to ACR or BOS or could otherwise be detrimental have not been unraveled. Formal criteria for antibody-mediated rejection have been defined for renal transplantation, but few cases in lung transplantation fulfill them. Nonetheless, episodes of acute lung allograft dysfunction occasionally have been attributed directly to antibody-mediated injury. If treatment is indicated, therapies that may deplete antibodies include plasmapheresis, intravenous immune globulin, and rituximab.

Infection

The lung allograft is especially susceptible to infection, which has been one of the leading causes of death. In addition to a blunted immune response from the immunosuppressive drugs, other normal defenses are compromised: the cough reflex is diminished, and mucociliary clearance is impaired in the transplanted lung. The spectrum of infections includes both opportunistic and nonopportunistic pathogens.

Bacterial bronchitis or pneumonia can occur at any time, but it is very common in the perioperative period. Later, bronchitis occurs frequently in recipients with BOS, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is often the culprit.

CMV is the most common viral infection. Although gastroenteritis, colitis, and hepatitis can occur, CMV viremia and CMV pneumonia are the main illnesses. Most episodes occur in the first 6 months, and treatment with ganciclovir is effective unless resistance develops. Other community-acquired viruses such as influenza, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial virus also contribute to respiratory complications. The most problematic fungal infections are caused by Aspergillus species. The spectrum encompasses simple pulmonary colonization, tracheobronchitis, invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, and disseminated aspergillosis, and the clinical scenario dictates treatment.

Other Complications

Other potential complications are listed in Table 266-3. Many of them are related to side effects or toxicities of the immunosuppressive drugs. Management of these general medical problems is guided by standard practices, but the complex milieu of transplantation requires close collaboration and good communication among health care providers.
 
Further Readings

BELPERIO JA et al: Chronic lung allograft rejection: Mechanisms and therapy. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:108, 2009[PMID: 19131536]  [Full Text]

 
BHORADE SM, STERN E: Immunosuppression for lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:47, 2009[PMID: 19131530]  [Full Text]

 
BOASQUEVISQUE CHR et al: Surgical techniques: Lung transplant and lung volume reduction. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:66, 2009[PMID: 19131532]  [Full Text]

 
CHAN KM et al: Nonmedical therapy for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:137, 2009[PMID: 19131539]  [Full Text]

 
CHRISTIE JD et al: The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Twenty-sixth Official Adult Lung and Heart-Lung Transplantation Report-2009. J Heart Lung Transplant 28:1031, 2009[PMID: 19782285]  [Full Text]

 
KREIDER M, KOTLOFF RM: Selection of candidates for lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:20, 2009[PMID: 19131527]  [Full Text]

 
LEE JC, CHRISTIE JD: Primary graft dysfunction. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6: 39, 2009[PMID: 20046372]  [Full Text]

 
LYU DM, ZAMORA MR: Medical complications of lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:101, 2009[PMID: 19131535]  [Full Text]

 
MARTINU T et al: Acute rejection and humoral sensitization in lung transplant recipients. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:54, 2009[PMID: 19131531]  [Full Text]

 
ORENS JB, GARRITY ER JR: General overview of lung transplantation and review of organ allocation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:13, 2009[PMID: 19131526]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞〞 et al: International guidelines for the selection of lung transplant candidates: 2006 update〞a consensus report from the pulmonary scientific council of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 25:745, 2006 

 
REMUND KF et al: Infections relevant to lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:94, 2009[PMID: 19131534]  [Full Text]

 
SANTACRUZ JF, MEHTA AC: Airway complications and management after lung transplantation: Ischemia, dehiscence, and stenosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:79, 2009[PMID: 19131533]  [Full Text]

 
SWEET SC: Pediatric lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:122, 2009[PMID: 19131537]  [Full Text]

 
VAN RAEMDONCK D et al: Lung donor selection and management. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:28, 2009 

 
YUSEN RD: Technology and outcomes assessment in lung transplantation. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:128, 2009[PMID: 19131538]  [Full Text]
^^