
Chapter 314. Introduction to the Immune System >
 

Introduction to the Immune System

Definitions

Adaptive immune system&mdah;recently evolved system of immune responses mediated by T and B lymphocytes. Immune responses by these cells are based on specific antigen recognition by clonotypic receptors that are products of genes that rearrange during development and throughout the life of the organism. Additional cells of the adaptive immune system include various types of antigen-presenting cells.
Antibody〞B cell每produced molecules encoded by genes that rearrange during B cell development consisting of immunoglobulin heavy and light chains that together form the central component of the B cell receptor for antigen. Antibody can exist as B cell每surface antigen-recognition molecules or as secreted molecules in plasma and other body fluids (Table 314-13).
Antigens〞foreign or self-molecules that are recognized by the adaptive and innate immune systems resulting in immune cell triggering, T cell activation, and/or B cell antibody production.
Antimicrobial peptides〞small peptides <100 amino acids in length that are produced by cells of the innate immune system and have anti-infectious agent activity (Table 314-2).
Apoptosis〞the process of programmed cell death whereby signaling through various "death receptors" on the surface of cells [e.g., tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors, CD95] leads to a signaling cascade that involves activation of the caspase family of molecules and leads to DNA cleavage and cell death. Apoptosis, which does not lead to induction of inordinate inflammation, is to be contrasted with cell necrosis, which does lead to induction of inflammatory responses.
Autoimmune diseases〞diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis in which cells of the adaptive immune system such as autoreactive T and B cells become overreactive and produce self-reactive T cell and antibody responses.
Autoinflammatory diseases〞hereditary disorders such as hereditary periodic fevers (HPFs) characterized by recurrent episodes of severe inflammation and fever due to mutations in controls of the innate inflammatory response, i.e., the inflammasome (see below and Table 314-6). Patients with HPFs also have rashes and serosal and joint inflammation and some can have neurologic symptoms. Autoinflammatory diseases are different from autoimmune diseases in that evidence for activation of adaptive immune cells such as autoreactive B cells is not present.
B cell receptor for antigen〞complex of surface molecules that rearrange during postnatal B cell development, made up of surface immunoglobulin (Ig) and associated Ig  chain molecules that recognize nominal antigen via Ig heavy- and light-chain variable regions, and signal the B cell to terminally differentiate to make antigen-specific antibody (Fig. 314-8).
B lymphocytes〞bone marrow每derived or bursal-equivalent lymphocytes that express surface immunoglobulin (the B cell receptor for antigen) and secrete specific antibody after interaction with antigen (Figs. 314-2 and 314-6).
CD classification of human lymphocyte differentiation antigens〞the development of monoclonal antibody technology led to the discovery of a large number of new leukocyte surface molecules. In 1982, the First International Workshop on Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens was held to establish a nomenclature for cell-surface molecules of human leukocytes. From this and subsequent leukocyte differentiation workshops has come the cluster of differentiation (CD) classification of leukocyte antigens (Table 314-1).
Chemokines〞soluble molecules that direct and determine immune cell movement and circulation pathways.
Complement〞cascading series of plasma enzymes and effector proteins whose function is to lyse pathogens and/or target them to be phagocytized by neutrophils and monocyte/macrophage lineage cells of the reticuloendothelial system (Fig. 314-5).
Co-stimulatory molecules〞molecules of antigen-presenting cells (such as B7-1 and B7-2 or CD40) that lead to T cell activation when bound by ligands on activated T cells (such as CD28 or CD40 ligand) (Fig. 314-7).
Cytokines〞soluble proteins that interact with specific cellular receptors that are involved in the regulation of the growth and activation of immune cells and mediate normal and pathologic inflammatory and immune responses (Tables 314-7, 314-9, and 314-10).
Dendritic cells〞myeloid and/or lymphoid lineage antigen-presenting cells of the adaptive immune system. Immature dendritic cells, or dendritic cell precursors, are key components of the innate immune system by responding to infections with production of high levels of cytokines. Dendritic cells are key initiators both of innate immune responses via cytokine production and of adaptive immune responses via presentation of antigen to T lymphocytes (Figs. 314-2 and 314-3, Table 314-5).
Inflammasome〞large cytoplasmic complexes of intracellular proteins that link the sensing of microbial products and cellular stress to the proteolytic activation of interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-18 inflammatory cytokines. Activation of molecules in the inflammasome is a key step in the response of the innate immune system for intracellular recognition of microbial and other danger signals in both health and pathologic states (Table 314-6).
Innate immune system〞ancient immune recognition system of host cells bearing germ line每encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize pathogens and trigger a variety of mechanisms of pathogen elimination. Cells of the innate immune system include natural killer cell lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, tissue mast cells, and epithelial cells (Tables 314-2 to 314-5 and 314-12).
Large granular lymphocytes〞lymphocytes of the innate immune system with azurophilic cytotoxic granules that have natural killer cell activity capable of killing foreign and host cells with few or no self每major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules (Fig. 314-4).
Natural killer cells〞large granular lymphocytes that kill target cells expressing few or no human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules, such as malignantly transformed cells and virally infected cells. Natural killer cells express receptors that inhibit killer cell function when self每major histocompatibility complex class I is present (Fig. 314-4).
Natural killer (NK) T cells 〞innate-like lymphocytes that use an invariant T cell receptor (TCR)- chain combined with a limited set of TCR- chains and coexpress receptors commonly found on NK cells. NK T cells recognize lipid antigens of bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoal infectious agents.
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)〞Invariant molecular structures expressed by large groups of microorganisms that are recognized by host cellular pattern recognition receptors in the mediation of innate immunity (Fig. 314-1).
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)〞germ line每encoded receptors expressed by cells of the innate immune system that recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (Table 314-3).
Polyreactive natural antibodies〞preexisting low-affinity antibodies produced by innate B cells that cross-react with multiple antigens and are available at the time of infection to bind to and coat the invading pathogen and harness innate responses to slow the infection until an adaptive high-affinity protective antibody response can be made.
T cell receptor (TCR) for antigen〞complex of surface molecules that rearrange during postnatal T cell development made up of clonotypic TCR- and - chains that are associated with the CD3 complex composed of invariant , , , , and  chains. TCR- and - chains recognize peptide fragments of protein antigen physically bound in antigen-presenting cell major histocompatibility complex class I or II molecules, leading to signaling via the CD3 complex to mediate effector functions (Fig. 314-7).
T cells〞thymus-derived lymphocytes that mediate adaptive cellular immune responses including T helper, T regulatory, and cytotoxic T lymphocyte effector cell functions (Figs. 314-2,314-3, and 314-7).
Tolerance〞B and T cell nonresponsiveness to antigens that results from encounter with foreign or self-antigens by B and T lymphocytes in the absence of expression of antigen-presenting cell co-stimulatory molecules. Tolerance to antigens may be induced and maintained by multiple mechanisms either centrally (in the thymus for T cells or bone marrow for B cells) or peripherally at sites throughout the peripheral immune system.
Introduction

The human immune system has evolved over millions of years from both invertebrate and vertebrate organisms to develop sophisticated defense mechanisms to protect the host from microbes and their virulence factors. The normal immune system has three key properties: a highly diverse repertoire of antigen receptors that enables recognition of a nearly infinite range of pathogens; immune memory, to mount rapid recall immune responses; and immunologic tolerance, to avoid immune damage to normal self-tissues. From invertebrates, humans have inherited the innate immune system, an ancient defense system that uses germ line每encoded proteins to recognize pathogens. Cells of the innate immune system, such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and natural killer (NK) lymphocytes, recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are highly conserved among many microbes and use a diverse set of pattern recognition receptor molecules (PRRs). Important components of the recognition of microbes by the innate immune system include (1) recognition by germ line每encoded host molecules, (2) recognition of key microbe virulence factors but not recognition of self-molecules, and (3) nonrecognition of benign foreign molecules or microbes. Upon contact with pathogens, macrophages and NK cells may kill pathogens directly or, in concert with dendritic cells, may activate a series of events that both slow the infection and recruit the more recently evolved arm of the human immune system, the adaptive immune system.

Adaptive immunity is found only in vertebrates and is based on the generation of antigen receptors on T and B lymphocytes by gene rearrangements, such that individual T or B cells express unique antigen receptors on their surface capable of specifically recognizing diverse antigens of the myriad infectious agents in the environment. Coupled with finely tuned specific recognition mechanisms that maintain tolerance (nonreactivity) to self-antigens, T and B lymphocytes bring both specificity and immune memory to vertebrate host defenses.

This chapter describes the cellular components, key molecules (Table 314-1), and mechanisms that make up the innate and adaptive immune systems and describes how adaptive immunity is recruited to the defense of the host by innate immune responses. An appreciation of the cellular and molecular bases of innate and adaptive immune responses is critical to understanding the pathogenesis of inflammatory, autoimmune, infectious, and immunodeficiency diseases.

Table 314每1. Human Leukocyte Surface Antigens〞the CD Classification of Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens

 
 
Surface Antigen (Other Names) Family Molecular Mass, kDa Distribution Ligand(s) Function 
CD1a (T6, HTA-1) Ig 49 CD, cortical thymocytes, Langerhans type of dendritic cells TCR T cells CD1 molecules present lipid antigens of intracellular bacteria such as Mycobacterium leprae and M. tuberculosis to TCR T cells.  
CD1b Ig 45 CD, cortical thymocytes, Langerhans type of dendritic cells TCR T cells   
CD1c Ig 43 DC, cortical thymocytes, subset of B cells, Langerhans type of dendritic cells TCR T cells   
CD1d Ig ? Cortical thymocytes, intestinal epithelium, Langerhans type of dendritic cells TCR T cells   
CD2 (T12, LFA-2) Ig 50 T, NK CD58, CD48, CD59, CD15 Alternative T cell activation, T cell anergy, T cell cytokine production, T- or NK-mediated cytolysis, T cell apoptosis, cell adhesion 
CD3 (T3, Leu-4) Ig :25每28, :21每28, :20每25, :21每22, :16 T Associates with the TCR T cell activation and function;  is the signal transduction component of the CD3 complex 
CD4 (T4, Leu-3) Ig 55 T, myeloid MHC-II, HIV, gp120, IL-16, SABP T cell selection, T cell activation, signal transduction with p56lck, primary receptor for HIV  
CD7 (3A1, Leu-9) Ig 40 T, NK K-12 (CD7L) T and NK cell signal transduction and regulation of IFN-, TNF- production 
CD8 (T8, Leu-2) Ig 34 T MHC-I T cell selection, T cell activation, signal transduction with p56lck  
CD14 (LPS-receptor) LRG 53每55 M, G (weak), not by myeloid progenitors Endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide), lipoteichoic acid, PI TLR4 mediates with LPS and other PAMP activation of innate immunity 
CD19 B4 Ig 95 B (except plasma cells), FDC Not known Associates with CD21 and CD81 to form a complex involved in signal transduction in B cell development, activation, and differentiation 
CD20 (B1) Unassigned 33每37 B (except plasma cells) Not known Cell signaling, may be important for B cell activation and proliferation 
CD21 (B2, CR2, EBV-R, C3dR) RCA 145 Mature B, FDC, subset of thymocytes C3d, C3dg, iC3b, CD23, EBV Associates with CD19 and CD81 to form a complex involved in signal transduction in B cell development, activation, and differentiation; Epstein-Barr virus receptor 
CD22 (BL-CAM) Ig 130每140 Mature B CDw75 Cell adhesion, signaling through association with p72sky, p53/56lyn, PI3 kinase, SHP1, fLC  
CD23 (FcRII, B6, Leu-20, BLAST-2) C-type lectin 45 B, M, FDC IgE, CD21, CD11b, CD11c Regulates IgE synthesis, cytokine release by monocytes 
CD28 Ig 44 T, plasma cells CD80, CD86 Co-stimulatory for T cell activation; involved in the decision between T cell activation and anergy 
CD40 TNFR 48每50 B, DC, EC, thymic epithelium, MP, cancers CD154 B cell activation, proliferation, and differentiation; formation of GCs; isotype switching; rescue from apoptosis 
CD45 (LCA, T200, B220) PTP 180, 200, 210, 220 All leukocytes Galectin-1, CD2, CD3, CD4 T and B activation, thymocyte development, signal transduction, apoptosis 
CD45RA PTP 210, 220 Subset T, medullary thymocytes, ※naive§ T Galectin-1, CD2, CD3, CD4 Isoforms of CD45 containing exon 4 (A), restricted to a subset of T cells 
CD45RB PTP 200, 210, 220 All leukocytes Galectin-1, CD2, CD3, CD4 Isoforms of CD45 containing exon 5 (B) 
CD45RC PTP 210, 220 Subset T, medullary thymocytes, ※naive§ T Galectin-1, CD2, CD3, CD4 Isoforms of CD45 containing exon 6 (C), restricted to a subset of T cells 
CD45RO PTP 180 Subset T, cortical thymocytes, ※memory§ T Galectin-1, CD2, CD3, CD4 Isoforms of CD45 containing no differentially spliced exons, restricted to a subset of T cells 
CD80 (B7-1, BB1) Ig 60 Activated B and T, MP, DC CD28, CD152 Co-regulator of T cell activation; signaling through CD28 stimulates and through CD152 inhibits T cell activation 
CD86 (B7-2, B70) Ig 80 Subset B, DC, EC, activated T, thymic epithelium CD28, CD152 Co-regulator of T cell activation; signaling through CD28 stimulates and through CD152 inhibits T cell activation 
CD95 (APO-1, Fas) TNFR 135 Activated T and B Fas ligand Mediates apoptosis 
CD152 (CTLA-4) Ig 30每33 Activated T CD80, CD86 Inhibits T cell proliferation 
CD154 (CD40L) TNF 33 Activated CD4+ T, subset CD8+ T, NK, M, basophil CD40 Co-stimulatory for T cell activation, B cell proliferation and differentiation 
 


Abbreviations: CTLA, cytotoxic T lymphocyte每associated protein; DC, dendritic cells; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; EC, endothelial cells; ECM, extracellular matrix; Fc RIIIA, low-affinity IgG receptor isoform A; FDC, follicular dendritic cells; G, granulocytes; GC, germinal center; GPI, glycosyl phosphatidylinositol; HTA, human thymocyte antigen; IgG, immunoglobulin G; LCA, leukocyte common antigen; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MHC-I, major histocompatibility complex class I; MP, macrophages; Mr, relative molecular mass; NK, natural killer cells; P, platelets; PBT, peripheral blood T cells; PI, phosphatidylinositol; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PLC, phospholipase C; PTP, protein tyrosine phosphatase; TCR, T cell receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TNFR, tumor necrosis factor receptor. For an expanded list of cluster of differentiation (CD) human antigens, see Harrison's Online at http://www.accessmedicine.com; and for a full list of CD human antigens from the most recent Human Workshop on Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens (VII), see http://mpr.nci.nih.gov/prow/. 

Source: Compiled from T Kishimoto et al (eds): Leukocyte Typing VI, New York, Garland Publishing 1997; R Brines et al: Immunology Today 18S:1, 1997; and S Shaw (ed): Protein Reviews on the Web, http://mpr.nci.nih.gov/prow/.
 

The Innate Immune System

All multicellular organisms, including humans, have developed the use of a limited number of surface and intracellular germ line每encoded molecules that recognize large groups of pathogens. Because of the myriad human pathogens, host molecules of the human innate immune system sense "danger signals" and either recognize PAMPs, the common molecular structures shared by many pathogens, or recognize host cell molecules produced in response to infection such as heat shock proteins and fragments of the extracellular matrix. PAMPs must be conserved structures vital to pathogen virulence and survival, such as bacterial endotoxin, so that pathogens cannot mutate molecules of PAMPs to evade human innate immune responses. PRRs are host proteins of the innate immune system that recognize PAMPs as host danger signal molecules (Tables 314-2 and 314-3). Thus, recognition of pathogen molecules by hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cell types leads to activation/production of the complement cascade, cytokines, and antimicrobial peptides as effector molecules. In addition, pathogen PAMPs as host danger signal molecules activate dendritic cells to mature and to express molecules on the dendritic cell surface that optimize antigen presentation to respond to foreign antigens.

Table 314每2. Major Components of the Innate Immune System

 
 
Pattern recognition receptors (PRR) C-type lectins, leucine-rich proteins, scavenger receptors, pentraxins, lipid transferases, integrins, inflammasome proteins 
Antimicrobial peptides -Defensins, -defensins, cathelin, protegrin, granulysin, histatin, secretory leukoprotease inhibitor, and probiotics 
Cells Macrophages, dendritic cells, NK cells, NK-T cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells, basophils, and epithelial cells 
Complement components Classic and alternative complement pathway, and proteins that bind complement components 
Cytokines Autocrine, paracrine, endocrine cytokines that mediate host defense and inflammation, as well as recruit, direct, and regulate adaptive immune responses 
 


Abbreviation: NK cells, natural killer cells.
 
Table 314每3. Major Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRR) of the Innate Immune System

 
 
PRR Protein Family Sites of Expression Examples Ligands (PAMPs) Functions of PRR 
Toll-like receptors Multiple cell types TLR2-10 Bacterial and viral carbohydrates Activate innate immune cells to respond to multiple pathogens and initiate adaptive immune responses 
C-type Lectins Plasma proteins Collectins   Opsonization of bacteria and virus, activation of complement 
  Humoral     Terminal mannose   
  Cellular Macrophages, dendritic cell Macrophage mannose receptor Carbohydrate on HLA molecules Phagocytosis of pathogens 
  Natural killer (NK) cells NKG2-A   Inhibits killing of host cells expressing HLA + self-peptides 
Leucine-rich proteins Macrophages, dendritic cells, epithelial cells CD14 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) Binds LPS and Toll proteins 
Scavenger receptors Macrophage Macrophage scavenger receptors Bacterial cell walls Phagocytosis of bacteria 
Pentraxins Plasma protein C-reactive proteins Phosphatidyl choline Opsonization of bacteria, activation of complement 
  Plasma protein Serum amyloid P Bacterial cell walls Opsonization of bacteria, activation of complement 
Lipid transferases Plasma protein LPS binding protein LPS Binds LPS, transfers LPS to CD14 
Integrins Macrophages, dendritic cells, NK cells CD11b,c; CD18 LPS Signals cells, activates phagocytosis 
NOD-like Receptors Innate cells NALP-3 Viral DNA Bacterial muramyl dipeptide Cytosolic proteins involved in innate sensing 
 


Abbreviation: PAMPs, pathogen-associated molecular patterns.

Source: Adapted from R Medzhitov, CA Janeway: Curr Opin Immunol 9:4, 1997. Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier.
 

Pattern Recognition

Major PRR families of proteins include C-type lectins, leucine-rich proteins, macrophage scavenger receptor proteins, plasma pentraxins, lipid transferases, and integrins (Table 314-3). A major group of PRR collagenous glycoproteins with C-type lectin domains are termed collectins and include the serum protein mannose-binding lectin (MBL). MBL and other collectins, as well as two other protein families〞the pentraxins (such as C-reactive protein and serum amyloid P) and macrophage scavenger receptors〞all have the property of opsonizing (coating) bacteria for phagocytosis by macrophages and can also activate the complement cascade to lyse bacteria. Integrins are cell-surface adhesion molecules that signal after cells bind bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and activate phagocytic cells to ingest pathogens.

There are multiple connections between the innate and adaptive immune systems; these include (1) a plasma protein, LPS-binding protein, which binds and transfers LPS to the macrophage LPS receptor, CD14; (2) a human family of proteins called Toll-like receptor proteins (TLRs), some of which are associated with CD14, bind LPS, and signal epithelial cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages to produce cytokines and upregulate cell-surface molecules that signal the initiation of adaptive immune responses (Fig. 314-1, Tables 314-3 and 314-4), and (3) families of intracellular microbial sensors called NOD-like receptors (NLRs) and RIG-like helicases (RLHs). Proteins in the Toll family can be expressed on macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells as well as on a variety of nonhematopoietic cell types, including respiratory epithelial cells. Ten TLRs have been identified in humans and 13 TLRs in mice (Tables 314-4 and 314-5). Upon ligation, TLRs activate a series of intracellular events that lead to the killing of bacteria- and viral-infected cells as well as to the recruitment and ultimate activation of antigen-specific T and B lymphocytes (Fig. 314-1). Importantly, signaling by massive amounts of LPS through TLR4 leads to the release of large amounts of cytokines that mediate LPS-induced shock. Mutations in TLR4 proteins in mice protect from LPS shock, and TLR mutations in humans protect from LPS-induced inflammatory diseases such as LPS-induced asthma (Fig. 314-1).

Figure 314-1

 
 
 
Overview of major TLR signaling pathways. All TLRs signal through MyD88, with the exception of TLR3. TLR4 and the TLR2 subfamily (TLR1, TLR2, TLR6) also engage TIRAP. TLR3 signals through TRIF. TRIF is also used in conjunction with TRAM in the TLR4每MyD88-independent pathway. Dashed arrrows indicate translocation into the nucleus. LPS, lipopolysaccharide; dsRNA, double-strand RNA; ssRNA, single-strand RNA; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinases; NF-B, nuclear factor-B; IFN, interferon; IRF3, interferon regulatory factor 3; TLR, Toll-like receptor. (Adapted from D van Duin et al., with permission.)
 
 
Table 314每4. The Role of Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) in Modulation of Adaptive Immune Responses

 
 
PRR Family PRRs Ligand DC or Macrophage Cytokine Response Adaptive Immune Response 
TLRs TLR2 (heterodimer with TLR1 or 6) Lipopeptides

Pam-3-cys (TLR 2/1)

MALP (TLR 2/6)
 Low IL-12p70

High IL-10

IL-6
 TH1

TH2

T regulatory
 
  TLR3 dsRNA IL-12p70

IFN-

IL-6
 TH1
  
  TLR4 E. coli LPS  High IL-12p70

Intermediate IL-10

IL-6
 TH1
  
  TLR5 Flagellin High IL-12p70

Low IL-12p70
 TH1

TH2
 
  TLR7/8 ssRNA

Imidazoquinolines
 High IL-12p70

IFN-

IL-6
 TH1
  
  TLR9 CpG DNA High IL-12p70

Low IL-10

IL-6

IFN-
 TH1
  
  TLR10 ? ? ? 
C-type lectins DC-SIGN Env of HIV; core protein of HCV; components of Mycobacterium tuberculosis; Helicobacter pylori, Lewis Ag  H. pylori, Lewis Ag

Suppresses IL-12p70

Suppresses TLR signaling in DCs
 TH2

T regulatory
 
NOD NOD2 Muramyl dipeptide of peptidoglycan Induces IL-10 in DCs Weak T cell response (tolerogenic?) 
Mannose receptor Mannose receptor Mannosylated lipoarabinomannans from bacillus Calmette-Guerin and M. tuberculosis  Suppresses IL-12 and TLR signaling in DCs Weak T cell response? (tolerogenic?) 
 


Abbreviations: dsRNA, double-strand RNA; ssRNA, single-strand RNA; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; TH2, helper T cell; TH1, helper T cell; CpG, sequences in DNA recognized by TLR-9; MALP, macrophage-activating lipopeptide; DC-SIGN, DC-specific C-type lectin; NOD, NOTCH protein domain; TLR, Toll-like receptor; HCV, hepatitis C.

Source: B Pulendran: J Immunol 174:2457, 2005. Copyright 2005 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc., with permission.
 
Table 314每5. Cells of the Innate Immune System and Their Major Roles in Triggering Adaptive Immunity

 
 
Cell Type Major Role in Innate Immunity Major Role in Adaptive Immunity 
Macrophages Phagocytose and kill bacteria; produce antimicrobial peptides; bind (LPS); produce inflammatory cytokines Produce IL-1 and TNF- to upregulate lymphocyte adhesion molecules and chemokines to attract antigen-specific lymphocyte. Produce IL-12 to recruit TH1 T helper cell responses; upregulate co-stimulatory and MHC molecules to facilitate T and B lymphocyte recognition and activation. Macrophages and dendritic cells, after LPS signaling, upregulate co-stimulatory molecules B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) that are required for activation of antigen-specific antipathogen T cells. There are also Toll-like proteins on B cells and dendritic cells that, after LPS ligation, induce CD80 and CD86 on these cells for T cell antigen presentation.
  
Plasmacytoid f dendritic cells (DCs) of lymphoid lineage Produce large amounts of interferon- (IFN-), which has antitumor and antiviral activity, and are found in T cell zones of lymphoid organs; they circulate in blood IFN- is a potent activator of macrophage and mature DCs to phagocytose invading pathogens and present pathogen antigens to T and B cells 
Myeloid dendritic cells are of two types; interstitial and Langerhans-derived Interstitial DCs are strong producers of IL-12 and IL-10 and are located in T cell zones of lymphoid organs, circulate in blood, and are present in the interstices of the lung, heart, and kidney; Langerhans DCs are strong producers of IL-12; are located in T cell zones of lymph nodes, skin epithelia, and the thymic medulla; and circulate in blood Interstitial DCs are potent activators of macrophage and mature DCs to phagocytose invading pathogens and present pathogen antigens to T and B cells 
Natural killer (NK) cells Kill foreign and host cells that have low levels of MHC+ self-peptides. Express NK receptors that inhibit NK function in the presence of high expression of self-MHC. Produce TNF- and IFN-, which recruit TH1 helper T cell responses
  
NK-T cells Lymphocytes with both T cell and NK surface markers that recognize lipid antigens of intracellular bacteria such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis by CD1 molecules and kill host cells infected with intracellular bacteria.  Produce IL-4 to recruit TH2 helper T cell responses, IgG1 and IgE production
  
Neutrophils Phagocytose and kill bacteria, produce antimicrobial peptides Produce nitric oxide synthase and nitric oxide, which inhibit apoptosis in lymphocytes and can prolong adaptive immune responses 
Eosinophils Kill invading parasites Produce IL-5, which recruits Ig-specific antibody responses 
Mast cells and basophils Release TNF-, IL-6, and IFN- in response to a variety of bacterial PAMPs Produce IL-4, which recruits TH2 helper T cell responses and recruit IgG1- and IgE-specific antibody responses
  
Epithelial cells Produce antimicrobial peptides; tissue-specific epithelia produce mediator of local innate immunity; e.g., lung epithelial cells produce surfactant proteins (proteins within the collectin family) that bind and promote clearance of lung-invading microbes Produces TGF-, which triggers IgA-specific antibody responses 
 


Abbreviations: LPS, lipopolysaccharide; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular patterns; TNF-, tumor necrosis factor-alpha; IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-12, interleukin 4, 5, 6, 10, and 12, respectively.

Source: Adapted from R Medzhitov, CA Janeway: Curr Opinion Immunol 9:4, 1997. Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier.
 

Two other families of intracellular PRRs are the NLRs (NOD-like receptors) and the RLHs (RIG-like helicases). These families, unlike the TLRs, are composed primarily of soluble intracellular proteins that scan the cytoplasm for intracellular pathogens (Tables 314-2 and 314-3).

The intracellular microbial sensors, NLRs, after triggering, form large cytoplasmic complexes termed inflammasomes, which are aggregates of molecules including NOD-like receptor pyrin (NLRP) proteins that are members of the NLR family (Table 314-3). Inflammasomes activate inflammatory caspases and IL-1 in the presence of nonbacterial danger signals (cell stress) and bacterial PAMPs. Mutations in inflammasome proteins can lead to chronic inflammation in a group of periodic febrile diseases called autoinflammatory syndromes(Table 314-6).

Table 314每6. Diseases Associated with Inflammasome Activity

 
 
Disease Clinical Features Gene Mutated Etiologic Agent Inflammasome Involvement *Anakinra Response
  
Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS) Fever, arthralgia, cold-induced urticaria NALP3   Overactive Yes 
Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS) Fever, arthralgia, urticaria, sensorineural deafness, amyloidosis NAPL3   Overactive Yes 
Chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and articular syndrome (CINCA, NOMID) Fever, severe arthralgia, urticaria, neurologic problems, severe amyloidosis NALP3   Overactive Yes 
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) Fever, peritonitis, pleuritis, amyloidosis Pyrin   Overactive Partial 
Pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne syndrome (PAPA) Pyogenic sterile arthritis PSTPIP1   Overactive Yes 
Hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome (HIDS) Arthralgia, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy Mevalonate kinase   To be demonstrated Yes 
Tumor necrosis factor receptor-1每associated syndrome (TRAPS) Fever, abdominal pain, skin lesions TNF-R1   To be demonstrated Yes 
Systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SOJIA) Chronic joint inflammation   Unknown To be demonstrated Yes 
Adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) Arthralgia, fever   Unknown To be demonstrated Yes 
Beh?et's disease Arthralgia, uveitis, ulcers   Unknown To be demonstrated Yes 
Schnitzler's syndrome Urticaria, fever, arthralgia   Unknown To be demonstrated Yes 
Gout Metabolic arthritis, pain   Uric acid (MSU) Activated Yes 
Pseudogout Arthritis   CPPD Activated Yes 
Contact dermatitis Urticaria   Irritants Activated Unknown 
Fever syndrome Fever NALP12   Unknown Unknown 
Hydatidiform mole Hydatid mole NALP7   Unknown Unknown 
Vitiligo Skin depigmentation, autoimmunity NALP1   Unknown Unknown 
 


*Anakinra is a recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist that functions to block the biologic activity of naturally occuring interleukin-1 (IL-1).

Source: From F Martinon et al: Ann Rev Immunol 27:229, 2009. Copyright 2009. Reproduced with permission from Annual Reviews Inc.
 

Effector Cells of Innate Immunity

Cells of the innate immune system and their roles in the first line of host defense are listed in Table 314-5. Equally important as their roles in the mediation of innate immune responses are the roles that each cell type plays in recruiting T and B lymphocytes of the adaptive immune system to engage in specific antipathogen responses.

Monocytes-Macrophages

Monocytes arise from precursor cells within bone marrow (Fig. 314-2) and circulate with a half-life ranging from 1 to 3 days. Monocytes leave the peripheral circulation by marginating in capillaries and migrating into a vast extravascular pool. Tissue macrophages arise from monocytes that have migrated out of the circulation and by in situ proliferation of macrophage precursors in tissue. Common locations where tissue macrophages (and certain of their specialized forms) are found are lymph node, spleen, bone marrow, perivascular connective tissue, serous cavities such as the peritoneum, pleura, skin connective tissue, lung (alveolar macrophages), liver (Kupffer cells), bone (osteoclasts), central nervous system (microglia cells), and synovium (type A lining cells).

Figure 314-2

 
 
 
Schematic model of intercellular interactions of adaptive immune system cells. In this figure, the arrows denote that cells develop from precursor cells or produce cytokines or antibodies; lines ending with bars indicate suppressive intercellular interactions. Stem cells differentiate into either T cells, antigen-presenting dendritic cells, natural killer cells, macrophages, granulocytes, or B cells. Foreign antigen is processed by dendritic cells, and peptide fragments of foreign antigen are presented to CD4+ and/or CD8+ T cells. CD8+ T cell activation leads to induction of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) or killer T cell generation, as well as induction of cytokine-producing CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. For antibody production against the same antigen, active antigen is bound to sIg within the B cell receptor complex and drives B cell maturation into plasma cells that secrete Ig. TH1 or TH2 CD4+ T cells producing interleukin (IL) 4, IL-5, or interferon (IFN) regulate the Ig class switching and determine the type of antibody produced. TH17 cells secrete IL-17, IL-22, IL-26, which contribute to host defense against extracellular bacteria and fungi, particularly at mucosal surfaces. CD4+, CD25+ T regulatory cells produce IL-10 and downregulate T and B cell responses once the microbe has been eliminated. GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
 

In general, monocytes-macrophages are on the first line of defense associated with innate immunity and ingest and destroy microorganisms through the release of toxic products such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and nitric oxide (NO). Inflammatory mediators produced by macrophages attract additional effector cells such as neutrophils to the site of infection. Macrophage mediators include prostaglandins; leukotrienes; platelet activating factor; cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-, IL-6, and IL-12; and chemokines (Tables 314-7, 314-8, 314-9, and 314-10).

Table 314每7. Cytokines and Cytokine Receptors

 
 
Cytokine Receptor Cell Source Cell Target Biologic Activity 
IL-1, Type I IL-1r, Type II IL-1r Monocytes/macrophages, B cells, fibroblasts, most epithelial cells including thymic epithelium, endothelial cells All cells Upregulates adhesion molecule expression, neutrophil and macrophage emigration, mimics shock, fever, upregulates hepatic acute-phase protein production, facilitates hematopoiesis 
IL-2 IL-2r ,, common  T cells T cells, B cells, NK cells, monocytes-macrophages Promotes T cell activation and proliferation, B cell growth, NK cell proliferation and activation, enhanced monocyte/macrophage cytolytic activity 
IL-3 IL-3r, common  T cells, NK cells, mast cells Monocytes-macrophages, mast cells, eosinophils, bone marrow progenitors Stimulates hematopoietic progenitors 
IL-4 IL-4r , common  T cells, mast cells, basophils T cells, B cells, NK cells, monocytes-macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, endothelial cells, fibroblasts Stimulates TH2 helper T cell differentiation and proliferation. Stimulates B cell Ig class switch to IgG1 and IgE anti-inflammatory action on T cells, monocytes
  
IL-5 IL-5r , common  T cells, mast cells, eosinophils Eosinophils, basophils, murine B cells Regulates eosinophil migration and activation 
IL-6 IL-6r, gp130 Monocytes-macrophages, B cells, fibroblasts, most epithelium including thymic epithelium, endothelial cells T cells, B cells, epithelial cells, hepatocytes, monocytes-macrophages Induces acute-phase protein production, T and B cell differentiation and growth, myeloma cell growth, and osteoclast growth and activation 
IL-7 IL-7r , common  Bone marrow, thymic epithelial cells T cells, B cells, bone marrow cells Differentiates B, T, and NK cell precursors, activates T and NK cells 
IL-8 CXCR1, CXCR2 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, neutrophils, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, epithelial cells Neutrophils, T cells, monocytes-macrophages, endothelial cells, basophils Induces neutrophil, monocyte, and T cell migration, induces neutrophil adherence to endothelial cells and histamine release from basophils, and stimulates angiogenesis. Suppresses proliferation of hepatic precursors 
IL-9 IL-9r , common  T cells Bone marrow progenitors, B cells, T cells, mast cells Induces mast cell proliferation and function, synergizes with IL-4 in IgG and IgE production and T cell growth, activation, and differentiation 
IL-10 IL-10r Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, B cells, keratinocytes, mast cells Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, B cells, NK cells, mast cells Inhibits macrophage proinflammatory cytokine production, downregulates cytokine class II antigen and B7-1 and B7-2 expression, inhibits differentiation of TH1 helper T cells, inhibits NK cell function, stimulates mast cell proliferation and function, B cell activation, and differentiation
  
IL-11 IL-11, gp130 Bone marrow stromal cells Megakaryocytes, B cells, hepatocytes Induces megakaryocyte colony formation and maturation, enhances antibody responses, stimulates acute-phase protein production 
IL-12 (35-kD and 40-kD subunits) IL-12r Activated macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils T cells, NK cells Induces TH1 T helper cell formation and lymphokine-activated killer cell formation. Increases CD8+ CTL cytolytic activity; IL-17, IFN-.
  
IL-13 IL-13/IL-4 T cells (TH2)
  Monocytes-macrophages, B cells, endothelial cells, keratinocytes Upregulates VCAM-1 and C-C chemokine expression on endothelial cells and B cell activation and differentiation, and inhibits macrophage proinflammatory cytokine production 
IL-14 Unknown T cells Normal and malignant B cells Induces B cell proliferation 
IL-15 IL-15r , common , IL2r  Monocytes-macrophages, epithelial cells, fibroblasts T cells, NK cells Promotes T cell activation and proliferation, angiogenesis, and NK cells 
IL-16 CD4 Mast cells, eosinophils, CD8+ T cells, respiratory epithelium CD4+ T cells, monocytesmacrophages, eosinophils Promotes chemoattraction of CD4+ T cells, monocytes, and eosinophils. Inhibits HIV replication. Inhibits T cell activation through CD3/T cell receptor 
IL-17 IL17r CD4+ T cells Fibroblasts, endothelium, epithelium Enhances cytokine secretion 
IL-18 IL-18r (IL-1R-related protein) Keratinocytes, macrophages T cells, B cells, NK cells Upregulates IFN- production, enhances NK cell cytotoxicity 
IL-21 IL- chain/IL-21R CD4 T cells NK cells Downregulates NK cell每activating molecules, NKG2D/DAP10 
IL-23 IL-12Rb1/IL23R Macrophages, other cell types T cells Opposite effects of IL-12 (IL-17, IFN-) 
IFN- Type I interferon receptor All cells All cells Promotes antiviral activity. Stimulates T cell, macrophage, and NK cell activity. Direct antitumor effects. Upregulates MHC class I antigen expression. Used therapeutically in viral and autoimmune conditions 
IFN-  Type I interferon receptor All cells All cells Antiviral activity. Stimulates T cell, macrophage, and NK cell activity. Direct antitumor effects. Upregulates MHC class I antigen expression. Used therapeutically in viral and autoimmune conditions 
IFN- Type II interferon receptor T cells, NK cells All cells Regulates macrophage and NK cell activations. Stimulates immunoglobulin secretion by B cells. Induction of class II histocompatibility antigens. TH1 T cell differentiation.
  
TNF- TNFrI, TNFrII Monocytes-macrophages, mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, NK cells, B cells, T cells, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, thymic epithelial cells All cells except erythrocytes Fever, anorexia, shock, capillary leak syndrome, enhanced leukocyte cytotoxicity, enhanced NK cell function, acute phase protein synthesis, proinflammatory cytokine induction. 
TNF- TNFrI, TNFrII T cells, B cells All cells except erythrocytes Cell cytotoxicity, lymph node and spleen development. 
LT- LTR T cells All cells except erythrocytes Cell cytotoxicity, normal lymph node development 
G-CSF G-CSFr; gp130 Monocytes-macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, thymic epithelial cells, stromal cells Myeloid cells, endothelial cells Regulates myelopoiesis. Enhances survival and function of neutrophils. Clinical use in reversing neutropenia after cytotoxic chemotherapy. 
GM-CSF GM-CSFr, common  T cells, monocytesmacrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, thymic epithelial cells Monocytes-macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, fibroblasts, endothelial cells Regulates myelopoiesis. Enhances macrophage bactericidal and tumoricidal activity. Mediator of dendritic cell maturation and function. Upregulates NK cell function. Clinical use in reversing neutropenia after cytotoxic chemotherapy. 
M-CSF M-CSFr (c-fms protooncogene  Fibroblasts, endothelial cells, monocytesmacrophages, T cells, B cells, epithelial cells including thymic epithelium Monocytes-macrophages Regulates monocyte-macrophage production and function. 
LIF LIFr; gp130 Activated T cells, bone marrow stromal cells, thymic epithelium Megakaryocytes, monocytes, hepatocytes, possibly lymphocyte subpopulations Induces hepatic acute-phase protein production. Stimulates macrophage differentiation. Promotes growth of myeloma cells and hematopoietic progenitors. Stimulates thrombopoiesis. 
OSM OSMr; LIFr; gp130 Activated monocytesmacrophages and T cells, bone marrow stromal cells, some breast carcinoma cell lines, myeloma cells Neurons, hepatocytes, monocytes-macrophages, adipocytes, alveolar epithelial cells, embryonic stem cells, melanocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, myeloma cells Induces hepatic acute-phase protein production. Stimulates macrophage differentiation. Promotes growth of myeloma cells and hematopoietic progenitors. Stimulates thrombopoiesis. Stimulates growth of Kaposi＊s sarcoma cells. 
SCF SCFr (c-kit protooncogene)  Bone marrow stromal cells and fibroblasts Embryonic stem cells, myeloid and lymphoid precursors, mast cells. Stimulates hematopoietic progenitor cell growth, mast cell growth, promotes embryonic stem cell migration. 
TGF- (3 isoforms) Type I, II, III TGF- receptor Most cell types Most cell types Downregulates T cell, macrophage, and granulocyte responses. Stimulates synthesis of matrix proteins. Stimulates angiogenesis. 
Lymphotactin/SCM-1 Unknown NK cells, mast cells, double negative thymocytes, activated CD8+ T cells T cells, NK cells Chemoattractant for lymphocytes. Only known chemokine of C class. 
MCP-1 CCR2 Fibroblasts, smoothmuscle cells, activated PBMCs Monocytes-macrophages, NK cells, memory T cells, basophils Chemoattractant for monocytes, activated memory T cells, and NK cells. Induces granule release from CD8+ T cells and NK cells. Potent histamine-releasing factor for basophils. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. Regulates monocyte protease production. 
MCP-2 CCR1, CCR2 Fibroblasts, activated PBMCs Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, eosinophils, basophils, NK cells Chemoattractant for monocytes, memory and na?ve T cells, eosinophils, ?NK cells. Activates basophils and eosinophils. Regulates monocyte protease production. 
MCP-3 CCR1, CCR2 Fibroblasts, activated PBMCs Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, eosinophils, basophils, NK cells, dendritic cells Chemoattractant for monocytes, memory and na?ve T cells, dendritic cells, eosinophils, ?NK cells. Activates basophils and eosinophils. Regulates monocyte protease production. 
MCP-4 CCR2, CCR3 Lung, colon, small intestinal epithelial cells, activated endothelial cells Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, eosinophils, basophils Chemoattractant for monocytes, T cells, eosinophils, and basophils 
Eotaxin CCR3 Pulmonary epithelial cells, heart Eosinophils, basophils Potent chemoattractant for eosinophils and basophils. Induces allergic airways disease. Acts in concert with IL-5 to activate eosinophils. Antibodies to eotaxin inhibit airway inflammation. 
TARC CCR4 Thymus, dendritic cells, activated T cells T cells, NK cells Chemoattractant for T and NK cells. 
MDC CCR4 Monocytes-macrophages, dendritic cells, thymus Activated T cells Chemoattractant for activated T cells. Inhibits infection with T cell tropic HIV. 
MIP-1 CCR1, CCR5 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, dendritic cells, NK cells, eosinophils, basophils Chemoattractant for monocytes, T cells, dendritic cells, NK cells, and weak chemoattractant for eosinophils and basophils. Activates NK cell function. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. Necessary for myocarditis associated with Coxsackie virus infection. Inhibits infection with monocytotropic HIV. 
MIP-1 CCR5 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells Monocytesmacrophages, T cells, NK cells, dendritic cells Chemoattractant for monocytes, T cells, and NK cells. Activates NK cell function. Inhibits infection with monocytotropic HIV. 
RANTES CCR1, CCR2, CCR5 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, fibroblasts, eosinophils Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, NK cells, dendritic cells, eosinophils, basophils Chemoattractant for monocytesmacrophages, CD4+, CD45Ro+T cells, CD8+ T cells, NK cells, eosinophils, and basophils. Induces histamine release from basophils. Inhibits infections with monocytotropic HIV. 
LARC/MIP-3/Exodus-1 CCR6 Dendritic cells, fetal liver cells, activated T cells T cells, B cells Chemoattractant for lymphocytes. 
ELC/MIP-3 CCR7 Thymus, lymph node, appendix Activated T cells and B cells Chemoattractant for B and T cells. Receptor upregulated on EBV-infected B cells and HSV-infected T cells. 
I-309/TCA-3 CCR8 Activated T cells Monocytes-macrophages, T cells Chemoattractant for monocytes. Prevents glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in some T cell lines. 
SLC/TCA-4/Exodus-2 Unknown Thymic epithelial cells, lymph node, appendix and spleen T cells Chemoattractant for T lymphocytes. Inhibits hematopoiesis. 
DC-CK1/PARC Unknown Dendritic cells in secondary lymphoid tissues Na?ve T cells May have a role in induction of immune responses. 
TECK Unknown Dendritic cells, thymus, liver, small intestine T cells, monocytesmacrophages, dendritic cells Thymic dendritic cell每derived cytokine, possibly involved in T cell development 
GRO-/MGSA CXCR2 Activated granulocytes, monocyte-macrophages, and epithelial cells. Neutrophils, epithelial cells, ?endothelial cells Neutrophil chemoattractant and activator. Mitogenic for some melanoma cell lines. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. Angiogenic activity. 
GRO-/MIP-2 CXCR2 Activated granulocytes and monocyte-macrophages Neutrophils and ?endothelial cells. Neutrophil chemoattractant and activator. Angiogenic activity. 
NAP-2 CXCR2 Platelets Neutrophils, basophils Derived from platelet basic protein. Neutrophil chemoattractant and activator. 
IP-10 CXCR3 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, epithelial cells Activated T cells, tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes, ?endothelial cells, ?NK cells IFN--inducible protein that is a chemoattractant for T cells. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. 
MIG CXCR3 Monocytes-macrophages, T cells, fibroblasts Activated T cells, tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes IFN--inducible protein that is a chemoattractant for T cells. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. 
SDF-1 CXCR4 Fibroblasts T cells, dendritic cells, ?basophils, ?endothelial cells Low-potency, high-efficacy T cell chemoattractant. Required for B-lymphocyte development. Prevents infection of CD4+, CXCR4+ cells by T cell tropic HIV. 
Fractalkine CX3CR1 Activated endothelial cells NK cells, T cells, monocytes-macrophages Cell-surface chemokine/mucin hybrid molecule that functions as a chemoattractant, leukocyte activator, and cell adhesion molecule. 
PF-4 Unknown Platelets, megakaryocytes Fibroblasts, endothelial cells Chemoattractant for fibroblasts. Suppresses proliferation of hematopoietic precursors. Inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis. 
 


Abbreviations: IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer; TH1 and TH2, helper T cell subsets; Ig, immunoglobulin; CXCR, CXC-type chemokine receptor; B7-1, CD80, B7-2, CD86; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; IFN, interferon; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage CSF; M-CSF, macrophage CSF; LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor; OSM, oncostatin M; SCF, stem cell factor; TGF, transforming growth factor; MCP, monocyte chemotactic protein; CCR, CC-type chemokine receptor; TARC, thymus- and activation-regulated chemokine; MDC, macrophage-derived chemokine; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; RANTES, regulated on activation, normally T cell每expressed and 每secreted; LARC, liver- and activation-regulated chemokine; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ELC, EB11 ligand chemokine (MIP-1b); HSV, herpes simplex virus; TCA, T-cell activation protein; DC-CK, dendritic cell chemokine; PARC, pulmonary- and activation-regulated chemokine; SLC, secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine; TECK, thymus expressed chemokine; GRP, growth-related peptide; MGSA, melanoma growth-stimulating activity; NAP, neutrophil-activating protein; IP-10, IFN--inducible protein-10; MIG, monokine induced by IFN- ; SDF, stromal cell-derived factor; PF, platelet factor.

Source: Data from JS Sundy et al: Appendix B, in Inflammation, Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, 3rd ed, J Gallin and R Snyderman (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 1999.
 
Table 314每8. CC, CXC1, CX3, C1 and XC Families of Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors

 
 
Chemokine Receptor Chemokine Ligands Cell Types Disease Connection 
CCR1 CCL3 (MIP-1), CCL5 (RANTES), CCL7 (MCP-3), CCL14 (HCC1) T cells, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils Rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis 
CCR2 CCL2 (MCP-1), CCL8 (MCP-2), CCL7 (MCP-3), CCL13 (MCP-4), CCL16 (HCC4) Monocytes, dendritic cells (immature), memory T cells Atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, resistance to intracellular pathogens, type 2 diabetes mellitus 
CCR3 CCL11 (eotaxin), CCL13 (eotaxin-2), CCL7 (MCP-3), CCL5 (RANTES), CCL8 (MCP-2), CCL13 (MCP-4) Eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, TH2, platelets
  Allergic asthma and rhinitis 
CCR4 CCL17 (TARC), CCL22 (MDC) T cells (TH2) dendritic cells (mature), basophils, macrophages, platelets
  Parasitic infection, graft rejection, T cell homing to skin 
CCR5 CCL3 (MIP-1), CCL4 (MIP-1), CCL5 (RANTES), CCL11 (eotaxin), CCL14 (HCC1), CCL16 (HCC4) T cells, monocytes HIV-1 co-receptor (T cell每tropic strains), transplant rejection 
CCR6 CCL20 (MIP-3, LARC) T cells (T regulatory and memory), B cells, dendritic cells Mucosal humoral immunity, allergic asthma, intestinal T cell homing 
CCR7 CCL19 (ELC), CCL21 (SLC) T cells, dendritic cells (mature) Transport of T cells and dendritic cells to lymph nodes, antigen presentation, and cellular immunity 
CCR8 CCL1 (1309) T cells (TH2), monocytes, dendritic cells
  Dendritic cell migration to lymph node, type 2 cellular immunity, granuloma formation 
CCR9 CCL25 (TECK) T cells, IgA+ plasma cells Homing of T cells and IgA+ plasma cells to the intestine, inflammatory bowel disease 
CCR10 CCL27 (CTACK), CCL28 (MEC) T cells T cell homing to intestine and skin 
CXCR1 CXCL8 (interleukin-8), CXCL6 (GCP2) Neutrophils, monocytes Inflammatory lung disease, COPD 
CXCR2 CXCL8, CXCL1 (GRO), CXCL2 (GRO), CXCL3 (GRO), CXCL5 (ENA-78), CXCL6 Neutrophils, monocytes, microvascular endothelial cells Inflammatory lung disease, COPD, angiogenic for tumor growth 
CXCR3-A CXCL9 (MIG), CXCL10 (IP-10), CXCL11 (I-TAC) Type 1 helper cells, mast cells, mesangial cells Inflammatory skin disease, multiple sclerosis, transplant rejection 
CXCR3-B CXCL4 (PF4), CXCL9 (MIG), CXCL10 (IP-10), CXCL11 (I-TAC) Microvascular endothelial cells, neoplastic cells Angiostatic for tumor growth 
CXCR4 CXCL12 (SDF-1) Widely expressed HIV-1 co-receptor (T cell每tropic), tumor metastases, hematopoiesis 
CXCR5 CXCL13 (BCA-1) B cells, follicular helper T cells Formation of B cell follicles 
CXCR6 CXCL16 (SR-PSOX) CD8+ T cells, natural killer cells, and memory CD4+ T cells Inflammatory liver disease, atherosclerosis (CXCL16) 
CX3CR1
  CX3CL1 (fractalkine) Macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth-muscle cells Atherosclerosis 
XCR1 XCL1 (lymphotactin), XCL2 T cells, natural killer cells Rheumatoid arthritis, IgA nephropathy, tumor response 
 


Abbreviations: MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant protein; HCC, hemofiltrate chemokine; TH2, type 2 helper T cells; TARC, thymus- and activation-regulated chemokine; MDC, macrophage-derived chemokine; LARC, liver- and activation-regulated chemokine; ELC, Epstein-Barr I1-ligand chemokine; SLC, secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine; TECK, thymus-expressed chemokine; CTACK, cutaneous T cell每attracting chemokine; MEC, mammary-enriched chemokine; GCP, granulocyte chemotactic protein; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GRO, growth-regulated oncogene; ENA, epithelial-cell每derived neutrophil-activating peptide; MIG, monokine induced by interferon- IP-10, interferon inducible 10; I-TAC, interferon-inducible T-cell alpha chemoattractant; PF, platelet factor; SDF, stromal-cell每derived factor; BCA-1, B-cell chemoattractant 1; SR-PSOX, scavenger receptor for phosphatidylserine-containing oxidized lipids.

Source: From IF Charo, RM Ranshohoff: N Engl J Med 354:610, 2006, with permission. Copyright Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
 
Table 314每9. Major Structural Families of Cytokines

 
 
Four -helix-bundle family interleukins Interleukin-2 (IL-2) Subfamily: 
  Interleukins: IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-9, IL-11, IL-12, IL-13, IL-15, IL-21, IL-23 
  Not called interleukins: Colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF1), granulocyte每macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF2), Flt-3 ligand, erythropoietin (EPO), thrombopoietin (THPO), leukocyte inhibitory factor (LIF) 
  Not interleukins: Growth hormone (GH1), prolactin (PRL), leptin (LEP), cardiotrophin (CTF1), ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), cytokine receptor-like factor 1 (CLC or CLF) Interferon (IFN) subfamily: IFN-, IFN- 
  IL-10 subfamily: IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26 
IL-1 family IL-1 (IL1A), IL-1 (IL1B), IL-18 (IL18), and paralogues, IL-17A, IL-17B, IL-17C, IL-17D, IL-17E, IL-17F 
Chemokines IL-8, MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, MCP-4, eotaxin, TARC, LARC/MIP-3, MDC, MIP-1, MIP-1, RANTES, MIP-3, I-309, SLC, PARC, TECK, GRO, GRO, NAP-2, IP-19, MIG, SDF-1, PF4 
 


Abbreviations: GRO, growth-related peptide; IL, interleukin; IP, INF--inducible protein; LARC, liver- and activation-regulated chemokine; MCP, monocyte chemotactic protein; MDC, macrophage-derived chemokine; MIG, monokine induced by IFN- ; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; NAP, neutrophil-activating protein; PARC, pulmonary- and activation-regulated chemokine; PF4, platelet factor; RANTES, regulated on activation, normally T cell每expressed and 每secreted; SDF, stromal cell每derived factor; SLC, secondary lymphoid tissue.

Source: Adapted from JW Schrader: Trends Immunol 23:573, 2002. Copyright 2002, with permission from Elsevier.
 
Table 314每10. Cytokine Families Grouped by Structural Similarity

 
 
Hematopoietins IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-9, IL-11, IL-12, IL-15, IL-16, IL-17, IL-21, IL-23, EPO, LIF, GM-CSF, G-CSF, OSM, CNTF, GH, and TPO 
  TNF-, LT-, LT-, CD40L, CD30L, CD27L, 4-1BBL, OX40, OPG, and FasL 
IL-1 IL-1, IL-1, IL-1ra, IL-18, bFGF, aFGF, and ECGF 
PDGF PDGF A, PDGF B, and M-CSF 
TGF- TGF- and BMPs (1,2,4 etc.) 
C-X-C chemokines IL-8, Gro-//, NAP-2, ENA78, GCP-2, PF4, CTAP-3, MIG, and IP-10 
C-C chemokines MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, MIP-1, MIP-1, RANTES 
 


Abbreviations: aFGF, acidic fibroblast growth factor; 4-1BBL, 401 BB ligand; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; BMP, bone marrow morphogenetic proteins; C-C, cysteine-cysteine; CD, cluster of differentiation; CNTF, ciliary neurotrophic factor; CTAP, connective tissue每activating peptide; C-X-C, cysteine-x-cysteine; ECGF, endothelial cell growth factor; EPO, erythropoietin; FasL, Fas ligand; GCP-2, granulocyte chemotactic protein 2; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GH, growth hormone; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; Gro, growth-related gene products; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; IP, interferon- inducible protein; LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor; LT, lymphotoxin; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; MIG, monokine induced by interferon-; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; NAP-2, neutrophil activating protein 2; OPG, osteoprotegerin; OSM, oncostatin M; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PF, platelet factor; R, receptor; RANTES, regulated on activation, normal T cell每expressed and 每secreted; TGF, transforming growth factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TPO, thyroperoxidase.
 

Although monocytes-macrophages were originally thought to be the major antigen-presenting cells (APCs) of the immune system, it is now clear that cell types called dendritic cells are the most potent and effective APCs in the body (see below). Monocytes-macrophages mediate innate immune effector functions such as destruction of antibody-coated bacteria, tumor cells, or even normal hematopoietic cells in certain types of autoimmune cytopenias. Monocytes-macrophages ingest bacteria or are infected by viruses, and in doing so, they frequently undergo programmed cell death or apoptosis. Macrophages that are infected by intracellular infectious agents are recognized by dendritic cells as infected and apoptotic cells and are phagocytosed by dendritic cells. In this manner, dendritic cells "cross-present" infectious agent antigens of macrophages to T cells. Activated macrophages can also mediate antigen-nonspecific lytic activity and eliminate cell types such as tumor cells in the absence of antibody. This activity is largely mediated by cytokines (i.e., TNF- and IL-1). Monocytes-macrophages express lineage-specific molecules (e.g., the cell-surface LPS receptor, CD14) as well as surface receptors for a number of molecules, including the Fc region of IgG, activated complement components, and various cytokines (Table 314-7).

Dendritic Cells

Human dendritic cells (DCs) are heterogenous and contain several subsets, including myeloid DCs and plasmacytoid DCs. Myeloid DCs can differentiate into either macrophages-monocytes or tissue-specific DCs. In contrast to myeloid DCs, plasmacytoid DCs are inefficient antigen-presenting cells but are potent producers of type I interferon (IFN) (e.g., IFN-) in response to viral infections. The maturation of DCs is regulated through cell-to-cell contact and soluble factors, and DCs attract immune effectors through secretion of chemokines. When DCs come in contact with bacterial products, viral proteins, or host proteins released as danger signals from distressed host cells (Figs. 314-2 and 314-3), infectious agent molecules bind to various TLRs and activate DCs to release cytokines and chemokines that drive cells of the innate immune system to become activated to respond to the invading organism, and recruit T and B cells of the adaptive immune system to respond. Plasmacytoid DCs produce antiviral IFN- that activates NK cell killing of pathogen-infected cells; IFN- also activates T cells to mature into antipathogen cytotoxic (killer) T cells. Following contact with pathogens, both plasmacytoid and myeloid DCs produce chemokines that attract helper and cytotoxic T cells, B cells, polymorphonuclear cells, and na?ve and memory T cells as well as regulatory T cells to ultimately dampen the immune response once the pathogen is controlled. TLR engagement on DCs upregulates MHC class II, B7-1 (CD80), and B7-2 (CD86), which enhance DC-specific antigen presentation and induce cytokine production (Table 314-7). Thus, DCs are important bridges between early (innate) and later (adaptive) immunity. DCs also modulate and determine the types of immune responses induced by pathogens via the TLRs expressed on DCs (TLR7-9 on plasmacytoid DCs, TLR4 on monocytoid DCs) and via the TLR adapter proteins that are induced to associate with TLRs (Fig. 314-1, Table 314-4). In addition, other PRRs, such as C-type lectins, NLRs, and mannose receptors, upon ligation by pathogen products, activate cells of the adaptive immune system and, like TLR stimulation, by a variety of factors, determine the type and quality of the adaptive immune response that is triggered (Table 314-4).

Figure 314-3

 
 
 
CD4+ helper T1 (TH1) cells and TH2 T cells secrete distinct but overlapping sets of cytokines. TH1 CD4+ cells are frequently activated in immune and inflammatory reactions against intracellular bacteria or viruses, while TH2 CD4+ cells are frequently activated for certain types of antibody production against parasites and extracellular encapsulated bacteria; they are also activated in allergic diseases. GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. (Adapted from Romagnani; with permission.)
 
 

Large Granular Lymphocytes/Natural Killer Cells

Large granular lymphocytes (LGLs) or NK cells account for ~5每15% of peripheral blood lymphocytes. NK cells are nonadherent, nonphagocytic cells with large azurophilic cytoplasmic granules. NK cells express surface receptors for the Fc portion of IgG (CD16) and for NCAM-I (CD56), and many NK cells express T lineage markers, particularly CD8, and proliferate in response to IL-2. NK cells arise in both bone marrow and thymic microenvironments.

Functionally, NK cells share features with both monocytes- macrophages and neutrophils in that they mediate both antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and NK cell activity. ADCC is the binding of an opsonized (antibody-coated) target cell to an Fc receptor每bearing effector cell via the Fc region of antibody, resulting in lysis of the target by the effector cell. NK cell cytotoxicity is the nonimmune (i.e., effector cell never having had previous contact with the target), MHC-unrestricted, non-antibody-mediated killing of target cells, which are usually malignant cell types, transplanted foreign cells, or virus-infected cells. Thus, NK cell cytotoxicity may play an important role in immune surveillance and destruction of malignant and virally infected host cells. NK cell hyporesponsiveness is also observed in patients with Ch谷diak-Higashi syndrome, an autosomal recessive disease associated with fusion of cytoplasmic granules and defective degranulation of neutrophil lysosomes.

NK cells have a variety of surface receptors that have inhibitory or activating functions and belong to two structural families. These families include the immunoglobulin superfamily and the lectin-like type II transmembrane proteins. NK immunoglobulin superfamily receptors include the killer cell immunoglobulin-like activating or inhibitory receptors (KIRs), many of which have been shown to have HLA class I ligands. The KIRs are made up proteins with either two (KIR2D) or three (KIR3D) extracellular immunoglobulin domains (D). Moreover, their nomenclature designates their function as either inhibitory KIRs with a long (L) cytoplasmic tail and immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) (KIRDL) or activating KIRs with a short (S) cytoplasmic tail (KIRDS). NK cell inactivation by KIRs is a central mechanism to prevent damage to normal host cells. Genetic studies have demonstrated the association of KIRs with viral infection outcome and autoimmune disease (Table 314-11).

Table 314每11. Association of KIRs with Disease

 
 
Disease KIR Association Observation 
Psoriatic arthritis KIR2DS1/KIR2DS2; HLA-Cw group homozygosity Susceptibility 
Spondylarthritides Increased KIR3DL2 expression May contribute to disease pathology 
  Interaction HLA-B27 homodimers with KIR3DL1/KIR3DL2; independent of peptide May contribute to disease pathogenesis 
Ankylosing spondylitis KIR3DL1/3DS1; HLA B27 genotypes Susceptibility 
Rheumatoid vasculitis KIR2DS2; HLA-Cw*03 Susceptibility 
  Increased KIR2L2/2DS2 in patients with extra articular manifestations Clinical manifestations may have different genetic backgrounds with respect to KIR genotype 
Rheumatoid arthritis Decreased KIR2DS1/3DS1 in patients without bone erosions Susceptibility 
  KIR2DS4; HLA-Cw4 Susceptibility 
Scleroderma KIR2DS2+/KIR2DL2- Susceptibility 
Beh?et's disease Altered KIR3DL1 expression Associated with severe eye disease 
Psoriasis vulgaris 2DS1; HLA-Cw*06  Susceptibility  
  2DS1; 2DL5; Haplotype B Susceptibility 
IDDM KIR2DS2; HLA-C1 Susceptibility 
Type 1 diabetes KIR2DS2; HLA-C1 and no HLA-C2, no HLA-Bw4 Increased disease progression 
Preeclampsia KIR2DL1 with fewer KIR2DS (mother); HLA-C2 (fetus) Increased disease progression 
AIDS KIR3DS1; HLA-Bw4Ile80  Decreased disease progression 
  KIR3DS1 homozygous; No HLA-Bw4Ile80
  Increased disease progression 
HCV infection KIR2DL3 homozygous; HLA-C1 homozygous Decreased disease progression 
Cervical neoplasia (HPV induced) KIR3DS1; HLA-C1 homozygous and no HLA-Bw4 Increased disease progression 
Malignant melanoma KIR2DL2 and/or KIR2DL3; HLA-C1 Increased disease progression 
 


Abbreviations: HCV, hepatitis C virus; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; HPV, human papillomavirus; IDDM, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; KIR, killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor.

Source: Adapted from Diaz-Pena et al.
 

In addition to the KIRs, a second set of immunoglobulin superfamily receptors include the natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs), which include NKp46, NKp30, and NKp44. These receptors help to mediate NK cell activation against target cells. The ligands to which NCRs bind on target cells remain largely undefined.

NK cell signaling is, therefore, a highly coordinated series of inhibiting and activating signals that prevent NK cells from responding to uninfected, nonmalignant self-cells; however, they are activated to attack malignant and virally infected cells (Fig. 314-4). Recent evidence suggests that NK cells, although not possessing rearranging immune recognition genes, may be able to mediate recall for NK cell responses to viruses and for immune responses such as contact hypersensitivity.

Figure 314-4

 
 
 
 
 
 
Encounters between NK cells: potential targets and possible outcomes. The amount of activating and inhibitory receptors on the NK cells and the amount of ligands on the target cell, as well as the qualitative differences in the signals transduced, determine the extent of the NK response. A. When target cells have no HLA class I nor activating ligands, NK cells cannot kill target cells. B. When target cells bear self-HLA, NK cells cannot kill targets. C. When target cells are pathogen infected and have downregulated HLA and express activating ligands, NK cells kill target cells. D. When NK cells encounter targets with both self-HLA and activating receptors, then the level of target killing is determined by the balance of inhibitory and activating signals to the NK cell. HLA, human leukocyte antigen; NK, natural killer. (Adapted from Lanier; reproduced with permission from Annual Reviews Inc. Copyright 2011 by Annual Reviews Inc.)
 
 

Some NK cells express CD3 and invariant T cell receptor (TCR) alpha chains and are termed NK T cells. TCRs of NK T cells recognize lipid molecules of intracellular bacteria when presented in the context of CD1d molecules on APCs. Upon activation, NK T cells secrete effector cytokines such as IL-4 and IFN. This mode of recognition of intracellular bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes and Mycobacterium tuberculosis by NK T cells leads to induction of activation of DCs and is thought to be an important innate defense mechanism against these organisms.

Neutrophils, Eosinophils, and Basophils

Granulocytes are present in nearly all forms of inflammation and are amplifiers and effectors of innate immune responses (Figs. 314-2 and 314-3). Unchecked accumulation and activation of granulocytes can lead to host tissue damage, as seen in neutrophil- and eosinophil-mediated systemic necrotizing vasculitis. Granulocytes are derived from stem cells in bone marrow. Each type of granulocyte (neutrophil, eosinophil, or basophil) is derived from a different subclass of progenitor cell that is stimulated to proliferate by colony-stimulating factors (Table 314-7). During terminal maturation of granulocytes, class-specific nuclear morphology and cytoplasmic granules appear that allow for histologic identification of granulocyte type.

Neutrophils express Fc receptors for IgG (CD16) and receptors for activated complement components (C3b or CD35). Upon interaction of neutrophils with opsonized bacteria or immune complexes, azurophilic granules (containing myeloperoxidase, lysozyme, elastase, and other enzymes) and specific granules (containing lactoferrin, lysozyme, collagenase, and other enzymes) are released, and microbicidal superoxide radicals (O2每) are generated at the neutrophil surface. The generation of superoxide leads to inflammation by direct injury to tissue and by alteration of macromolecules such as collagen and DNA.

Eosinophils express Fc receptors for IgG (CD32) and are potent cytotoxic effector cells for various parasitic organisms. In Nippostrongylus brasiliensis helminth infection, eosinophils are important cytotoxic effector cells for removal of these parasites. Key to regulation of eosinophil cytotoxicity to N. brasiliensis worms are antigen-specific T helper cells that produce IL-4, thus providing an example of regulation of innate immune responses by adaptive immunity antigen-specific T cells. Intracytoplasmic contents of eosinophils, such as major basic protein, eosinophil cationic protein, and eosinophil-derived neurotoxin, are capable of directly damaging tissues and may be responsible in part for the organ system dysfunction in the hypereosinophilic syndromes (Chap. 60). Since the eosinophil granule contains anti-inflammatory types of enzymes (histaminase, arylsulfatase, phospholipase D), eosinophils may homeostatically downregulate or terminate ongoing inflammatory responses.

Basophils and tissue mast cells are potent reservoirs of cytokines such as IL-4 and can respond to bacteria and viruses with antipathogen cytokine production through multiple TLRs expressed on their surface. Mast cells and basophils can also mediate immunity through the binding of antipathogen antibodies. This is a particularly important host defense mechanism against parasitic diseases. Basophils express high-affinity surface receptors for IgE (FcRI) and, upon cross-linking of basophil-bound IgE by antigen, can release histamine, eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis, and neutral protease〞all mediators of allergic immediate (anaphylaxis) hypersensitivity responses (Table 314-12). In addition, basophils express surface receptors for activated complement components (C3a, C5a), through which mediator release can be directly effected. Thus, basophils, like most cells of the immune system, can be activated in the service of host defense against pathogens, or they can be activated for mediation release and cause pathogenic responses in allergic and inflammatory diseases. For further discussion of tissue mast cells, see Chap. 317.

Table 314每12. Examples of Mediators Released from Human Cells and Basophils

 
 
Mediator Actions 
Histamine Smooth-muscle contraction, increased vascular permeability 
Slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRSA) (leukotriene C4, D4, E4) Smooth-muscle contraction 
Eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis (ECF-A) Chemotactic attraction of eosinophils 
Platelet-activating factor Activates platelets to secrete serotonin and other mediators: smooth-muscle contraction; induces vascular permeability 
Neutrophil chemotactic factor (NCF) Chemotactic attraction of neutrophils 
Leukotactic activity (leukotriene B4) Chemotactic attraction of neutrophils 
Heparin Anticoagulant 
Basophil kallikrein of anaphylaxis (BK-A) Cleaves kininogen to form bradykinin 
 

 

The Complement System

The complement system, an important soluble component of the innate immune system, is a series of plasma enzymes, regulatory proteins, and proteins that are activated in a cascading fashion, resulting in cell lysis. There are four pathways of the complement system: the classic activation pathway activated by antigen/antibody immune complexes, the MBL (a serum collectin; Table 314-3) activation pathway activated by microbes with terminal mannose groups, the alternative activation pathway activated by microbes or tumor cells, and the terminal pathway that is common to the first three pathways and leads to the membrane attack complex that lyses cells (Fig. 314-5). The series of enzymes of the complement system are serine proteases.

Figure 314-5

 
 
 
The four pathways and the effector mechanisms of the complement system. Dashed arrows indicate the functions of pathway components. (After Morley and Walport; with permission. Copyright Academic Press, London, 2000.)
 
 

Activation of the classic complement pathway via immune complex binding to C1q links the innate and adaptive immune systems via specific antibody in the immune complex. The alternative complement activation pathway is antibody-independent and is activated by binding of C3 directly to pathogens and "altered self" such as tumor cells. In the renal glomerular inflammatory disease IgA nephropathy, IgA activates the alternative complement pathway and causes glomerular damage and decreased renal function. Activation of the classic complement pathway via C1, C4, and C2 and activation of the alternative pathway via factor D, C3, and factor B both lead to cleavage and activation of C3. C3 activation fragments, when bound to target surfaces such as bacteria and other foreign antigens, are critical for opsonization (coating by antibody and complement) in preparation for phagocytosis. The MBL pathway substitutes MBL-associated serine proteases (MASPs) 1 and 2 for C1q, C1r, and C1s to activate C4. The MBL activation pathway is activated by mannose on the surface of bacteria and viruses.

The three pathways of complement activation all converge on the final common terminal pathway. C3 cleavage by each pathway results in activation of C5, C6, C7, C8, and C9, resulting in the membrane attack complex that physically inserts into the membranes of target cells or bacteria and lyses them.

Thus, complement activation is a critical component of innate immunity for responding to microbial infection. The functional consequences of complement activation by the three initiating pathways and the terminal pathway are shown in Fig. 314-5. In general the cleavage products of complement components facilitate microbe or damaged cell clearance (C1q, C4, C3), promote activation and enhancement of inflammation (anaphylatoxins, C3a, C5a), and promote microbe or opsonized cell lysis (membrane attack complex).

Cytokines

Cytokines are soluble proteins produced by a wide variety of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cell types (Tables 314-7, 314-8, 314-9, and 314-10). They are critical for both normal innate and adaptive immune responses, and their expression may be perturbed in most immune, inflammatory, and infectious disease states.

Cytokines are involved in the regulation of the growth, development, and activation of immune system cells and in the mediation of the inflammatory response. In general, cytokines are characterized by considerable redundancy; different cytokines have similar functions. In addition, many cytokines are pleiotropic in that they are capable of acting on many different cell types. This pleiotropism results from the expression on multiple cell types of receptors for the same cytokine (see below), leading to the formation of "cytokine networks." The action of cytokines may be (1) autocrine when the target cell is the same cell that secretes the cytokine, (2) paracrine when the target cell is nearby, and (3) endocrine when the cytokine is secreted into the circulation and acts distal to the source.

Cytokines have been named based on presumed targets or based on presumed functions. Those cytokines that are thought to primarily target leukocytes have been named interleukins (IL-1, -2, -3, etc.). Many cytokines that were originally described as having a certain function have retained those names (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or G-CSF, etc.). Cytokines belong in general to three major structural families: the hematopoietin family; the TNF, IL-1, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and transforming growth factor (TGF)  families; and the CXC and C-C chemokine families (Table 314-10). Chemokines are cytokines that regulate cell movement and trafficking; they act through G protein每coupled receptors and have a distinctive three-dimensional structure. IL-8 is the only chemokine that early on was named an interleukin (Table 314-7).

In general, cytokines exert their effects by influencing gene activation that results in cellular activation, growth, differentiation, functional cell-surface molecule expression, and cellular effector function. In this regard, cytokines can have dramatic effects on the regulation of immune responses and the pathogenesis of a variety of diseases. Indeed, T cells have been categorized on the basis of the pattern of cytokines that they secrete, which results in either humoral immune response (TH2) or cell-mediated immune response (TH1). A third type of T helper cell is the TH17 cell that contributes to host defense against extracellular bacteria and fungi, particularly at mucosal sites (Fig. 314-2).

Cytokine receptors can be grouped into five general families based on similarities in their extracellular amino acid sequences and conserved structural domains. The immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily represents a large number of cell-surface and secreted proteins. The IL-1 receptors (type 1, type 2) are examples of cytokine receptors with extracellular Ig domains.

The hallmark of the hematopoietic growth factor (type 1) receptor family is that the extracellular regions of each receptor contain two conserved motifs. One motif, located at the N terminus, is rich in cysteine residues. The other motif is located at the C terminus proximal to the transmembrane region and comprises five amino acid residues, tryptophan-serine-X-tryptophan-serine (WSXWS). This family can be grouped on the basis of the number of receptor subunits they have and on the utilization of shared subunits. A number of cytokine receptors, i.e., IL-6, IL-11, IL-12, and leukemia inhibitory factor, are paired with gp130. There is also a common 150-kDa subunit shared by IL-3, IL-5, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptors. The gamma chain (c) of the IL-2 receptor is common to the IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15 receptors. Thus, the specific cytokine receptor is responsible for ligand-specific binding, while the subunits such as gp130, the 150-kDa subunit, and c are important in signal transduction. The c gene is on the X chromosome, and mutations in the c protein result in the X-linked form of severe combined immune deficiency syndrome (X-SCID) (Chap. 316).

The members of the interferon (type II) receptor family include the receptors for IFN- and -, which share a similar 210-amino-acid binding domain with conserved cysteine pairs at both the amino and carboxy termini. The members of the TNF (type III) receptor family share a common binding domain composed of repeated cysteine-rich regions. Members of this family include the p55 and p75 receptors for TNF (TNF-R1 and TNF-R2, respectively); CD40 antigen, which is an important B cell每surface marker involved in immunoglobulin isotype switching; fas/Apo-1, whose triggering induces apoptosis; CD27 and CD30, which are found on activated T cells and B cells; and nerve growth factor receptor.

The common motif for the seven transmembrane helix family was originally found in receptors linked to GTP-binding proteins. This family includes receptors for chemokines (Table 314-8), -adrenergic receptors, and retinal rhodopsin. It is important to note that two members of the chemokine receptor family, CXC chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) and  chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), have been found to serve as the two major co-receptors for binding and entry of HIV into CD4-expressing host cells (Chap. 189).

Significant advances have been made in defining the signaling pathways through which cytokines exert their effects intracellularly. The Janus family of protein tyrosine kinases (JAK) is a critical element involved in signaling via the hematopoietin receptors. Four JAK kinases, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and Tyk2, preferentially bind different cytokine receptor subunits. Cytokine binding to its receptor brings the cytokine receptor subunits into apposition and allows a pair of JAKs to transphosphorylate and activate one another. The JAKs then phosphorylate the receptor on the tyrosine residues and allow signaling molecules to bind to the receptor, where these molecules become phosphorylated. Signaling molecules bind the receptor because they have domains (SH2, or src homology 2 domains) that can bind phosphorylated tyrosine residues. There are a number of these important signaling molecules that bind the receptor, such as the adapter molecule SHC, which can couple the receptor to the activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. In addition, an important class of substrate of the JAKs is the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors. STATs have SH2 domains that enable them to bind to phosphorylated receptors, where they are then phosphorylated by the JAKs. It appears that different STATs have specificity for different receptor subunits. The STATs then dissociate from the receptor and translocate to the nucleus, bind to DNA motifs that they recognize, and regulate gene expression. The STATs preferentially bind DNA motifs that are slightly different from one another and thereby control transcription of specific genes. The importance of this pathway is particularly relevant to lymphoid development. Mutations of JAK3 itself also result in a disorder identical to X-SCID; however, since JAK3 is found on chromosome 19 and not on the X chromosome, JAK3 deficiency occurs in boys and girls (Chap. 316).

The Adaptive Immune System

Adaptive immunity is characterized by antigen-specific responses to a foreign antigen or pathogen. A key feature of adaptive immunity is that following the initial contact with antigen (immunologic priming), subsequent antigen exposure leads to more rapid and vigorous immune responses (immunologic memory). The adaptive immune system consists of dual limbs of cellular and humoral immunity. The principal effectors of cellular immunity are T lymphocytes, while the principal effectors of humoral immunity are B lymphocytes. Both B and T lymphocytes derive from a common stem cell (Fig. 314-6).

Figure 314-6

 
 
 
Development stages of T and B cells. Elements of the developing T and B cell receptor for antigen are shown schematically. The classification into the various stages of B cell development is primarily defined by rearrangement of the immunoglobulin (Ig), heavy (H), and light (L) chain genes and by the absence or presence of specific surface markers. [Adapted from CA Janeway et al (eds): Immunobiology. The Immune Systemic Health and Disease, 4th ed. New York, Garland, 1999; with permission.] The classification of stages of T cell development is primarily defined by cell-surface marker protein expression (sCD3, surface CD3 expression, cCD3, cytoplasmic CD3 expression; TCR, T cell receptor).
 
 

The proportion and distribution of immunocompetent cells in various tissues reflect cell traffic, homing patterns, and functional capabilities. Bone marrow is the major site of maturation of B cells, monocytes-macrophages, dendritic cells, and granulocytes and contains pluripotent stem cells that, under the influence of various colony-stimulating factors, are capable of giving rise to all hematopoietic cell types. T cell precursors also arise from hematopoietic stem cells and home to the thymus for maturation. Mature T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, monocytes, and dendritic cells enter the circulation and home to peripheral lymphoid organs (lymph nodes, spleen) and mucosal surface-associated lymphoid tissue (gut, genitourinary, and respiratory tracts) as well as the skin and mucous membranes and await activation by foreign antigen.

T Cells

The pool of effector T cells is established in the thymus early in life and is maintained throughout life both by new T cell production in the thymus and by antigen-driven expansion of virgin peripheral T cells into "memory" T cells that reside in peripheral lymphoid organs. The thymus exports ~2% of the total number of thymocytes per day throughout life, with the total number of daily thymic emigrants decreasing by ~3% per year during the first four decades of life.

Mature T lymphocytes constitute 70每80% of normal peripheral blood lymphocytes (only 2% of the total-body lymphocytes are contained in peripheral blood), 90% of thoracic duct lymphocytes, 30每40% of lymph node cells, and 20每30% of spleen lymphoid cells. In lymph nodes, T cells occupy deep paracortical areas around B cell germinal centers, and in the spleen, they are located in periarteriolar areas of white pulp (Chap. 59). T cells are the primary effectors of cell-mediated immunity, with subsets of T cells maturing into CD8+ cytotoxic T cells capable of lysis of virus-infected or foreign cells (short-lived effector T cells). Two populations of long-lived memory T cells are triggered by infections: effector memory and central memory T cells. Effector memory T cells reside in nonlymphoid organs and respond rapidly to repeated pathogenic infections with cytokine production and cytotoxic functions to kill virus-infected cells. Central memory T cells home to lymphoid organs where they replenish long- and short-lived and effector memory T cells as needed.

In general, CD4+ T cells are also the primary regulatory cells of T and B lymphocyte and monocyte function by the production of cytokines and by direct cell contact (Fig. 314-2). In addition, T cells regulate erythroid cell maturation in bone marrow and, through cell contact (CD40 ligand), have an important role in activation of B cells and induction of Ig isotype switching.

Human T cells express cell-surface proteins that mark stages of intrathymic T cell maturation or identify specific functional subpopulations of mature T cells. Many of these molecules mediate or participate in important T cell functions (Table 314-1, Fig. 314-6).

The earliest identifiable T cell precursors in bone marrow are CD34+ pro-T cells (i.e., cells in which TCR genes are neither rearranged nor expressed). In the thymus, CD34+ T cell precursors begin cytoplasmic (c) synthesis of components of the CD3 complex of TCR-associated molecules (Fig. 314-6). Within T cell precursors, TCR for antigen gene rearrangement yields two T cell lineages, expressing either TCR- chains or TCR- chains. T cells expressing the TCR- chains constitute the majority of peripheral T cells in blood, lymph node, and spleen and terminally differentiate into either CD4+ or CD8+ cells. Cells expressing TCR- chains circulate as a minor population in blood; their functions, although not fully understood, have been postulated to be those of immune surveillance at epithelial surfaces and cellular defenses against mycobacterial organisms and other intracellular bacteria through recognition of bacterial lipids.

In the thymus, the recognition of self-peptides on thymic epithelial cells, thymic macrophages, and dendritic cells plays an important role in shaping the T cell repertoire to recognize foreign antigen (positive selection) and in eliminating highly autoreactive T cells (negative selection). As immature cortical thymocytes begin to express surface TCR for antigen, autoreactive thymocytes are destroyed (negative selection), thymocytes with TCRs capable of interacting with foreign antigen peptides in the context of self-MHC antigens are activated and develop to maturity (positive selection), and thymocytes with TCRs that are incapable of binding to self-MHC antigens die of attrition (no selection). Mature thymocytes that are positively selected are either CD4+ helper T cells or MHC class II每restricted cytotoxic (killer) T cells, or they are CD8+ T cells destined to become MHC class I每restricted cytotoxic T cells. MHC class I每 or class II每restricted means that T cells recognize antigen peptide fragments only when they are presented in the antigen-recognition site of a class I or class II MHC molecule, respectively (Chap. 315).

After thymocyte maturation and selection, CD4 and CD8 thymocytes leave the thymus and migrate to the peripheral immune system. The thymus continues to be a contributor to the peripheral immune system, well into adult life, both normally and when the peripheral T cell pool is damaged, such as occurs in AIDS and cancer chemotherapy.

Molecular Basis of T Cell Recognition of Antigen

The TCR for antigen is a complex of molecules consisting of an antigen-binding heterodimer of either  or  chains noncovalently linked with five CD3 subunits (, , , , and ) (Fig. 314-7). The CD3  chains are either disulfide-linked homodimers (CD3-2) or disulfide-linked heterodimers composed of one  chain and one  chain. TCR- or TCR- molecules must be associated with CD3 molecules to be inserted into the T cell每surface membrane, TCR being paired with TCR- and TCR- being paired with TCR-. Molecules of the CD3 complex mediate transduction of T cell activation signals via TCRs, while TCR- and - or - and - molecules combine to form the TCR antigen-binding site.

Figure 314-7

 
 
 
Signaling through the T cell receptor. Activation signals are mediated via immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation (ITAM) sequences in LAT and CD3 chains (blue bars) that bind to enzymes and transduce activation signals to the nucleus via the indicated intracellular activation pathways. Ligation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) by MHC complexed with antigen results in sequential activation of LCK and -chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kDa (ZAP-70). ZAP-70 phosphorylates several downstream targets, including LAT (linker for activation of T cells) and SLP76 [SCR homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa]. SLP76 is recruited to membrane-bound LAT through its constitutive interaction with GADS (GRB2-related adaptor protein). Together, SLP76 and LAT nucleate a multimolecular signaling complex, which induces a host of downstream responses, including calcium flux, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation, integrin activation, and cytoskeletal reorganization. APC denotes antigen-presenting cell. (Adapted from Koretzky et al; with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright 2006.)
 
 

The , , , and  TCR for antigen molecules have amino acid sequence homology and structural similarities to immunoglobulin heavy and light chains and are members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily of molecules. The genes encoding TCR molecules are encoded as clusters of gene segments that rearrange during the course of T cell maturation. This creates an efficient and compact mechanism for housing the diversity requirements of antigen receptor molecules. The TCR- chain is on chromosome 14 and consists of a series of V (variable), J (joining), and C (constant) regions. The TCR- chain is on chromosome 7 and consists of multiple V, D (diversity), J, and C TCR- loci. The TCR- chain is on chromosome 7, and the TCR- chain is in the middle of the TCR- locus on chromosome 14. Thus, molecules of the TCR for antigen have constant (framework) and variable regions, and the gene segments encoding the , , , and  chains of these molecules are recombined and selected in the thymus, culminating in synthesis of the completed molecule. In both T and B cell precursors (see below), DNA rearrangements of antigen receptor genes involve the same enzymes, recombinase activating gene (RAG)1 and RAG2, both DNA-dependent protein kinases.

TCR diversity is created by the different V, D, and J segments that are possible for each receptor chain by the many permutations of V, D, and J segment combinations, by "N-region diversification" due to the addition of nucleotides at the junction of rearranged gene segments, and by the pairing of individual chains to form a TCR dimer. As T cells mature in the thymus, the repertoire of antigen-reactive T cells is modified by selection processes that eliminate many autoreactive T cells, enhance the proliferation of cells that function appropriately with self-MHC molecules and antigen, and allow T cells with nonproductive TCR rearrangements to die.

TCR- cells do not recognize native protein or carbohydrate antigens. Instead, T cells recognize only short (~9每13 amino acids) peptide fragments derived from protein antigens taken up or produced in APCs. Foreign antigens may be taken up by endocytosis into acidified intracellular vesicles or by phagocytosis and degraded into small peptides that associate with MHC class II molecules (exogenous antigen-presentation pathway). Other foreign antigens arise endogenously in the cytosol (such as from replicating viruses) and are broken down into small peptides that associate with MHC class I molecules (endogenous antigen-presenting pathway). Thus, APCs proteolytically degrade foreign proteins and display peptide fragments embedded in the MHC class I or II antigen-recognition site on the MHC molecule surface, where foreign peptide fragments are available to bind to TCR- or TCR- chains of reactive T cells. CD4 molecules act as adhesives and, by direct binding to MHC class II (DR, DQ, or DP) molecules, stabilize the interaction of TCR with peptide antigen (Fig. 314-7). Similarly, CD8 molecules also act as adhesives to stabilize the TCR-antigen interaction by direct CD8 molecule binding to MHC class I (A, B, or C) molecules.

Antigens that arise in the cytosol and are processed via the endogenous antigen-presentation pathway are cleaved into small peptides by a complex of proteases called the proteasome. From the proteasome, antigen peptide fragments are transported from the cytosol into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum by a heterodimeric complex termed transporters associated with antigen processing, or TAP proteins. There, MHC class I molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane physically associate with processed cytosolic peptides. Following peptide association with class I molecules, peptide每class I complexes are exported to the Golgi apparatus, and then to the cell surface, for recognition by CD8+ T cells.

Antigens taken up from the extracellular space via endocytosis into intracellular acidified vesicles are degraded by vesicle proteases into peptide fragments. Intracellular vesicles containing MHC class II molecules fuse with peptide-containing vesicles, thus allowing peptide fragments to physically bind to MHC class II molecules. Peptide每MHC class II complexes are then transported to the cell surface for recognition by CD4+ T cells (Chap. 315).

Whereas it is generally agreed that the TCR- receptor recognizes peptide antigens in the context of MHC class I or class II molecules, lipids in the cell wall of intracellular bacteria such as M. tuberculosis can also be presented to a wide variety of T cells, including subsets of TCR- T cells, and a subset of CD8+ TCR- T cells. Importantly, bacterial lipid antigens are not presented in the context of MHC class I or II molecules, but rather are presented in the context of MHC-related CD1 molecules. Some  T cells that recognize lipid antigens via CD1 molecules have very restricted TCR usage, do not need antigen priming to respond to bacterial lipids, and may actually be a form of innate rather than acquired immunity to intracellular bacteria.

Just as foreign antigens are degraded and their peptide fragments presented in the context of MHC class I or class II molecules on APCs, endogenous self-proteins also are degraded and self-peptide fragments are presented to T cells in the context of MHC class I or class II molecules on APCs. In peripheral lymphoid organs, there are T cells that are capable of recognizing self-protein fragments but normally are anergic or tolerant, i.e., nonresponsive to self-antigenic stimulation, due to lack of self-antigen upregulating APC co-stimulatory molecules such as B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) (see below).

Once engagement of mature T cell TCR by foreign peptide occurs in the context of self每MHC class I or class II molecules, binding of non-antigen-specific adhesion ligand pairs such as CD54-CD11/CD18 and CD58-CD2 stabilizes MHC peptide每TCR binding, and the expression of these adhesion molecules is upregulated (Fig. 314-7). Once antigen ligation of the TCR occurs, the T cell membrane is partitioned into lipid membrane microdomains, or lipid rafts, that coalesce the key signaling molecules TCR/CD3 complex, CD28, CD2, LAT (linker for activation of T cells), intracellular activated (dephosphorylated) src family protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs), and the key CD3-associated protein-70 (ZAP-70) PTK (Fig. 314-7). Importantly, during T cell activation, the CD45 molecule, with protein tyrosine phosphatase activity is partitioned away from the TCR complex to allow activating phosphorylation events to occur. The coalescence of signaling molecules of activated T lymphocytes in microdomains has suggested that T cell每APC interactions can be considered immunologic synapses, analogous in function to neuronal synapses.

After TCR-MHC binding is stabilized, activation signals are transmitted through the cell to the nucleus and lead to the expression of gene products important in mediating the wide diversity of T cell functions such as the secretion of IL-2. The TCR does not have intrinsic signaling activity but is linked to a variety of signaling pathways via immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) expressed on the various CD3 chains that bind to proteins that mediate signal transduction. Each of the pathways results in the activation of particular transcription factors that control the expression of cytokine and cytokine receptor genes. Thus, antigen-MHC binding to the TCR induces the activation of the src family of PTKs, fyn and lck (lck is associated with CD4 or CD8 co-stimulatory molecules); phosphorylation of CD3 chain; activation of the related tyrosine kinases ZAP-70 and syk; and downstream activation of the calcium-dependent calcineurin pathway, the ras pathway, and the protein kinase C pathway. Each of these pathways leads to activation of specific families of transcription factors (including NF-AT, fos and jun, and rel/NF-B) that form heteromultimers capable of inducing expression of IL-2, IL-2 receptor, IL-4, TNF-, and other T cell mediators.

In addition to the signals delivered to the T cell from the TCR complex and CD4 and CD8, molecules on the T cell such as CD28 and inducible co-stimulator (ICOS) and molecules on dendritic cells such as B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) also deliver important co-stimulatory signals that upregulate T cell cytokine production and are essential for T cell activation. If signaling through CD28 or ICOS does not occur, or if CD28 is blocked, the T cell becomes anergic rather than activated (see "Immune Tolerance and Autoimmunity" below).

T Cell Superantigens

Conventional antigens bind to MHC class I or II molecules in the groove of the  heterodimer and bind to T cells via the V regions of the TCR- and - chains. In contrast, superantigens bind directly to the lateral portion of the TCR- chain and MHC class II  chain and stimulate T cells based solely on the V gene segment utilized independent of the D, J, and V sequences present. Superantigens are protein molecules capable of activating up to 20% of the peripheral T cell pool, whereas conventional antigens activate <1 in 10,000 T cells. T cell superantigens include staphylococcal enterotoxins and other bacterial products. Superantigen stimulation of human peripheral T cells occurs in the clinical setting of staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome, leading to massive overproduction of T cell cytokines that leads to hypotension and shock (Chap. 135).

B Cells

Mature B cells constitute 10每15% of human peripheral blood lymphocytes, 20每30% of lymph node cells, 50% of splenic lymphocytes, and ~10% of bone marrow lymphocytes. B cells express on their surface intramembrane immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules that function as B cell receptors (BCRs) for antigen in a complex of Ig-associated  and  signaling molecules with properties similar to those described in T cells (Fig. 314-8). Unlike T cells, which recognize only processed peptide fragments of conventional antigens embedded in the notches of MHC class I and class II antigens of APCs, B cells are capable of recognizing and proliferating to whole unprocessed native antigens via antigen binding to B cell每surface Ig (sIg) receptors. B cells also express surface receptors for the Fc region of IgG molecules (CD32) as well as receptors for activated complement components (C3d or CD21, C3b or CD35). The primary function of B cells is to produce antibodies. B cells also serve as APCs and are highly efficient at antigen processing. Their antigen-presenting function is enhanced by a variety of cytokines. Mature B cells are derived from bone marrow precursor cells that arise continuously throughout life (Fig. 314-6).

Figure 314-8

 
 
 
B cell receptor (BCR) activation results in the sequential activation of protein tyrosine kinases, which results in the formation of a signaling complex and activation of downstream pathways as shown. Whereas SLP76 is recruited to the membrane through GADS and LAT, the mechanism of SLP65 recruitment is unclear. Studies have indicated two mechanisms: (a) direct binding by the SH2 domain of SLP65 to immunoglobulin (Ig) of the BCR complex or (b) membrane recruitment through a leucine zipper in the amino terminus of SLP65 and an unknown binding partner. ADAP, adhesion- and degranulation-promoting adaptor protein; AP1, activator protein 1; BTK, Bruton's tyrosine kinase; DAG, diacylglycerol; GRB2, growth factor receptor每bound protein 2; HPK1, hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1; InsP3, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate; ITK, interleukin-2-inducible T cell kinase; NCK, noncatalytic region of tyrosine kinase; NF-B, nuclear factor B; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; PtdIns(4,5)P2, phosphatidylinositol-4, 5-bisphosphate; RASGRP, RAS guanyl-releasing protein; SOS, son of sevenless homologue; SYK, spleen tyrosine kinase. (Adapted from Koretzky et al; with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright 2006.)
 
 

B lymphocyte development can be separated into antigen- independent and antigen-dependent phases. Antigen-independent B cell development occurs in primary lymphoid organs and includes all stages of B cell maturation up to the sIg+ mature B cell. Antigen-dependent B cell maturation is driven by the interaction of antigen with the mature B cell sIg, leading to memory B cell induction, Ig class switching, and plasma cell formation. Antigen-dependent stages of B cell maturation occur in secondary lymphoid organs, including lymph node, spleen, and gut Peyer's patches. In contrast to the T cell repertoire that is generated intrathymically before contact with foreign antigen, the repertoire of B cells expressing diverse antigen-reactive sites is modified by further alteration of Ig genes after stimulation by antigen〞a process called somatic hypermutation〞which occurs in lymph node germinal centers.

During B cell development, diversity of the antigen-binding variable region of Ig is generated by an ordered set of Ig gene rearrangements that are similar to the rearrangements undergone by TCR , , , and  genes. For the heavy chain, there is first a rearrangement of D segments to J segments, followed by a second rearrangement between a V gene segment and the newly formed D-J sequence; the C segment is aligned to the V-D-J complex to yield a functional Ig heavy chain gene (V-D-J-C). During later stages, a functional  or  light chain gene is generated by rearrangement of a V segment to a J segment, ultimately yielding an intact Ig molecule composed of heavy and light chains.

The process of Iggene rearrangement is regulated and results in a single antibody specificity produced by each B cell, with each Ig molecule comprising one type of heavy chain and one type of light chain. Although each B cell contains two copies of Ig light and heavy chain genes, only one gene of each type is productively rearranged and expressed in each B cell, a process termed allelic exclusion.

There are ~300 V genes and 5 J genes, resulting in the pairing of V and J genes to create >1500 different light chain combinations. The number of distinct  light chains that can be generated is increased by somatic mutations within the V and J genes, thus creating large numbers of possible specificities from a limited amount of germ-line genetic information. As noted above, in heavy chain Iggene rearrangement, the VH domain is created by the joining of three types of germ-line genes called VH, DH, and JH, thus allowing for even greater diversity in the variable region of heavy chains than of light chains.

The most immature B cell precursors (early pro-B cells) lack cytoplasmic Ig (cIg) and sIg (Fig. 314-6). The large pre-B cell is marked by the acquisition of the surface pre-BCR composed of  heavy (H) chains and a pre-B light chain, termed LC. LC is a surrogate light chain receptor encoded by the nonrearranged V pre-B and the 5 light chain locus (the pre-BCR). Pro- and pre-B cells are driven to proliferate and mature by signals from bone marrow stroma〞in particular, IL-7. Light chain rearrangement occurs in the small pre-B cell stage such that the full BCR is expressed at the immature B cell stage. Immature B cells have rearranged Ig light chain genes and express sIgM. As immature B cells develop into mature B cells, sIgD is expressed as well as sIgM. At this point, B lineage development in bone marrow is complete, and B cells exit into the peripheral circulation and migrate to secondary lymphoid organs to encounter specific antigens.

Random rearrangements of Iggenes occasionally generate self-reactive antibodies, and mechanisms must be in place to correct these mistakes. One such mechanism is BCR editing, whereby autoreactive BCRs are mutated to not react with self-antigens. If receptor editing is unsuccessful in eliminating autoreactive B cells, then autoreactive B cells undergo negative selection in the bone marrow through induction of apoptosis after BCR engagement of self-antigen.

After leaving the bone marrow, B cells populate peripheral B cell sites, such as lymph node and spleen, and await contact with foreign antigens that react with each B cell's clonotypic receptor. Antigen-driven B cell activation occurs through the BCR, and a process known as somatic hypermutation takes place whereby point mutations in rearranged H- and L-genes give rise to mutant sIg molecules, some of which bind antigen better than the original sIg molecules. Somatic hypermutation, therefore, is a process whereby memory B cells in peripheral lymph organs have the best binding, or the highest-affinity antibodies. This overall process of generating the best antibodies is called affinity maturation of antibody.

Lymphocytes that synthesize IgG, IgA, and IgE are derived from sIgM+, sIgD+ mature B cells. Ig class switching occurs in lymph node and other peripheral lymphoid tissue germinal centers. CD40 on B cells and CD40 ligand on T cells constitute a critical co- stimulatory receptor-ligand pair of immune-stimulatory molecules. Pairs of CD40+ B cells and CD40 ligand+ T cells bind and drive B cell Ig class switching via T cell每produced cytokines such as IL-4 and TGF-. IL-1, -2, -4, -5, and -6 synergize to drive mature B cells to proliferate and differentiate into Ig-secreting cells.

Humoral Mediators of Adaptive Immunity: Immunoglobulins

Immunoglobulins are the products of differentiated B cells and mediate the humoral arm of the immune response. The primary functions of antibodies are to bind specifically to antigen and bring about the inactivation or removal of the offending toxin, microbe, parasite, or other foreign substance from the body. The structural basis of Ig molecule function and Ig gene organization has provided insight into the role of antibodies in normal protective immunity, pathologic immune-mediated damage by immune complexes, and autoantibody formation against host determinants.

All immunoglobulins have the basic structure of two heavy and two light chains (Fig. 314-8). Immunoglobulin isotype (i.e., G, M, A, D, E) is determined by the type of Ig heavy chain present. IgG and IgA isotypes can be divided further into subclasses (G1, G2, G3, G4, and A1, A2) based on specific antigenic determinants on Ig heavy chains. The characteristics of human immunoglobulins are outlined in Table 314-13. The four chains are covalently linked by disulfide bonds. Each chain is made up of a V region and C regions (also called domains), themselves made up of units of ~110 amino acids. Light chains have one variable (VL) and one constant (CL) unit; heavy chains have one variable unit (VH) and three or four constant (CH) units, depending on isotype. As the name suggests, the constant, or C, regions of Ig molecules are made up of homologous sequences and share the same primary structure as all other Ig chains of the same isotype and subclass. Constant regions are involved in biologic functions of Ig molecules. The CH2 domain of IgG and the CH4 units of IgM are involved with the binding of the C1q portion of C1 during complement activation. The CH region at the carboxy-terminal end of the IgG molecule, the Fc region, binds to surface Fc receptors (CD16, CD32, CD64) of macrophages, dendritic cells, NK cells, B cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils.

Table 314每13. Physical, Chemical, and Biologic Properties of Human Immunoglobulins

 
 
Property IgG IgA IgM IgD IgE 
Usual molecular form Monomer Monomer, dimer Pentamer, hexamer Monomer Monomer 
Other chains None J chain, SC J chain None None 
Subclasses G1, G2, G3, G4 A1, A2 None None None 
Heavy chain allotypes Gm (=30) No A1, A2m (2) None None None 
Molecular mass, kDa 150 160, 400 950, 1150 175 190 
Serum level in average adult, mg/mL 9.5每12.5 1.5每2.6 0.7每1.7 0.04 0.0003 
Percentage of total serum Ig 75每85 7每15 5每10 0.3 0.019 
Serum half-life, days 23 6 5 3 2.5 
Synthesis rate, mg/kg per day 33 65 7 0.4 0.016 
Antibody valence 2 2,4 10, 12 2 2 
Classical complement activation +(G1, 2?, 3) 每 ++ 每 每 
Alternate complement activation +(G4) + 每 + 每 
Binding cells via Fc Macrophages, neutrophils, large granular lymphocytes Lymphocytes Lymphocytes None Mast cells, basophils, B cells 
Biologic properties Placental transfer, secondary Ab for most antipathogen responses Secretory immunoglobulin Primary Ab responses Marker for mature B cells Allergy, antiparasite responses 
 


Source: After L Carayannopoulos, JD Capra, in WE Paul (ed): Fundamental Immunology, 3rd ed. New York, Raven, 1993; with permission.
 

Variable regions (VL and VH) constitute the antibody-binding (Fab) region of the molecule. Within the VL and VH regions are hypervariable regions (extreme sequence variability) that constitute the antigen-binding site unique to each Ig molecule. The idiotype is defined as the specific region of the Fab portion of the Ig molecule to which antigen binds. Antibodies against the idiotype portion of an antibody molecule are called anti-idiotype antibodies. The formation of such antibodies in vivo during a normal B cell antibody response may generate a negative (or "off") signal to B cells to terminate antibody production.

IgG constitutes 75每85% of total serum immunoglobulin. The four IgG subclasses are numbered in order of their level in serum, IgG1 being found in greatest amounts and IgG4 the least. IgG subclasses have clinical relevance in their varying ability to bind macrophage and neutrophilFc receptors and to activate complement (Table 314-13). Moreover, selective deficiencies of certain IgG subclasses give rise to clinical syndromes in which the patient is inordinately susceptible to bacterial infections. IgG antibodies are frequently the predominant antibody made after rechallenge of the host with antigen (secondary antibody response).

IgM antibodies normally circulate as a 950-kDa pentamer with 160-kDa bivalent monomers joined by a molecule called the J chain, a 15-kDa nonimmunoglobulin molecule that also effects polymerization of IgA molecules. IgM is the first immunoglobulin to appear in the immune response (primary antibody response) and is the initial type of antibody made by neonates. Membrane IgM in the monomeric form also functions as a major antigen receptor on the surface of mature B cells (Fig. 314-13). IgM is an important component of immune complexes in autoimmune diseases. For example, IgM antibodies against IgG molecules (rheumatoid factors) are present in high titers in rheumatoid arthritis, other collagen diseases, and some infectious diseases (subacute bacterial endocarditis).

IgA constitutes only 7每15% of total serum immunoglobulin but is the predominant class of immunoglobulin in secretions. IgA in secretions (tears, saliva, nasal secretions, gastrointestinal tract fluid, and human milk) is in the form of secretory IgA (sIgA), a polymer consisting of two IgA monomers, a joining molecule, again called the J chain, and a glycoprotein called the secretory protein. Of the two IgA subclasses, IgA1 is primarily found in serum, whereas IgA2 is more prevalent in secretions. IgA fixes complement via the alternative complement pathway and has potent antiviral activity in humans by prevention of virus binding to respiratory and gastrointestinal epithelial cells.

IgD is found in minute quantities in serum and, together with IgM, is a major receptor for antigen on the B cell surface. IgE, which is present in serum in very low concentrations, is the major class of immunoglobulin involved in arming mast cells and basophils by binding to these cells via the Fc region. Antigen cross-linking of IgE molecules on basophil and mast cell surfaces results in release of mediators of the immediate hypersensitivity (allergic) response (Table 314-13).

Cellular Interactions in Regulation of Normal Immune Responses

The net result of activation of the humoral (B cell) and cellular (T cell) arms of the adaptive immune system by foreign antigen is the elimination of antigen directly by specific effector T cells or in concert with specific antibody. Figure 314-2 is a simplified schematic diagram of the T and B cell responses indicating some of these cellular interactions.

The expression of adaptive immune cell function is the result of a complex series of immunoregulatory events that occur in phases. Both T and B lymphocytes mediate immune functions, and each of these cell types, when given appropriate signals, passes through stages, from activation and induction through proliferation, differentiation, and ultimately effector functions. The effector function expressed may be at the end point of a response, such as secretion of antibody by a differentiated plasma cell, or it might serve a regulatory function that modulates other functions, such as is seen with CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes that modulate both differentiation of B cells and activation of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells.

CD4 helper T cells can be subdivided on the basis of cytokines produced (Fig. 314-2). Activated TH1-type helper T cells secrete IL-2, IFN-, IL-3, TNF-, GM-CSF, and TNF-, while activated TH2-type helper T cells secrete IL-3, -4, -5, -6, -10, and -13. TH1 CD4+ T cells, through elaboration of IFN-, have a central role in mediating intracellular killing by a variety of pathogens. TH1 CD4+ T cells also provide T cell help for generation of cytotoxic T cells and some types of opsonizing antibody, and they generally respond to antigens that lead to delayed hypersensitivity types of immune responses for many intracellular viruses and bacteria (such as HIV or M. tuberculosis). In contrast, TH2 cells have a primary role in regulatory humoral immunity and isotype switching. TH2 cells, through production of IL-4 and IL-10, have a regulatory role in limiting proinflammatory responses mediated by TH1 cells (Fig. 314-2). In addition, TH2 CD4+ T cells provide help to B cells for specific Ig production and respond to antigens that require high antibody levels for foreign antigen elimination (extracellular encapsulated bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and certain parasite infections). More recently, a new subset of the TH family has been described termed Th17 characterized by these cells to secrete cytokines such as IL-17, -22, and -26. Th17 cells have been shown to play a role in autoimmune inflammatory disorders in addition to defense against extracellular bacteria and fungi, particularly at mucosal surfaces (Fig. 314-3). In summary, the type of T cell response generated in an immune response is determined by the microbe PAMPs presented to the DCs, the TLRs on the DCs that become activated, the types of DCs that are activated, and the cytokines that are produced (Table 308-4). Commonly, myeloid DCs produce IL-12 and activate TH1 T cell responses that result in IFN- and cytotoxic T cell induction, and plasmacytoid DCs produce IFN- and lead to TH2 responses that result in IL-4 production and enhanced antibody responses.

As shown in Figs. 314-2 and 314-3, upon activation by DCs, T cell subsets that produce IL-2, IL-3, IFN-, and/or IL-4, -5, -6, -10, and -13 are generated and exert positive and negative influences on effector T and B cells. For B cells, trophic effects are mediated by a variety of cytokines, particularly T cell每derived IL-3, -4, -5, and -6, that act at sequential stages of B cell maturation, resulting in B cell proliferation, differentiation, and ultimately antibody secretion. For cytotoxic T cells, trophic factors include inducer T cell secretion of IL-2, IFN-, and IL-12.

An important type of immunomodulatory T cell that controls immune responses is CD4+ and CD8+ T regulatory cells. These cells constitutively express the  chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD25), produce large amounts of IL-10, and can suppress both T and B cell responses. T regulatory cells are induced by immature dendritic cells and play key roles in maintaining tolerance to self-antigens in the periphery. Loss of T regulatory cells is the cause of organ-specific autoimmune disease in mice such as autoimmune thyroiditis, adrenalitis, and oophoritis (see "Immune Tolerance and Autoimmunity" below). T regulatory cells also play key roles in controlling the magnitude and duration of immune responses to microbes. Normally, after the initial immune response to a microbe has eliminated the invader, T regulatory cells are activated to suppress the antimicrobe response and prevent host injury. Some microbes have adapted to induce T regulatory cell activation at the site of infection to promote parasite infection and survival. In Leishmania infection, the parasite locally induces T regulatory cell accumulation at skin infection sites that dampens anti-Leishmania T cell responses and prevents elimination of the parasite. It is thought that many chronic infections such as by M. tuberculosis are associated with abnormal T regulatory cell activation that prevents elimination of the microbe.

Although B cells recognize native antigen via B cell每surface Ig receptors, B cells require T cell help to produce high-affinity antibody of multiple isotypes that are the most effective in eliminating foreign antigen. This T cell dependence likely functions in the regulation of B cell responses and in protection against excessive autoantibody production. T cell每B cell interactions that lead to high-affinity antibody production require (1) processing of native antigen by B cells and expression of peptide fragments on the B cell surface for presentation to TH cells, (2) the ligation of B cells by both the TCR complex and the CD40 ligand, (3) induction of the process termed antibody isotype switching in antigen-specific B cell clones, and (4) induction of the process of affinity maturation of antibody in the germinal centers of B cell follicles of lymph node and spleen.

Na?ve B cells express cell-surface IgD and IgM, and initial contact of na?ve B cells with antigen is via binding of native antigen to B cell每surface IgM. T cell cytokines, released following TH2 cell contact with B cells or by a "bystander" effect, induce changes in Iggene conformation that promote recombination of Ig genes. These events then result in the "switching" of expression of heavy chain exons in a triggered B cell, leading to the secretion of IgG, IgA, or, in some cases, IgE antibody with the same V region antigen specificity as the original IgM antibody, for response to a wide variety of extracellular bacteria, protozoa, and helminths. CD40 ligand expression by activated T cells is critical for induction of B cell antibody isotype switching and for B cell responsiveness to cytokines. Patients with mutations in T cell CD40 ligand have B cells that are unable to undergo isotype switching, resulting in lack of memory B cell generation and the immunodeficiency syndrome of X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome (Chap. 316).

Immune Tolerance and Autoimmunity

Immune tolerance is defined as the absence of activation of pathogenic autoreactivity. Autoimmune diseases are syndromes caused by the activation of T or B cells or both, with no evidence of other causes such as infections or malignancies (Chap. 318). Once thought to be mutually exclusive, immune tolerance and autoimmunity are now both recognized to be present normally in health; when abnormal, they represent extremes from the normal state. For example, it is now known that low levels of autoreactivity of T and B cells with self-antigens in the periphery are critical to their survival. Similarly, low levels of autoreactivity and thymocyte recognition of self-antigens in the thymus are the mechanisms whereby (1) normal T cells are positively selected to survive and leave the thymus to respond to foreign microbes in the periphery and (2) T cells highly reactive to self-antigens are negatively selected and die to prevent overly self-reactive T cells from getting into the periphery (central tolerance). However, not all self-antigens are expressed in the thymus to delete highly self-reactive T cells, and there are mechanisms for peripheral tolerance induction of T cells as well. Unlike the presentation of microbial antigens by mature dendritic cells, the presentation of self-antigens by immature dendritic cells neither activates nor matures the dendritic cells to express high levels of co-stimulatory molecules such as B7-1 (CD80) or B7-2 (CD86). When peripheral T cells are stimulated by dendritic cells expressing self-antigens in the context of HLA molecules, sufficient stimulation of T cells occurs to keep them alive, but otherwise they remain anergic, or nonresponsive, until they contact a dendritic cell with high levels of co-stimulatory molecules expressing microbial antigens. In the latter setting, normal T cells then become activated to respond to the microbe. If B cells have high-self-reactivity BCRs, they normally undergo either deletion in the bone marrow or receptor editing to express a less autoreactive receptor. Although many autoimmune diseases are characterized by abnormal or pathogenic autoantibody production (Table 314-14), most autoimmune diseases are caused by a combination of excess T and B cell reactivity.

Table 314每14. Recombinant or Purified Autoantigens Recognized by Autoantibodies Associated with Human Autoimmune Disorders

 
 
Autoantigen Autoimmune Diseases Autoantigen Autoimmune Diseases 
Cell- or Organ-Specific Autoimmunity  
Acetylcholine receptor Myasthenia gravis Insulin receptor Type B insulin resistance, acanthosis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
Actin Chronic active hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis Intrinsic factor type 1 Pernicious anemia 
Adenine nucleotide translator (ANT) Dilated cardiomyopathy, myocarditis Leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA-1) Treatment-resistant Lyme arthritis 
-Adrenoreceptor Dilated cardiomyopathy     
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) Polyneuropathy 
Asialoglycoprotein receptor Autoimmune hepatitis Myelin-basic protein Multiple sclerosis, demyelinating diseases 
Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (Bpi) Cystic fibrosis vasculitides Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) Multiple sclerosis 
Calcium-sensing receptor Acquired hypoparathyroidism Myosin Rheumatic fever 
Cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYPlla) Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 p-80-Collin Atopic dermatitis 
Collagen type IV-3-chain Goodpasture syndrome Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex-E2 (PDC-E2) Primary biliary cirrhosis 
Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) Autoimmune hepatitis     
Desmin Crohn's disease, coronary artery disease Sodium iodide symporter (NIS) Graves' disease, autoimmune hypothyroidism 
Desmoglein 1 Pemphigus foliaceus     
Desmoglein 3 Pemphigus vulgaris SOX-10 Vitiligo 
F-actin Autoimmune hepatitis Thyroid and eye muscle shared protein Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy 
GM gangliosides Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome     
Glutamate decarboxylase (GAD65) Type 1 diabetes, stiff-person syndrome Thyroglobulin Autoimmune thyroiditis 
Glutamate receptor (GLUR) Rasmussen encephalitis Thyroid peroxidase Autoimmune Hashimoto thyroiditis 
H/K ATPase Autoimmune gastritis Thyrotropin receptor Graves' disease 
17--Hydroxylase (CYP17) Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 Tissue transglutaminase Celiac disease 
21-Hydroxylase (CYP21) Addison disease Transcription coactivator p75 Atopic dermatitis 
IA-2 (ICA512) Type 1 diabetes Tryptophan hydroxylase Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 
Insulin Type 1 diabetes, insulin hypoglycemic syndrome (Hirata disease) Tyrosinase Tyrosine hydroxylase Vitiligo, metastatic melanoma Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 
Systemic Autoimmunity        
ACTH ACTH deficiency Histone H2A-H2B-DNA SLE 
Aminoacyl-tRAN histidyl synthetase Myositis, dermatomyositis IgE receptor Chronic idiopathic urticaria 
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (several) Polymyositis, dermatomyositis Keratin RA 
Cardiolipin SLE, anti-phospholipid syndrome Ku-DNA-protein kinase SLE 
Carbonic anhydrase II SLE, Sj?gren's syndrome, systemic sclerosis Ku-nucleoprotein

La phosphoprotein (La 55-B)
 Connective tissue syndrome

Sj?gren's syndrome
 
Collagen (multiple types) Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), SLE, progressive systemic sclerosis Myeloperoxidase Necrotizing and crescentic glomerulonephritis (NCGN), systemic vasculitis 
Centromere-associated proteins Systemic sclerosis Proteinase 3 (PR3) Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener＊s), Churg-Strauss syndrome 
DNA-dependent nucleoside-stimulated ATPase Dermatomyositis RNA polymerase I每III (RNP) Systemic sclerosis, SLE 
Fibrillarin Scleroderma Signal recognition protein (SRP54) Polymyositis 
Fibronectin SLE, RA, morphea Topoisomerase-1 (Scl-70) Scleroderma, Raynaud syndrome 
Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase RA Tublin Chronic liver disease, visceral leishmaniasis 
2-Glycoprotein I (B2-GPI) Primary antiphospholipid syndrome     
Golgin (95, 97, 160, 180)  Sj?gren＊s syndrome, SLE, RA  Vimentin Systemic autoimmune disease 
Heat shock protein Various immune-related disorders     
Hemidesmosomal protein 180 Bullous pemphigoid, herpes gestationis, cicatricial pemphigoid     
Plasma Protein and Cytokine Autoimmunity        
C1 inhibitor Autoimmune C1 deficiency Glycoprotein IIb/IIIg and Ib/IX Autoimmune thrombocytopenia purpura 
C1q SLE, membrane proliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) IgA Immunodeficiency associated with SLE, pernicious anemia, thyroiditis, Sj?gren＊s syndrome and chronic active hepatitis 
Cytokines (IL-1, IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, LIF) RA, systemic sclerosis, normal subjects     
Factor II, factor V, factor VII, factor VIII, factor IX, factor X, factor XI, thrombin vWF Prolonged coagulation time Oxidized LDL (OxLDL) Atherosclerosis 
Cancer and Paraneoplastic Autoimmunity        
Amphiphysin Neuropathy, small cell lung cancer p62 (IGF-II mRNA-binding protein) Hepatocellular carcinoma (China) 
Cyclin B1 Hepatocellular carcinoma Recoverin Cancer-associated retinopathy 
DNA topoisomerase II Liver cancer Ri protein Paraneoplastic opsoclonus myoclonus ataxia 
Desmoplakin Paraneoplastic pemphigus     
Gephyrin Paraneoplastic stiff-person syndrome IV spectrin Lower motor neuron syndrome 
Hu proteins Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis Synaptotagmin Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor Subacute autonomic neuropathy, cancer Voltage-gated calcium channels Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome 
p53 Cancer, SLE Yo protein Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration 
 


Source: From A Lernmark et al: J Clin Invest 108:1091, 2001; with permission.
 

Multiple factors contribute to the genesis of clinical autoimmune disease syndromes, including genetic susceptibility (Table 314-14), environmental immune stimulants such as drugs [e.g., procainamide and phenytoin (Dilantin) with drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus], infectious agent triggers (such as Epstein-Barr virus and autoantibody production against red blood cells and platelets), and loss of T regulatory cells (leading to thyroiditis, adrenalitis, and oophoritis).

Immunity at Mucosal Surfaces

Mucosa covering the respiratory, digestive, and urogenital tracts; the eye conjunctiva; the inner ear; and the ducts of all exocrine glands contain cells of the innate and adaptive mucosal immune system that protect these surfaces against pathogens. In the healthy adult, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) contains 80% of all immune cells within the body and constitutes the largest mammalian lymphoid organ system.

MALT has three main functions: (1) to protect the mucous membranes from invasive pathogens; (2) to prevent uptake of foreign antigens from food, commensal organisms, and airborne pathogens and particulate matter; and (3) to prevent pathologic immune responses from foreign antigens if they do cross the mucosal barriers of the body (Fig. 314-9).

Figure 314-9

 
 
 
Increased epithelial permeability may be important in the development of chronic gut T cell每mediated inflammation. CD4 T cells activated by gut antigens in Peyer's patches migrate to the LP. In healthy individuals, these cells die by apoptosis. Increased epithelial permeability may allow sufficient antigen to enter the LP to trigger T cell activation, breaking tolerance mediated by immunosuppressive cytokines and perhaps T regulatory cells. Proinflammatory cytokines then further increase epithelial permeability, setting up a vicious cycle of chronic inflammation. (From MacDonald and Monteleone; with permission.)
 
 

MALT is a compartmentalized system of immune cells that functions independently from systemic immune organs. Whereas the systemic immune organs are essentially sterile under normal conditions and respond vigorously to pathogens, MALT immune cells are continuously bathed in foreign proteins and commensal bacteria, and they must select those pathogenic antigens that must be eliminated. MALT contains anatomically defined foci of immune cells in the intestine, tonsil, appendix, and peribronchial areas that are inductive sites for mucosal immune responses. From these sites, immune T and B cells migrate to effector sites in mucosal parenchyma and exocrine glands where mucosal immune cells eliminate pathogen-infected cells. In addition to mucosal immune responses, all mucosal sites have strong mechanical and chemical barriers and cleansing functions to repel pathogens.

Key components of MALT include specialized epithelial cells called "membrane" or "M" cells that take up antigens and deliver them to dendritic cells or other APCs. Effector cells in MALT include B cells producing antipathogen neutralizing antibodies of secretory IgA as well as IgG isotype, T cells producing similar cytokines as in systemic immune system response, and T helper and cytotoxic T cells that respond to pathogen-infected cells.

Secretory IgA is produced in amounts of >50 mg/kg of body weight per 24 h and functions to inhibit bacterial adhesion, inhibit macromolecule absorption in the gut, neutralize viruses, and enhance antigen elimination in tissue through binding to IgA and receptor-mediated transport of immune complexes through epithelial cells.

Recent studies have demonstrated the importance of commensal gut and other mucosal bacteria to the health of the human immune system. Normal commensal flora induces anti-inflammatory events in the gut and protects epithelial cells from pathogens through TLRs and other PRR signaling. When the gut is depleted of normal commensal flora, the immune system becomes abnormal, with loss of TH1 T cell function. Restoration of the normal gut flora can reestablish the balance in T helper cell ratios characteristic of the normal immune system. When the gut barrier is intact, either antigens do not transverse the gut epithelium or, when pathogens are present, a self-limited, protective MALT immune response eliminates the pathogen (Fig. 314-9). However, when the gut barrier breaks down, immune responses to commensal flora antigens can cause inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn's disease and, perhaps, ulcerative colitis (Fig. 314-9) (Chap. 295). Uncontrolled MALT immune responses to food antigens, such as gluten, can cause celiac disease (Chap. 295).

The Cellular and Molecular Control of Programmed Cell Death

The process of apoptosis (programmed cell death) plays a crucial role in regulating normal immune responses to antigen. In general, a wide variety of stimuli trigger one of several apoptotic pathways to eliminate microbe-infected cells, eliminate cells with damaged DNA, or eliminate activated immune cells that are no longer needed (Fig. 314-10). The largest known family of "death receptors" is the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNF-R) family [TNF-R1, TNF-R2, Fas (CD95), death receptor 3 (DR3), death receptor 4 [DR4, TNF-related apoptosis-including ligand receptor 1 (TRAIL-R1)], and death receptor 5 (DR5, TRAIL-R2)]; their ligands are all in the TNF- family. Binding of ligands to these death receptors leads to a signaling cascade that involves activation of the caspase family of molecules that leads to DNA cleavage and cell death. Two other pathways of programmed cell death involve nuclear p53 in the elimination of cells with abnormal DNA and mitochondrial cytochrome c to induce cell death in damaged cells (Fig. 314-10). A number of human diseases have now been described that result from, or are associated with, mutated apoptosis genes (Table 314-15). These include mutations in the Fas and Fas ligand genes in autoimmune and lymphoproliferation syndromes, and multiple associations of mutations in genes in the apoptotic pathway with malignant syndromes.

Figure 314-10

 
 
 
Pathways of Cellular Apoptosis. There are two major pathways of apoptosis: the death-receptor pathway, which is mediated by activation of death receptors, and the BCL2-regulated mitochondrial pathway, which is mediated by noxious stimuli that ultimately lead to mitochondrial injury. Ligation of death receptors recruits the adaptor protein FAS-associated death domain (FADD). FADD in turn recruits caspase 8, which ultimately activates caspase 3, the key "executioner" caspase. Cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) can either inhibit or potentiate binding of FADD and caspase 8, depending on its concentration. In the intrinsic pathway, proapoptotic BH3 proteins are activated by noxious stimuli, which interact with and inhibit antiapoptotic BCL2 or BCL-XL. Thus, BAX and BAK are free to induce mitochondrial permeabilization with release of cytochrome c, which ultimately results in the activation of caspase 9 through the apoptosome. Caspase 9 then activates caspase 3. SMAC/DIABLO is also released after mitochondrial permeabilization and acts to block the action of inhibitors of apoptosis protein (IAPs), which inhibit caspase activation. There is potential cross-talk between the two pathways, which is mediated by the truncated form of BID (tBID) that is produced by caspase 8每mediated BID cleavage; tBID acts to inhibit the BCL2-BCL-XL pathway and to activate BAX and BAK. There is debate (indicated by the question mark) as to whether proapoptotic BH3 molecules (e.g., BIM and PUMA) act directly on BAX and BAK to induce mitochondrial permeability or whether they act only on BCL2-BCL-XL. APAF1, apoptotic protease-activating factor 1; BH3, BCL homologue; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TRAIL, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand. (From Hotchkiss et al; with permission.)
 
 
Table 314每15. Immune System Molecule Defects in Animals or Humans that Cause Autoimmune or Malignant Syndromes

 
 
Protein Defect Disease or Syndrome Observation in Animal Models or Humans 
Cytokines and Signaling Proteins  
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)  Overexpression Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), arthritis, vasculitis Mice 
TNF- Underexpression Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) Mice 
Interleukin-1-receptor antagonist Underexpression Arthritis Mice 
IL-2 Overexpression IBD Mice 
IL-7 Overexpression IBD Mice 
IL-10 Overexpression IBD Mice 
IL-2 receptor Overexpression IBD Mice 
IL-10 receptor Overexpression IBD Mice 
IL-3 Overexpression Demyelinating syndrome Mice 
Interferon- Overexpression in skin SLE Mice 
STAT-3 Underexpression IBD Mice 
STAT-4 Overexpression IBD Mice 
Transforming growth factor (TGF)  Underexpression Systemic wasting syndrome and IBD Mice 
TGF- receptor in T cells Underexpression SLE Mice 
Programmed death (PD-1) Underexpression SLE-like syndrome Mice 
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte, antigen-4 (CTLA-4) Underexpression Systemic lymphoproliferative disease Mice 
IL-10 Underexpression IBD (mouse) Type 1 diabetes, thyroid disease, primary (human) Mice and humans 
Major Histocompatibility Locus Molecules*
  
HLA B27 Allele expression or overexpression Inflammatory bowel disease Rats and humans 
Complement deficiency of C1, 2, 3 or 4 Underexpression   Humans 
LIGHT (TNF superfamily 14) Overexpression Systemic lymphoproliferative (mouse) and autoimmunity Mice 
HLA class II DQB10301, DQB10302 Allele expression Juvenile-onset diabetes Humans 
HLA class II DQB10401, DQB10402 Allele expression Rheumatoid arthritis Humans 
HLA class I B27 Allele expression Ankylosing spondylitis, IBD Rats and humans 
Apoptosis Proteins  
TNF receptor 1 (TNF-R1) Underexpression Familial periodic fever syndrome Humans 
Fas (CD95; Apo-1) Underexpression Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type 1 (ALPS 1); malignant lymphoma; bladder cancer Humans 
Fas ligand Underexpression SLE (only one case identified) Humans 
Perforin Underexpression Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) Humans 
Caspase 10 Underexpression Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II (ALPS II) Humans 
bcl-10 Underexpression Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma Humans 
P53 Underexpression Various malignant neoplasms Humans 
Bax Underexpression Colon cancer; hematopoietic malignancies Humans 
bcl-2 Underexpression Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma Humans 
c-IAP2 Underexpression Low-grade MALT lymphoma Humans 
NAIP1 Underexpression Spinal muscular atrophy Humans 
 


*Many autoimmune diseases are associated with a myriad of major compatibility complex gene allele (HLA) types. They are presented here as examples.

Abbreviation: MALT, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.

Source: Adapted from Mullauer and from Davidson and Diamond; with permission.
 

Mechanisms of Immune-Mediated Damage to Microbes or Host Tissues

Several responses by the host innate and adaptive immune systems to foreign microbes culminate in rapid and efficient elimination of microbes. In these scenarios, the classic weapons of the adaptive immune system (T cells, B cells) interface with cells (macrophages, dendritic cells, NK cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils) and soluble products (microbial peptides, pentraxins, complement and coagulation systems) of the innate immune system (Chaps. 60 and 317).

There are five general phases of host defenses: (1) migration of leukocytes to sites of antigen localization; (2) antigen-nonspecific recognition of pathogens by macrophages and other cells and systems of the innate immune system; (3) specific recognition of foreign antigens mediated by T and B lymphocytes; (4) amplification of the inflammatory response with recruitment of specific and nonspecific effector cells by complement components, cytokines, kinins, arachidonic acid metabolites, and mast cell每basophil products; and (5) macrophage, neutrophil, and lymphocyte participation in destruction of antigen with ultimate removal of antigen particles by phagocytosis (by macrophages or neutrophils) or by direct cytotoxic mechanisms (involving macrophages, neutrophils, DCs, and lymphocytes). Under normal circumstances, orderly progression of host defenses through these phases results in a well-controlled immune and inflammatory response that protects the host from the offending antigen. However, dysfunction of any of the host defense systems can damage host tissue and produce clinical disease. Furthermore, for certain pathogens or antigens, the normal immune response itself might contribute substantially to the tissue damage. For example, the immune and inflammatory response in the brain to certain pathogens such as M. tuberculosis may be responsible for much of the morbidity rate of this disease in that organ system (Chap. 165). In addition, the morbidity rate associated with certain pneumonias such as that caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci may be associated more with inflammatory infiltrates than with the tissue-destructive effects of the microorganism itself (Chap. 207).

The Molecular Basis of Lymphocyte每Endothelial Cell Interactions

The control of lymphocyte circulatory patterns between the bloodstream and peripheral lymphoid organs operates at the level of lymphocyte每endothelial cell interactions to control the specificity of lymphocyte subset entry into organs. Similarly, lymphocyte每endothelial cell interactions regulate the entry of lymphocytes into inflamed tissue. Adhesion molecule expression on lymphocytes and endothelial cells regulates the retention and subsequent egress of lymphocytes within tissue sites of antigenic stimulation, delaying cell exit from tissue and preventing reentry into the circulating lymphocyte pool (Fig. 314-11). All types of lymphocyte migration begin with lymphocyte attachment to specialized regions of vessels, termed high endothelial venules (HEVs). An important concept is that adhesion molecules do not generally bind their ligand until a conformational change (ligand activation) occurs in the adhesion molecule that allows ligand binding. Induction of a conformation-dependent determinant on an adhesion molecule can be accomplished by cytokines or via ligation of other adhesion molecules on the cell.

Figure 314-11

 
 
 
Key migration steps of immune cells at sites of inflammation. Inflammation due to tissue damage or infection induces the release of cytokines (not shown) and inflammatory chemoattractants (red arrowheads) from distressed stromal cells and "professional" sentinels, such as mast cells and macrophages (not shown). The inflammatory signals induce upregulation of endothelial selectins and immunoglobulin "superfamily" members, particularly ICAM-1 and/or VCAM-1. Chemoattractants, particularly chemokines, are produced by or translocated across venular endothelial cells (red arrow) and are displayed in the lumen to rolling leukocytes. Those leukocytes that express the appropriate set of trafficking molecules undergo a multistep adhesion cascade (steps 1每3) and then polarize and move by diapedesis across the venular wall (steps 4 and 5). Diapedesis involves transient disassembly of endothelial junctions and penetration through the underlying basement membrane (step 6). Once in the extravascular (interstitial) space, the migrating cell uses different integrins to gain "footholds" on collagen fibers and other ECM molecules, such as laminin and fibronectin, and on inflammation-induced ICAM-1 on the surface of parenchymal cells (step 7). The migrating cell receives guidance cues from distinct sets of chemoattractants, particularly chemokines, which may be immobilized on glycosaminoglycans (GAG) that "decorate" many ECM molecules and stromal cells. Inflammatory signals also induce tissue DCs to undergo maturation. Once DCs process material from damaged tissues and invading pathogens, they upregulate CCR7, which allows them to enter draining lymph vessels that express the CCR7 ligand CCL21 (and CCL19). In lymph nodes (LN), these antigen-loaded mature DCs activate na?ve T cells and expand pools of effector lymphocytes, which enter the blood and migrate back to the site of inflammation. T cells in tissue also use this CCR7-dependent route to migrate from peripheral sites to draining lymph nodes through afferent lymphatics. (Adapted from AD Luster et al: Nat Immunol 6:1182, 2005; with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright 2005.)
 
 

The first stage of lymphocyte每endothelial cell interactions, attachment and rolling, occurs when lymphocytes leave the stream of flowing blood cells in a postcapillary venule and roll along venule endothelial cells (Fig. 314-11). Lymphocyte rolling is mediated by the l-selectin molecule (LECAM-1, LAM-1, CD62L) and slows cell transit time through venules, allowing time for activation of adherent cells.

The second stage of lymphocyte每endothelial cell interactions, firm adhesion with activation-dependent stable arrest, requires stimulation of lymphocytes by chemoattractants or by endothelial cell每derived cytokines. Cytokines thought to participate in adherent cell activation include members of the IL-8 family, platelet-activation factor, leukotriene B4, and C5a. In addition, HEVs express chemokines, SLC (CCL21) and ELC (CCL19), which participate in this process. Following activation by chemoattractants, lymphocytes shed l-selectin from the cell surface and upregulate cell CD11b/18 (MAC-1) or CD11a/18 (LFA-1) molecules, resulting in firm attachment of lymphocytes to HEVs.

Lymphocyte homing to peripheral lymph nodes involves adhesion of l-selectin to glycoprotein HEV ligands collectively referred to as peripheral node addressin (PNAd), whereas homing of lymphocytes to intestine Peyer's patches primarily involves adhesion of the 4,7 integrin to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) on the Peyer's patch HEVs. However, for migration to mucosal Peyer's patch lymphoid aggregates, na?ve lymphocytes primarily use l-selectin, whereas memory lymphocytes use 4,7 integrin. 4,1 Integrin (CD49d/CD29, VLA-4)每VCAM-1 interactions are important in the initial interaction of memory lymphocytes with HEVs of multiple organs in sites of inflammation (Table 314-16).

Table 314每16. Trafficking Molecules Involved in Inflammatory Disease Processes

 
 
    Proposed Leukocyte Receptors for Endothelial Traffic Signals 
Disease Key Effector Cell L-Selectin, Ligand GPCR Integrina
  
Acute Inflammation  
Myocardial infarction Neutrophil PSGL-1 CXCR1, CXCR2, PAFR, BLT1 LFA-1, Mac-1 
Stroke Neutrophil L-Selectin, PSGL-1 CXCR1, CXCR2, PAFR, BLT1 LFA-1, Mac-1 
Ischemia-reperfusion Neutrophil PSGL-1 CXCR1, CXCR2, PAFR, BLT1 LFA-1, Mac-1 
TH1 Inflammation  
Atherosclerosis Monocyte PSGL-1 CCR1, CCR2, BLT1, CXCR2, CX3CR1 VLA-4 
  TH1
  PSGL-1 CXCR3, CCR5 VLA-4 
Multiple sclerosis TH1
  PSGL-1 (?) CXCR3, CXCR6 VLA-4, LFA-1 
  Monocyte PSGL-1 (?) CCR2, CCR1 VLA-4, LFA-1 
Rheumatoid arthritis Monocyte PSGL-1 CCR1, CCR2 VLA-1, VLA-2, VLA-4, LFA-1 
  TH1
  PSGL-1 CXCR3, CXCR6 VLA-1, VLA-2, VLA-4, LFA-1 
  Neutrophil L-Selectin, PSGL-1 CXCR2, BLT1 LFA-1b
  
Psoriasis Skin-homing TH1
  CLA CCR4, CCR10, CXCR3 VLA-4c, LFA-1
  
Crohn disease Gut-homing TH1
  PSGL-1 CCR9, CXCR3 4, 7, LFA-1 
Type I diabetes TH1
  PSGL-1 (?) CCR4, CCR5 VLA-4, LFA-1 
  CD8 L-Selectin (?), PSGL-1 (?) CXCR3 VLA-4, LFA-1 
Allograft rejection CD8 PSGL-1 CXCR3, CX3CR1, BLT1 VLA-4, LFA-1 
  B cell L-Selectin, PSGL-1 CXCR5, CXCR4 VLA-4, LFA-1 
Hepatitis CD8 PSGL-1 CXCR3, CCR5, CXCR6 VLA-4 
Lupus TH1
  None CXCR6 VLA-4d
  
  Plasmacytoid DC L-Selectin, CLA CCR7, CXCR3, ChemR23 LFA-1, Mac-1 
  B cell CLA (?) CXCR5, CXCR4 LFA-1 
TH2 Inflammation  
Asthma TH2
  PSGL-1 CCR4, CCR8, BLT1 LFA-1 
  Eosinophil PSGL-1 CCR3, PAFR, BLT1 VLA-4, LFA-1 
  Mast cells PSGL-1 CCR2, CCR3, BLT1 VLA-4, LFA-1 
Atopic dermatitis Skin-homing TH2
  CLA CCR4, CCR10 VLA-4, LFA-1 
 


a Various 1 integrins have been linked in different ways in basal lamina and interstitial migration of distinct cell types and inflammatory settings.

b In some settings, Mac-1 has been linked to transmigration.

c CD44 can act in concert with VLA-4 in particular models of leukocyte arrest.

d TH2 cells require VAP-1 to traffic to inflamed liver.

Source: From AD Luster et al: Nat Immunol 6:1182, 2005; with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright 2005.
 

The third stage of leukocyte emigration in HEVs is sticking and arrest. Sticking of the lymphocyte to endothelial cells and arrest at the site of sticking are mediated predominantly by ligation of 1,2 integrin LFA-1 to the integrin ligand ICAM-1 on HEVs. While the first three stages of lymphocyte attachment to HEVs take only a few seconds, the fourth stage of lymphocyte emigration, transendothelial migration, takes 10 min. Although the molecular mechanisms that control lymphocyte transendothelial migration are not fully characterized, the HEV CD44 molecule and molecules of the HEV glycocalyx (extracellular matrix) are thought to play important regulatory roles in this process (Fig. 314-11). Finally, expression of matrix metalloproteases capable of digesting the subendothelial basement membrane, rich in nonfibrillar collagen, appears to be required for the penetration of lymphoid cells into the extravascular sites.

Abnormal induction of HEV formation and use of the molecules discussed above have been implicated in the induction and maintenance of inflammation in a number of chronic inflammatory diseases. In animal models of Type 1 diabetes mellitus, MAdCAM-1 and GlyCAM-1 have been shown to be highly expressed on HEVs in inflamed pancreatic islets, and treatment of these animals with inhibitors of l-selectin and 4 integrin function blocked the development of Type 1 diabetes mellitus (Chap. 344). A similar role for abnormal induction of the adhesion molecules of lymphocyte emigration has been suggested in rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 321), Hashimoto's thyroiditis (Chap. 341), Graves' disease (Chap. 341), multiple sclerosis (Chap. 380), Crohn's disease (Chap. 295), and ulcerative colitis (Chap. 295).

Immune-Complex Formation

Clearance of antigen by immune-complex formation between antigen, complement, and antibody is a highly effective mechanism of host defense. However, depending on the level of immune complexes formed and their physicochemical properties, immune complexes may or may not result in host and foreign cell damage. After antigen exposure, certain types of soluble antigen-antibody complexes freely circulate and, if not cleared by the reticuloendothelial system, can be deposited in blood vessel walls and in other tissues such as renal glomeruli and cause vasculitis or glomerulonephritis syndromes (Chaps. 283 and 326). Deficiencies of early complement components are associated with inefficient clearance of immune complexes and immune complex mediated tissue damage in autoimmune syndromes, while deficiencies of the later complement components are associated with susceptibility to recurrent neisseria infections (Table 314-17).

Table 314每17. Complement Deficiencies and Associated Diseases

 
 
Component Associated Diseases 
Classic Pathway  
Clq, Clr, Cls, C4 Immune-complex syndromes,* pyogenic infections 
C2 Immune-complex syndromes,* few with pyogenic infections 
C1 Inhibitor Rare immune-complex disease, few with pyogenic infections 
C3 and Alternative Pathway C3  
C3 Immune-complex syndromes,* pyogenic infections 
D Pyogenic infections 
Properdin Neisseria infections  
I Pyogenic infections 
H Hemolytic uremic syndrome 
Membrane Attack Complex  
C5, C6, C7, C8 Recurrent Neisseria infections, immune-complex disease  
C9 Rare Neisseria infections  
 


*Immune-complex syndromes include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and SLE-like syndromes, glomerulonephritis, and vasculitis syndromes.

Source: After JA Schifferli, DK Peters: Lancet 88:957, 1983. Copyright 1983, with permission from Elsevier.
 

Immediate-Type Hypersensitivity

Helper T cells that drive antiallergen IgE responses are usually TH2-type inducer T cells that secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10. Mast cells and basophils have high-affinity receptors for the Fc portion of IgE (FcRI), and cell-bound antiallergen IgE effectively "arms" basophils and mast cells. Mediator release is triggered by antigen (allergen) interaction with Fc receptor每bound IgE, the mediators released are responsible for the pathophysiologic changes of allergic diseases (Table 314-12). Mediators released from mast cells and basophils can be divided into three broad functional types: (1) those that increase vascular permeability and contract smooth muscle (histamine, platelet-activating factor, SRS-A, BK-A), (2) those that are chemotactic for or activate other inflammatory cells (ECF-A, NCF, leukotriene B4), and (3) those that modulate the release of other mediators (BK-A, platelet-activating factor) (Chap. 317).

Cytotoxic Reactions of Antibody

In this type of immunologic injury, complement-fixing (C1-binding) antibodies against normal or foreign cells or tissues (IgM, IgG1, IgG2, IgG3) bind complement via the classic pathway and initiate a sequence of events similar to that initiated by immune-complex deposition, resulting in cell lysis or tissue injury. Examples of antibody-mediated cytotoxic reactions include red cell lysis in transfusion reactions, Goodpasture's syndrome with anti每glomerular basement membrane antibody formation, and pemphigus vulgaris with antiepidermal antibodies inducing blistering skin disease.

Classic Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity Reactions

Inflammatory reactions initiated by mononuclear leukocytes and not by antibody alone have been termed delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions. The term delayed has been used to contrast a secondary cellular response that appears 48每72 h after antigen exposure with an immediate hypersensitivity response generally seen within 12 h of antigen challenge and initiated by basophil mediator release or preformed antibody. For example, in an individual previously infected with M. tuberculosis organisms, intradermal placement of tuberculin purified-protein derivative as a skin test challenge results in an indurated area of skin at 48每72 h, indicating previous exposure to tuberculosis.

The cellular events that result in classic delayed-type hypersensitivity responses are centered around T cells (predominantly, though not exclusively, IFN-, IL-2, and TNF--secreting TH1-type helper T cells) and macrophages. Recently NK cells have been suggested to play a major role in the form of delayed hypersensitivity that occurs following skin contact with immunogens. First, local immune and inflammatory responses at the site of foreign antigen upregulate endothelial cell adhesion molecule expression, promoting the accumulation of lymphocytes at the tissue site. In the general schemes outlined in Figs. 314-2 and 314-3, antigen is processed by dendritic cells and presented to small numbers of CD4+ T cells expressing a TCR specific for the antigen. IL-12 produced by APCs induces T cells to produce IFN- (TH1 response). Macrophages frequently undergo epithelioid cell transformation and fuse to form multinucleated giant cells in response to IFN-. This type of mononuclear cell infiltrate is termed granulomatous inflammation. Examples of diseases in which delayed-type hypersensitivity plays a major role are fungal infections (histoplasmosis; Chap. 199), mycobacterial infections (tuberculosis, leprosy; Chaps. 165 and 166), chlamydial infections (lymphogranuloma venereum; Chap. 176), helminth infections (schistosomiasis; Chap. 219), reactions to toxins (berylliosis; Chap. 256), and hypersensitivity reactions to organic dusts (hypersensitivity pneumonitis; Chap. 255). In addition, delayed-type hypersensitivity responses play important roles in tissue damage in autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, temporal arteritis, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) (Chaps. 321 and 326).

Clinical Evaluation of Immune Function

Clinical assessment of immunity requires investigation of the four major components of the immune system that participate in host defense and in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases: (1) humoral immunity (B cells); (2) cell-mediated immunity (T cells, monocytes); (3) phagocytic cells of the reticuloendothelial system (macrophages), as well as polymorphonuclear leukocytes; and (4) complement. Clinical problems that require an evaluation of immunity include chronic infections, recurrent infections, unusual infecting agents, and certain autoimmune syndromes. The type of clinical syndrome under evaluation can provide information regarding possible immune defects (Chap. 316). Defects in cellular immunity generally result in viral, mycobacterial, and fungal infections. An extreme example of deficiency in cellular immunity is AIDS (Chap. 189). Antibody deficiencies result in recurrent bacterial infections, frequently with organisms such as S. pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae (Chap. 316). Disorders of phagocyte function are frequently manifested by recurrent skin infections, often due to Staphylococcus aureus (Chap. 60). Finally, deficiencies of early and late complement components are associated with autoimmune phenomena and recurrent Neisseria infections (Table 314-17). For further discussion of useful initial screening tests of immune function, see Chap. 316.

Immunotherapy

Many therapies for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases involve the use of nonspecific immune-modulating or immunosuppressive agents such as glucocorticoids or cytotoxic drugs. The goal of development of new treatments for immune-mediated diseases is to design ways to specifically interrupt pathologic immune responses, leaving nonpathologic immune responses intact. Novel ways to interrupt pathologic immune responses that are under investigation include the use of anti-inflammatory cytokines or specific cytokine inhibitors as anti-inflammatory agents, the use of monoclonal antibodies against T or B lymphocytes as therapeutic agents, the induction of anergy by administration of soluble CTLA-4 protein, the use of intravenous Ig for certain infections and immune complex每mediated diseases, the use of specific cytokines to reconstitute components of the immune system, and bone marrow transplantation to replace the pathogenic immune system with a more normal immune system (Chaps. 60, 316, and 189). In particular, the use of a monoclonal antibody to B cells (rituximab, anti-CD20 MAb) is approved in the United States for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (Chap. 110) and, in combination with methotrexate, for treatment of adult patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis resistant to TNF- inhibitors (Chap. 321).

Cytokines and Cytokine Inhibitors

Recently, a humanized mouse anti-TNF- monoclonal antibody (MAb) has been shown to be effective in both rheumatoid arthritis and ulcerative colitis. Use of anti-TNF- antibody therapy has resulted in clinical improvement in patients with these diseases and has opened the way for targeting TNF- to treat other severe forms of autoimmune and/or inflammatory disease. Blockage of TNF- has been effective in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, Crohn's disease, and ankylosing spondylitis. Anti-TNF- MAb (infliximab) has been approved by the FDA for treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Other cytokine inhibitors are recombinant soluble TNF- receptor (R) fused to human Ig and Anakinra (soluble IL-1 receptor antagonist, or IL-1 ra). The treatment of autoinflammatory syndromes (Table 314-6) with recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist can prevent symptoms in these syndromes, since the overproduction of IL-1 is a hallmark of these diseases. Soluble TNF-R (etanercept) and IL-1 ra act to inhibit the activity of pathogenic cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis, i.e., TNF- and IL-1, respectively. Similarly, anti-IL-6, IFN-, and IL-11 act to inhibit pathogenic proinflammatory cytokines. Anti-IL-6 inhibits IL-6 activity, while IFN- and IL-11 decrease IL-1 and TNF- production.

Of particular note has been the successful use of IFN- in the treatment of the phagocytic cell defect in chronic granulomatous disease (Chap. 60).

Monoclonal Antibodies to T and B Cells

The OKT3 MAb against human T cells has been used for several years as a T cell每specific immunosuppressive agent that can substitute for horse anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) in the treatment of solid organ transplant rejection. OKT3 produces fewer allergic reactions than ATG but does induce human anti-mouse Ig antibody〞thus limiting its use. Anti-CD4 MAb therapy has been used in trials to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis. While inducing profound immunosuppression, anti-CD4 MAb treatment also induces susceptibility to severe infections. Treatment of patients with a MAb against the T cell molecule CD40 ligand (CD154) is under investigation to induce tolerance to organ transplants, with promising results reported in animal studies. Monoclonal antibodies to the CD25 (IL-2) receptor (Basiliximab) are being used for treatment of graft-versus-host disease in bone marrow transplantation, and anti-CD20 MAb (rituximab) is used to treat hematologic neoplasms, autoimmune diseases, and kidney transplant rejection. The anti-IgE monoclonal antibody (omalizumab) is used for blocking antigen-specific IgE that causes hay fever and allergic rhinitis (Chap. 317); however, side effects of anti-IgE include increased risk of anaphylaxis. Studies have shown that Th17 cells, in addition to Th1, are mediators of inflammation in Crohn's disease, and anti每IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody therapy has been studied as a treatment.

It is important to realize the potential risks for these immunosuppressive monoclonal antibodies. Natalizumab is a humanized IgG antibody against an 4 integrin that inhibits leukocyte migration into tissues, and has been approved for treatment of multiple sclerosis in the United States. Both it and anti-CD20 (rituximab) have been associated with the onset of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)〞a serious and usually fatal CNS infection caused by JC polyoma virus. Efalizumab, a humanized IgG monoclonal antibody previously approved for treatment of plaque psoriasis, has now been taken off the market due to reactivation of JC virus leading to fatal PML. Thus, use of any currently approved immunosuppressant immunotherapies should be undertaken with caution and with careful monitoring of patients according to FDA guidelines.

Tolerance Induction

Specific immunotherapy has moved into a new era with the introduction of soluble CTLA-4 protein into clinical trials. Use of this molecule to block T cell activation via TCR/CD28 ligation during organ or bone marrow transplantation has showed promising results in animals and in early human clinical trials. Specifically, treatment of bone marrow with CTLA-4 protein reduces rejection of the graft in HLA-mismatched bone marrow transplantation. In addition, promising results with soluble CTLA-4 have been reported in the downmodulation of autoimmune T cell responses in the treatment of psoriasis; and it is being studied for treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 319).

Intravenous Immunoglobulin (Ivig)

IVIg has been used successfully to block reticuloendothelial cell function and immune complex clearance in various immune cytopenias such as immune thrombocytopenia (Chap. 115). In addition, IVIg is useful for prevention of tissue damage in certain inflammatory syndromes such as Kawasaki disease (Chap. 326) and as Ig replacement therapy for certain types of immunoglobulin deficiencies (Chap. 316). In addition, controlled clinical trials support the use of IVIg in selected patients with graft-versus-host disease, multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome, and chronic demyelinating polyneuropathy.

Stem Cell Transplantation

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (SCT) is now being comprehensively studied to treat several autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, and scleroderma. The goal of immune reconstitution in autoimmune disease syndromes is to replace a dysfunctional immune system with a normally reactive immune cell repertoire. Preliminary results in patients with scleroderma and lupus have showed encouraging results. Controlled clinical trials in these three diseases are now being launched in the United States and Europe to compare the toxicity and efficacy of conventional immunosuppression therapy with that of myeloablative autologous SCT.

Thus, a number of recent insights into immune system function have spawned a new field of interventional immunotherapy and have enhanced the prospect for development of specific and nontoxic therapies for immune and inflammatory diseases.
 
Further Readings

Andreakos ETH et al: Role of cytokines, in Rheumatoid Arthritis, EW St. Clair et al (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004, pp 134每149 

 
Berger JR et al: Monoclonal antibodies and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. MAbs 1:583, 2009[PMID: 20073129]  [Full Text]

 
Blander JM et al: Toll-dependent selection of microbial antigens for presentation by dendritic cells. Nature 440:808, 2006[PMID: 16489357]  [Full Text]

 
Carson KR et al: Monoclonal antibody-associated progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy in patients treated with rituximab, natalizumab, and efalizumab: A review from the Research on Adverse Drug Events and Reports (RADAR) Project. Lancet Oncol 10:816, 2009[PMID: 19647202]  [Full Text]

 
Davidson A, Diamond B: Autoimmune diseases. N Engl J Med 345:340, 2001[PMID: 11484692]  [Full Text]

 
Diaz-Pena R et al: KIR genes and their role in spondyloarthropathies. Adv Exp Med Biol 649:286, 2009[PMID: 19731638]  [Full Text]

 
Falschlehner C et al: Following TRAIL's path in the immune system. Immunology 127:145, 2009[PMID: 19476510]  [Full Text]

 
Franchi L et al: The inflammasome: A caspase-1-activation platform that regulates immune responses. Nat Immunol 10:241, 2009[PMID: 19221555]  [Full Text]

 
Hotchkiss RS et al: Cell death. N Engl J Med 361:1570, 2009[PMID: 19828534]  [Full Text]

 
Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R: Regulation of adaptive immunity by the innate immune system. Science 327:291, 2010[PMID: 20075244]  [Full Text]

 
Kelley WN et al (eds): Textbook of Rheumatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1993, chaps. 6, 7, 10, 13, 15, 16 

 
Koretzky GA et al: SLP76 and SLP65: Complex regulation of signaling in lymphocytes and beyond. Nat Rev Immunol 6:67, 2006[PMID: 16493428]  [Full Text]

 
Korman BD et al: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, efalizumab, and immunosuppression: A cautionary tale for dermatologists. Arch Dermatol 145:937, 2009[PMID: 19687432]  [Full Text]

 
Kronenberg M et al: Innate-like recognition of microbes by invariant natural killer T cells. Curr Opin Immunol 21:391, 2009[PMID: 19646850]  [Full Text]

 
Lanier L: NK cell recognition. Annu Rev Immunol 23:225, 2005[PMID: 15771571]  [Full Text]

 
Lernmark A: Autoimmune diseases: Are markers ready for prediction? J Clin Invest 108:1091, 2001[PMID: 11602614]  [Full Text]

 
Louten J et al: Development and function of Th17 cells in health and disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol 123:1004, 2009[PMID: 19410689]  [Full Text]

 
Macdonald TT et al: Immunity, inflammation, and allergy in the gut. Science 307:1920, 2005[PMID: 15790845]  [Full Text]

 
Martinon F et al: The inflammasomes: Guardians of the body. Annu Rev Immunol 27:229, 2009[PMID: 19302040]  [Full Text]

 
Middendorp S et al: NKT cells in mucosal immunity. Mucosal Immunol 2(5):393, 2009[PMID: 19587641]  [Full Text]

 
Morley BJ, Walport MJ: The Complement Facts Books. London, Academic Press, 2000, Chap. 2 

 
Mullauer L et al: Mutations in apoptosis genes: A pathogenetic factor for human disease. Mutat Res 488:211, 2001[PMID: 11397650]  [Full Text]

 
Paust S et al: Adaptive immune responses mediated by natural killer cells. Immunol Rev 235:286, 2010[PMID: 20536570]  [Full Text]

 
Rajagopalan S et al: Understanding how combinations of HLA and KIR genes influence disease. J Exp Med 201:1025, 2005[PMID: 15809348]  [Full Text]

 
Ramaswamy M et al: Harnessing programmed cell death as a therapeutic strategy in rheumatic diseases. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2011 [epub ahead of print] 

 
Rinaudo C et al: Vaccinology in the Genome Era. J Clin Invest 119:2515, 2009[PMID: 19729849]  [Full Text]

 
Rivera J et al: Molecular regulation of mast cell activation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 6:1214, 2006 

 
Romagnani S: CD4 effector cells, in Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, 3rd ed, J Gallin, R Snyderman (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999, pp 177 

 
Schroder K et al: The NLRP3 inflammasome: a sensor for metabolic danger? Science 327:296, 2010[PMID: 20075245]  [Full Text]

 
Steinman RM, Banchereau J: Taking dendritic cells into medicine. Nature 449:419, 2007[PMID: 17898760]  [Full Text]

 
Ting Jpy et al: How the noninflammasome NLRs function in the innate immune system. Science 327:286, 2010[PMID: 20075243]  [Full Text]

 
Ueno H et al: Targeting human dendritic cell subsets for improved vaccines. Semin Immunol 23:21, 2011[PMID: 21277223]  [Full Text]

 
van Duin D et al: Triggering TLR signaling in vaccination. Trends Immunol 27:49, 2006 

 
Weaver C et al: Interplay between the Th17 and Treg cell lineages: a co-evolutionary perspective. Nat Rev Immunol 9:883, 2009[PMID: 19935807]  [Full Text]

 
Whelan B et al: mAbs in nonlupus autoimmune rheumatic disease. Curr Opin Hemat 16:280, 2009[PMID: 19444098]  [Full Text]

 
Williams AP et al: Hanging in the balance. Mol Interv 5:226, 2005[PMID: 16123537]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
 Chapter 315. The Major Histocompatibility Complex >
 

The HLA Complex and Its Products

The human major histocompatibility complex (MHC), commonly called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex, is a 4-megabase (Mb) region on chromosome 6 (6p21.3) that is densely packed with expressed genes. The best known of these genes are the HLA class I and class II genes, whose products are critical for immunologic specificity and transplantation histocompatibility, and they play a major role in susceptibility to a number of autoimmune diseases. Many other genes in the HLA region are also essential to the innate and antigen-specific functioning of the immune system. The HLA region shows extensive conservation with the MHC of other mammals in terms of genomic organization, gene sequence, and protein structure and function.

The HLA class I genes are located in a 2-Mb stretch of DNA at the telomeric end of the HLA region (Fig. 315-1). The classic (MHC class Ia) HLA-A, -B, and -C loci, the products of which are integral participants in the immune response to intracellular infections, tumors, and allografts, are expressed in all nucleated cells and are highly polymorphic in the population. Polymorphism refers to a high degree of allelic variation within a genetic locus that leads to extensive variation between different individuals expressing different alleles. More than 650 alleles at HLA-A, 1000 at HLA-B, and 360 at HLA-C have been identified in different human populations, making this the most highly polymorphic segment known within the human genome. Each of the alleles at these loci encodes a heavy chain (also called an  chain) that associates noncovalently with the nonpolymorphic light chain 2-microglobulin, encoded on chromosome 15.

Figure 315-1

 
 
 
Physical map of the HLA region, showing the class I and class II loci, other immunologically important loci, and a sampling of other genes mapped to this region. Gene orientation is indicated by arrowheads. Scale is in kilobase (kb). The approximate genetic distance from DP to A is 3.2 cM. This includes 0.8 cM between A and B (including 0.2 cM between C and B), 0.4每0.8 cM between B and DR-DQ, and 1.6每2.0 cM between DR-DQ and DP.
 
 


The nomenclature of HLAgenes and their products reflects the grafting of newer DNA sequence information on an older system based on serology. Among class I genes, alleles of the HLA-A, -B, and -C loci were originally identified in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s by alloantisera, derived primarily from multiparous women, who in the course of normal pregnancy produce antibodies against paternal antigens expressed on fetal cells. The serologic allotypes were designated by consecutive numbers (e.g., HLA-A1, HLA-B8). Currently, under World Health Organization (WHO) nomenclature, class I alleles are given a single designation that indicates locus, serologic specificity, and sequence-based subtype. For example, HLA-A*0201 indicates subtype 1 of the serologically defined allele HLA-A2. Subtypes that differ from each other at the nucleotide but not the amino acid sequence level are designated by an extra numeral (e.g., HLA-B*07021 and HLA-B*07022 are two variants of the HLA-B702 subtype of HLA-B*07). The nomenclature of class II genes, discussed below, is made more complicated by the fact that both chains of a class II molecule are encoded by closely linked HLA-encoded loci, both of which may be polymorphic, and by the presence of differing numbers of isotypic DRB loci in different individuals. It has become clear that accurate HLA genotyping requires DNA sequence analysis, and the identification of alleles at the DNA sequence level has contributed greatly to the understanding of the role of HLA molecules as peptide-binding ligands, to the analysis of associations of HLA alleles with certain diseases, to the study of the population genetics of HLA, and to a clearer understanding of the contribution of HLA differences to allograft rejection and graft-versus-host disease. Current databases of HLA class I and class II sequences can be accessed by the Internet (e.g., from the IMGT/HLA Database, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/imgt/hla), and frequent updates of HLA gene lists are published in several journals.

The biologic significance of this MHC genetic diversity, resulting in extreme variation in the human population, is evident from the perspective of the structure of MHC molecules. As shown in Fig. 315-2, the MHC class I and class II genes encode MHC molecules that bind small peptides, and together this complex (pMHC; peptide-MHC) forms the ligand for recognition by T lymphocytes, through the antigen-specific T cell receptor (TCR). There is a direct link between the genetic variation and this structural interaction: The allelic changes in genetic sequence result in diversification of the peptide-binding capabilities of each MHC molecule and in differences for specific TCR binding. Thus, different pMHC complexes bind different antigens and are targets for recognition by different T cells.

Figure 315-2

 
 
 
 
 
A. The trimolecular complex of TCR (top), MHC molecule (bottom) and a bound peptide form the structural determinants of specific antigen recognition. Other panels (B. and C.) show the domain structure of MHC class I (B) and class II (C) molecules. The 1 and 2 domains of class I and the 1 and 1 domains of class II form a -sheet platform that forms the floor of the peptide-binding groove, and  helices that form the sides of the groove. The 3 (B) and 2 domains (C) project from the cell surface and form the contact sites for CD8 and CD4, respectively. (Adapted from EL Reinhertz et al: Science 286:1913, 1999; and C Janeway et al: Immunobiology Bookshelf, 2nd ed, Garland Publishing, New York, 1997; with permission.)
 
 

The class I MHC and class II MHC structures, shown in Fig. 315-2B, C, are structurally closely related; however, there are a few key differences. While both bind peptides and present them to T cells, the binding pockets have different shapes, which influence the types of immune responses that result (discussed below). In addition, there are structural contact sites for T cell molecules known as CD8 and CD4, expressed on the class I or class II membrane-proximal domains, respectively. This ensures that when peptide antigens are presented by class I molecules, the responding T cells are predominantly of the CD8 class, and similarly, that T cells responding to class II pMHC complexes are predominantly CD4.

The nonclassic, or class Ib, MHC molecules, HLA-E, -F, and -G, are much less polymorphic than MHC Ia and appear to have distinct functions. The HLA-E molecule has a peptide repertoire displaying signal peptides cleaved from classic MHC class I molecules and is the major self-recognition target for the natural killer (NK) cell每inhibitory receptors NKG2A or NKG2C paired with CD94 (see below and Chap. 314). This appears to be a function of immune surveillance, as loss of MHC class I signal peptides serves as a surrogate marker for injured or infected cells, leading to release of the inhibitory signal and subsequent activation of NK cells. HLA-E can also bind and present peptides to CD8 T cells, albeit with a limited scope, as only three HLA-E alleles are known. HLA-G is expressed selectively in extravillous trophoblasts, the fetal cell population directly in contact with maternal tissues. It binds a wide array of peptides, is expressed in six different alternatively spliced forms, and provides inhibitory signals to both NK cells and T cells, presumably in the service of maintaining maternofetal tolerance; 14 HLA-G alleles have been identified. The protein product of HLA-F is found mainly intracellularly, and the function of this locus, which encodes four alleles, remains largely unknown.

Additional class I每like genes have been identified, some HLA-linked and some encoded on other chromosomes, that show only distant homology to the class Ia and Ib molecules but share the three-dimensional class I structure. Those on chromosome 6p21 include MIC-A and MIC-B, which are encoded centromeric to HLA-B, and HLA-HFE, located 3 to 4 cM (centi-Morgan) telomeric of HLA-F. MIC-A and MIC-B do not bind peptide but are expressed on gut and other epithelium in a stress-inducible manner and serve as activation signals for certain  T cells, NK cells, CD8 T cells, and activated macrophages, acting through the activating NKG2D receptors. Sixty-seven MIC-A and 30 MIC-B alleles are known, and additional diversification comes from variable alanine repeat sequences in the transmembrane domain. Due to this structural diversity, MIC-A can be recognized as a foreign tissue target during organ transplantation, contributing to graft failure. HLA-HFE encodes the gene defective in hereditary hemochromatosis (Chap. 357). Among the non-HLA, class I每like genes, CD1 refers to a family of molecules that present glycolipids or other nonpeptide ligands to certain T cells, including T cells with NK activity; FcRn binds IgG within lysosomes and protects it from catabolism (Chap. 314); and Zn-2-glycoprotein 1 binds a nonpeptide ligand and promotes catabolism of triglycerides in adipose tissue. Like the HLA-A, -B, -C, -E, -F, and -G heavy chains, each of which forms a heterodimer with 2-microglobulin (Fig. 315-2), the class I每like molecules, HLA-HFE, FcRn, and CD1 also bind to 2-microglobulin, but MIC-A, MIC-B, and Zn-2-glycoprotein 1 do not.

The HLA class II region is also illustrated in Fig. 315-1. Multiple class II genes are arrayed within the centromeric 1 Mb of the HLA region, forming distinct haplotypes. A haplotype refers to an array of alleles at polymorphic loci along a chromosomal segment. Multiple class II genes are present on a single haplotype, clustered into three major subregions: HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP. Each of these subregions contains at least one functional alpha (A) locus and one functional beta (B) locus. Together these encode proteins that form the  and  polypeptide chains of a mature class II HLA molecule. Thus, the DRA and DRB genes encode an HLA-DR molecule; products of the DQAl and DQBl genes form an HLA-DQ molecule; and the DPAl and DPBl genes encode an HLA-DP molecule. There are several DRB genes (DRB1, DRB2, DRB3, etc.), so that two expressed DR molecules are encoded on most haplotypes by combining the -chain product of the DRA gene with separate  chains. More than 530 alleles have been identified at the HLA-DRB1 locus, with most of the variation occurring within limited segments encoding residues that interact with antigens. Detailed analysis of sequences and population distribution of these alleles strongly suggest that this diversity is actively selected by environmental pressures associated with pathogen diversity.

In the DQ region, both DQA1 and DQB1 are polymorphic, with 34 DQA1 alleles and 72 DQB1 alleles. The current nomenclature is largely analogous to that discussed above for class I, using the convention "locus * allele." Thus, for example, subtypes of the serologically defined specificity DR4, encoded by the DRB1 locus, are termed DRB1*0401, *0402, etc. In addition to allelic polymorphism, products of different DQA1 alleles can, with some limitations, pair with products of different DQB1 alleles through both cis and trans pairing to create combinatorial complexity and expand the number of expressed class II molecules. Because of the enormous allelic diversity in the general population, most individuals are heterozygous at all of the class I and class II loci. Thus, most individuals express six classic class I molecules (two each of HLA-A, -B, and -C) and around eight class II molecules〞two DP, two DR (more in the case of haplotypes with additional functional DRB genes), and up to four DQ (two cis and two trans).

Other Genes in the MHC

In addition to the class I and class II genes themselves, there are numerous genes interspersed among the HLA loci that have interesting and important immunologic functions. Our current concept of the function of MHC genes now encompasses many of these additional genes, some of which are also highly polymorphic. Indeed, direct comparison of the complete DNA sequences for eight of the entire 4-Mb MHC regions from different haplotypes show >44,000 nucleotide variations, encoding an extremely high potential for biologic diversity, and at least 97 genes located in this region are known to have coding region sequence variation. Specific examples include the TAP and LMP genes, as discussed in more detail below, which encode molecules that participate in intermediate steps in the HLA class I biosynthetic pathway. Another set of HLA genes, DMA and DMB, perform an analogous function for the class II pathway. These genes encode an intracellular molecule that facilitates the proper complexing of HLA class II molecules with antigen (see below). The HLA class III region is a name given to a cluster of genes between the class I and class II complexes, which includes genes for the two closely related cytokines tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- and lymphotoxin (TNF-); the complement components C2, C4, and Bf; heat shock protein (HSP)70; and the enzyme 21-hydroxylase.

The class I genesHLA-A, -B, and -C are expressed in all nucleated cells, although generally to a higher degree on leukocytes than on nonleukocytes. In contrast, the class II genes show a more restricted distribution: HLA-DR and HLA-DP genes are constitutively expressed on most cells of the myeloid cell lineage, whereas all three class II gene families (HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP) are inducible by certain stimuli provided by inflammatory cytokines such as interferon . Within the lymphoid lineage, expression of these class II genes is constitutive on B cells and inducible on human T cells. Most endothelial and epithelial cells in the body, including the vascular endothelium and the intestinal epithelium, are also inducible for class II gene expression. Thus, while these somatic tissues normally express only class I and not class II genes, during times of local inflammation they are recruited by cytokine stimuli to express class II genes as well, thereby becoming active participants in ongoing immune responses. Class II expression is controlled largely at the transcriptional level through a conserved set of promoter elements that interact with a protein known as CIITA. Cytokine-mediated induction of CIITA is a principal method by which tissue-specific expression of HLA gene expression is controlled. Other HLA genes involved in the immune response such as TAP and LMP, are also susceptible to upregulation by signals such as interferon . Sequence data for the entire HLA region can be accessed on the Internet (e.g., http://www.sanger.ac.uk/HGP/Chr6/MHC).

Linkage Disequilibrium

In addition to extensive polymorphism at the class I and class II loci, another characteristic feature of the HLA complex is linkage disequilibrium. This is formally defined as a deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for alleles at linked loci. This is reflected in the very low recombination rates between certain loci within the HLA complex. For example, recombination between DR and DQ loci is almost never observed in family studies, and characteristic haplotypes with particular arrays of DR and DQ alleles are found in every population. Similarly, the complement components C2, C4, and Bf are almost invariably inherited together, and the alleles at these loci are found in characteristic haplotypes. In contrast, there is a recombinational hotspot between DQ and DP, which are separated by 1每2 cM of genetic distance, despite their close physical proximity. Certain extended haplotypes encompassing the interval from DQ into the class I region are commonly found, the most notable being the haplotype DR3-B8-A1, which is found, in whole or in part, in 10每30% of northern European whites. It has been hypothesized that selective pressures may maintain linkage disequilibrium in HLA, but this remains to be determined. As discussed below under HLA and immunologic disease, one consequence of the phenomenon of linkage disequilibrium has been the resulting difficulty in assigning HLA-disease associations to a single allele at a single locus.
 
MHC Structure and Function

Class I and class II molecules display a distinctive structural architecture, which contains specialized functional domains responsible for the unique genetic and immunologic properties of the HLA complex. The principal known function of both class I and class II HLA molecules is to bind antigenic peptides in order to present antigen to an appropriate T cell. The ability of a particular peptide to satisfactorily bind to an individual HLA molecule is a direct function of the molecular fit between the amino acid residues on the peptide with respect to the amino acid residues of the HLA molecule. The bound peptide forms a tertiary structure called the MHC-peptide complex, which communicates with T lymphocytes through binding to the TCR molecule. The first site of TCR-MHC-peptide interaction in the life of a T cell occurs in the thymus, where self-peptides are presented to developing thymocytes by MHC molecules expressed on thymic epithelium and hematopoietically derived antigen-presenting cells, which are primarily responsible for positive and negative selection, respectively (Chap. 314). Thus, the population of MHC每T cell complexes expressed in the thymus shapes the TCR repertoire. Mature T cells encounter MHC molecules in the periphery both in the maintenance of tolerance (Chap. 318) and in the initiation of immune responses. The MHC-peptide-TCR interaction is the central event in the initiation of most antigen-specific immune responses, since it is the structural determinant of the specificity. For potentially immunogenetic peptides, the ability of a given peptide to be generated and bound by an HLA molecule is a primary feature of whether or not an immune response to that peptide can be generated, and the repertoire of peptides that a particular individual's HLA molecules can bind exerts a major influence over the specificity of that individual's immune response.

When a TCR molecule binds to an HLA-peptide complex, it forms intermolecular contacts with both the antigenic peptide and with the HLA molecule itself. The outcome of this recognition event depends on the density and duration of the binding interaction, accounting for a dual specificity requirement for activation of the T cell. That is, the TCR must be specific both for the antigenic peptide and for the HLA molecule. The polymorphic nature of the presenting molecules, and the influence that this exerts on the peptide repertoire of each molecule, results in the phenomenon of MHC restriction of the T cell specificity for a given peptide. The binding of CD8 or CD4 molecules to the class I or class II molecule, respectively, also contributes to the interaction between T cell and the HLA-peptide complex, by providing for the selective activation of the appropriate T cell.

Class I Structure

(Fig. 315-2B) As noted above, MHC class I molecules provide a cell-surface display of peptides derived from intracellular proteins, and they also provide the signal for self-recognition by NK cells. Surface-expressed class I molecules consist of an MHC-encoded 44-kD glycoprotein heavy chain, a non-MHC-encoded 12-kD light chain 2-microglobulin, and an antigenic peptide, typically 8每11 amino acids in length and derived from intracellularly produced protein. The heavy chain displays a prominent peptide-binding groove. In HLA-A and -B molecules, the groove is 3 nm in length by 1.2 nm in maximum width (30 ? x 12 ?), whereas it is apparently somewhat wider in HLA-C. Antigenic peptides are noncovalently bound in an extended conformation within the peptide-binding groove, with both N- and C-terminal ends anchored in pockets within the groove (A and F pockets, respectively) and, in many cases, with a prominent kink, or arch, approximately one-third of the way from the N-terminus that elevates the peptide main chain off the floor of the groove.

A remarkable property of peptide binding by MHC molecules is the ability to form highly stable complexes with a wide array of peptide sequences. This is accomplished by a combination of peptide sequence每independent and peptide sequence每dependent bonding. The former consists of hydrogen bond and van der Waals interactions between conserved residues in the peptide-binding groove and charged or polar atoms along the peptide backbone. The latter is dependent upon the six side pockets that are formed by the irregular surface produced by protrusion of amino acid side chains from within the binding groove. The side chains lining the pockets interact with some of the peptide side chains. The sequence polymorphism among different class I alleles and isotypes predominantly affects the residues that line these pockets, and the interactions of these residues with peptide residues constitute the sequence-dependent bonding that confers a particular sequence "motif" on the range of peptides that can bind any given MHC molecule.

Class I Biosynthesis

(Fig. 315-3A) The biosynthesis of the classic MHC class I molecules reflects their role in presenting endogenous peptides. The heavy chain is cotranslationally inserted into the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it becomes glycosylated and associates sequentially with the chaperone proteins calnexin and ERp57. It then forms a complex with 2-microglobulin, and this complex associates with the chaperone calreticulin and the MHC-encoded molecule tapasin, which physically links the class I complex to TAP, the MHC-encoded transporter associated with antigen processing. Meanwhile, peptides generated within the cytosol from intracellular proteins by the multisubunit, multicatalytic proteasome complex are actively transported into the ER by TAP, where they are trimmed by a peptidase known as ERAAP (ER aminopeptidase associated with antigen processing). At this point, peptides with appropriate sequence complementarity bind specific class I molecules to form complete, folded heavy chain每2-microglobulin每peptide trimer complexes. These are transported rapidly from the ER, through the cis- and trans-Golgi where the N-linked oligosaccharide is further processed, and thence to the cell surface.

Figure 315-3

 
 
 
 
Biosynthesis of class I (A) and class II (B) molecules. A. Nascent heavy chain (HC) becomes associated with 2-microglobulin (2m) and peptide through interactions with a series of chaperones. Peptides generated by the proteasome are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by TAP. Peptides undergo N-terminal trimming in the ER and become associated with chaperones, including gp96 and PDI. Once peptide binds to HC-2m, the HC-2m-peptide trimeric complex exits the ER and is transported by the secretory pathway to the cell surface. In the Golgi, the N-linked oligosaccharide undergoes maturation, with addition of sialic acid residues. Molecules are not necessarily drawn to scale. B. Pathway of HLA class II molecule assembly and antigen processing. After transport through the Golgi and post-Golgi compartment, the class II每invariant chain complex moves to an acidic endosome, where the invariant chain is proteolytically cleaved into fragments and displaced by antigenic peptides, facilitated by interactions with the DMA-DMB chaperone protein. This class II molecule每peptide complex is then transported to the cell surface.
 
 

Most of the peptides transported by TAP are produced in the cytosol by proteolytic cleavage of intracellular proteins by the multisubunit, multicatalytic proteasome, and inhibitors of the proteasome dramatically reduce expression of class I每presented antigenic peptides. A thiol-dependent oxidoreductase Erp57, which mediates disulfide bond rearrangements, also appears to play an important role in folding the class I每peptide complex into a stable multicomponent molecule. The MHC-encoded proteasome subunits LMP2 and LMP7 may influence the spectrum of peptides produced but are not essential for proteasome function.

Class I Function

Peptide Antigen Presentation

On any given cell, a class I molecule occurs in 100,000每200,000 copies and binds several hundred to several thousand distinct peptide species. The vast majority of these peptides are self-peptides to which the host immune system is tolerant by one or more of the mechanisms that maintain tolerance [e.g., clonal deletion in the thymus or clonal anergy or clonal ignorance in the periphery (Chaps. 314 and 318)]. However, class I molecules bearing foreign peptides expressed in a permissive immunologic context activate CD8 T cells, which, if na?ve, will then differentiate into cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). These T cells and their progeny, through their  TCRs, are then capable of Fas/CD95- and/or perforin-mediated cytotoxicity and/or cytokine secretion (Chap. 314) upon further encounter with the class I每peptide combination that originally activated it, and also with other combinations of class I molecule plus peptide that present a similar immunochemical stimulus to the TCR. As alluded to above, this phenomenon by which T cells recognize foreign antigens in the context of specific MHCalleles is termed MHC restriction, and the specific MHC molecule is termed the restriction element. The most common source of foreign peptides presented by class I molecules is viral infection, in the course of which peptides from viral proteins enter the class I pathway. The generation of a strong CTL response that destroys virally infected cells represents an important antigen-specific defense against many viral infections (Chap. 314). In the case of some viral infections〞hepatitis B, for example〞CTL-induced target cell apoptosis is thought to be a more important mechanism of tissue damage than any direct cytopathic effect of the virus itself. The importance of the class I pathway in the defense against viral infection is underscored by the identification of a number of viral products that interfere with the normal class I biosynthetic pathway and thus block the immunogenetic expression of viral antigens.

Other examples of intracellularly generated peptides that can be presented by class I molecules in an immunogenic manner include peptides derived from nonviral intracellular infectious agents (e.g., Listeria, Plasmodium), tumor antigens, minor histocompatibility antigens, and certain autoantigens. There are also situations in which cell surface每expressed class I molecules are thought to acquire and present exogenously derived peptides.

HLA Class I Receptors and NK Cell Recognition

(Chap. 314) NK cells, which play an important role in innate immune responses, are activated to cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion by contact with cells that lack MHC class I expression, and NK cell activation is inhibited by cells that express MHC class I. In humans, the recognition of class I molecules by NK cells is carried out by three classes of receptor families, the killer cell每inhibitory cell receptor (KIR) family, the leukocyte Ig-like receptor (LIR) family, and the CD94/NKG2 family. The KIR family, also called CD158, is encoded on chromosome 19q13.4. KIR gene nomenclature is based on the number of domains (2D or 3D) and the presence of long (L) or short (S) cytoplasmic domains. The KIR2DL1 and S1 molecules primarily recognize alleles of HLA-C, which possess a lysine at position 80 (HLA-Cw2, -4, -5 and -6), while the KIR2DL2/S2 and KIR2DL3/S3 families primarily recognize alleles of HLA-C with asparagine at this position (HLA-Cw1,-3, -7 and -8). The KIR3D L1 and S1 molecules predominantly recognize HLA-B alleles that fall into the HLA-Bw4 class determined by residues 77每83 in the 1 domain of the heavy chain, while the KIR3DL2 molecule is an inhibitory receptor for HLA-A*03. One of the KIR products, KIR2DL4, is known to be an activating receptor for HLA-G. The most common KIR haplotype in whites contains one activating KIR and six inhibitory KIR genes, although there is a great deal of diversity in the population, with >100 different combinations. It appears that most individuals have at least one inhibitory KIR for a self-HLA class I molecule, providing a structural basis for NK cell target specificity, which helps prevent NK cells from attacking normal cells. The importance of KIR-HLA interactions to many immune responses is illustrated by studies associating KIR3DL1 or S1 with multiple sclerosis (Chapter 380), an autoimmune disease, but also with partial protection against HIV (Chap. 189); in both cases consistent with a role for HLA-KIR mediated NK activation.

The LIR gene family (CD85, also called ILT) is encoded centromeric of the KIR locus on 19q13.4, and it encodes a variety of inhibitory immunoglobulin-like receptors expressed on many lymphocyte and other hematopoietic lineages. Interaction of LIR-1 (ILT2) with NK or T cells inhibits activation and cytotoxicity, mediated by many different HLA class I molecules, including HLA-G. HLA-F also appears to interact with LIR molecules, although the functional context for this is not understood.

The third family of NK receptors for HLA is encoded in the NK complex on chromosome 12p12.3-13.1 and consists of CD94 and five NKG2 genes, A/B, C, E/H, D, and F. These molecules are C-type (calcium-binding) lectins, and most function as disulfide-bonded heterodimers between CD94 and one of the NKG2 glycoproteins. The principal ligand of CD94/NKG2A receptors is the HLA-E molecule, complexed to a peptide derived from the signal sequence of classic HLA class I molecules and HLA-G. Thus, analogous to the way in which KIR receptors recognize HLA-C, the NKG2 receptor monitors self每class I expression, albeit indirectly through peptide recognition in the context of HLA-E. NKG2C, -E, and -H appear to have similar specificities but act as activating receptors. NKG2D is expressed as a homodimer and functions as an activating receptor expressed on NK cells,  TCR T cells, and activated CD8 T cells. When complexed with an adaptor called DAP10, NKG2D recognizes MIC-A and MIC-B molecules and activates the cytolytic response. NKG2D also binds a class of molecules known as ULBP, structurally related to class I molecules but not encoded in the MHC. The function of NK cells in immune responses is discussed in Chap. 314.

Class II Structure

(Fig. 315-2C) A specialized functional architecture similar to that of the class I molecules can be seen in the example of a class II molecule depicted in Fig. 315-2C, with an antigen-binding cleft arrayed above a supporting scaffold that extends the cleft toward the external cellular environment. However, in contrast to the HLA class I molecular structure, 2-microglobulin is not associated with class II molecules. Rather, the class II molecule is a heterodimer, composed of a 29-kD  chain and a 34-kD  chain. The amino-terminal domains of each chain form the antigen-binding elements that, like the class I molecule, cradle a bound peptide in a groove bounded by extended -helical loops, one encoded by the A ( chain) gene and one by the B ( chain) gene. Like the class I groove, the class II antigen-binding groove is punctuated by pockets that contact the side chains of amino acid residues of the bound peptide, but unlike the class I groove, it is open at both ends. Therefore, peptides bound by class II molecules vary greatly in length, since both the N- and C-terminal ends of the peptides can extend through the open ends of this groove. Approximately 11 amino acids within the bound peptide form intimate contacts with the class II molecule itself, with backbone hydrogen bonds and specific side chain interactions combining to provide, respectively, stability and specificity to the binding (Fig. 315-4).

Figure 315-4

 
 
 
 
 
Specific intermolecular interactions determine peptide binding to MHC class II molecules. A short peptide sequence derived from alpha-gliadin (A.) is accommodated within the MHC class II binding groove by specific interactions between peptide side chains (the P1每P9 residues illustrated in (B.) and corresponding pockets in the MHC class II structure. The latter are determined by the genetic polymorphisms of the MHC gene, in this case encoding an HLA-DQ2 molecule (C.). This shows the extensive hydrogen bond and salt bridge network, which tightly constrains the pMHC complex and presents the complex of antigen and restriction element for CD4 T cell recognition. (FromKim C et al: Structural basis for HLA-DQ2-mediated presentation of gluten epitopes in celiac disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:4175, 2004.)
 
 

The genetic polymorphisms that distinguish different class II genes correspond to changes in the amino acid composition of the class II molecule, and these variable sites are clustered predominantly around the pocket structures within the antigen-binding groove. As with class I, this is a critically important feature of the class II molecule, which explains how genetically different individuals have functionally different HLA molecules.

Biosynthesis and Function of Class II Molecules

(Fig. 315-3B) The intracellular assembly of class II molecules occurs within a specialized compartmentalized pathway that differs dramatically from the class I pathway described above. As illustrated in Fig. 315-3B, the class II molecule assembles in the ER in association with a chaperone molecule, known as the invariant chain. The invariant chain performs at least two roles. First, it binds to the class II molecule and blocks the peptide-binding groove, thus preventing antigenic peptides from binding. This role of the invariant chain appears to account for one of the important differences between class I and class II MHC pathways, since it can explain why class I molecules present endogenous peptides from proteins newly synthesized in the ER but class II molecules generally do not. Second, the invariant chain contains molecular localization signals that direct the class II molecule to traffic into post-Golgi compartments known as endosomes, which develop into specialized acidic compartments where proteases cleave the invariant chain, and antigenic peptides can now occupy the class II groove. The specificity and tissue distribution of these proteases appear to be an important way in which the immune system regulates access to the peptide-binding groove and T cells become exposed to specific self-antigens. Differences in protease expression in the thymus and in the periphery may in part determine which specific peptide sequences comprise the peripheral repertoire for T cell recognition. It is at this stage in the intracellular pathway, after cleavage of the invariant chain, that the MHC-encoded DM molecule catalytically facilitates the exchange of peptides within the class II groove to help optimize the specificity and stability of the MHC-peptide complex.

Once this MHC-peptide complex is deposited in the outer cell membrane it becomes the target for T cell recognition via a specific TCR expressed on lymphocytes. Because the endosome environment contains internalized proteins retrieved from the extracellular environment, the class II每peptide complex often contains bound antigens that were originally derived from extracellular proteins. In this way, the class II peptide每loading pathway provides a mechanism for immune surveillance of the extracellular space. This appears to be an important feature that permits the class II molecule to bind foreign peptides, distinct from the endogenous pathway of class I每mediated presentation.

Role of HLA in Transplantation

The development of modern clinical transplantation in the decades since the 1950s provided a major impetus for elucidation of the HLA system, as allograft survival is highest when donor and recipient are HLA-identical. Although many molecular events participate in transplantation rejection, allogeneic differences at class I and class II loci play a major role. Class I molecules can promote T cell responses in several different ways. In the cases of allografts in which the host and donor are mismatched at one or more class I loci, host T cells can be activated by classic direct alloreactivity, in which the antigen receptors on the host T cells react with the foreign class I molecule expressed on the allograft. In this situation, the response of any given TCR may be dominated by the allogeneic MHC molecule, the peptide bound to it, or some combination of the two. Another type of host antigraft T cell response involves the uptake and processing of donor MHC antigens by host antigen-presenting cells and the subsequent presentation of the resulting peptides by host MHC molecules. This mechanism is termed indirect alloreactivity.

In the case of class I molecules on allografts that are shared by the host and the donor, a host T cell response may still be triggered because of peptides that are presented by the class I molecules of the graft but not of the host. The most common basis for the existence of these endogenous antigen peptides, called minor histocompatibility antigens, is a genetic difference between donor and host at a non-MHC locus encoding the structural gene for the protein from which the peptide is derived. These loci are termed minor histocompatibility loci, and nonidentical individuals typically differ at many such loci. CD4 T cells react to analogous class II variation, both direct and indirect, and class II differences alone are sufficient to drive allograft rejection.

Association of HLA Alleles with Susceptibility to Disease

It has long been postulated that infectious agents provide the driving force for the allelic diversification seen in the HLA system. An important corollary of this hypothesis is that resistance to specific pathogens may differ between individuals, based on HLA genotype. Observations of specific HLA genes associated with resistance to malaria or dengue fever, persistence of hepatitis B, and to disease progression in HIV infection are consistent with this model. For example, failure to clear persistent hepatitis B or C viral infection may reflect the inability of particular HLA molecules to present viral antigens effectively to T cells. Similarly, both protective and susceptible HLA allelic associations have been described for human papilloma virus每associated cervical neoplasia, implicating the MHC as an influence in mediating viral clearance in this form of cancer.

Pathogen diversity is probably also the major selective pressure favoring HLA heterozygosity. The extraordinary scope of HLA allelic diversity increases the likelihood that most new pathogens will be recognized by some HLA molecules, helping to ensure immune fitness to the host. However, another consequence of diversification is that some alleles may become capable of recognition of "innocent bystander" molecules, including drugs, environmental molecules, and tissue-derived self-antigens. In a few instances, single HLA alleles display a strong selectivity for binding of a particular agent that accounts for a genetically determined response: hypersensitivity to abacavir, an antiretroviral therapeutic, is directly linked to binding of abacavir in the antigen-binding pockets of HLA-B*5701, and chronic beryllium toxicity is linked to binding of beryllium by HLA-DP molecules with a specific glutamic acid polymorphic residue on the class II beta chain. Even in the case of more complex diseases, particular HLA alleles are strongly associated with certain inappropriate immune-mediated disease states, particularly for some common autoimmune disorders (Chap. 318). By comparing allele frequencies in patients with any particular disease and in control populations, >100 such associations have been identified, some of which are listed in Table 315-1. The strength of genetic association is reflected in the term relative risk, which is a statistical odds ratio representing the risk of disease for an individual carrying a particular genetic marker compared with the risk for individuals in that population without that marker. The nomenclature shown in Table 315-1 reflects both the HLA serotype (e.g., DR3, DR4) and the HLA genotype (e.g., DRB1*0301, DRB1*0401). It very likely the class I and class II alleles themselves are the true susceptibility alleles for most of these associations. However, because of the extremely strong linkage disequilibrium between the DR and DQ loci, in some cases it has been difficult to determine the specific locus or combination of class II loci involved. In some cases, the susceptibility gene may be one of the HLA-linked genes located near the class I or class II region, but not the HLA gene itself, and in other cases the susceptibility gene may be a non-HLA gene such as TNF-, which is nearby. Indeed, since linkage disequilibrium of some haplotypes extends across large segments of the MHC region, it is quite possible that combinations of genes may account for the particular associations of HLA haplotypes with disease. For example, on some haplotypes associated with rheumatoid arthritis, both HLA-DRB1 alleles and a particular polymorphism associated with the TNF locus may be contributory to disease risk. Other candidates for similar epistatic effects include the IKBL gene and the MICA locus, potentially in combination with classic HLA class II risk alleles.

Table 315每1. Significant HLA Class I and Class II Associations with Disease

 
 
  Marker Gene Strength of Association 
Spondyloarthropathies  
Ankylosing spondylitis B27 B*2702, 每04, 每05 ++++ 
Reiter's syndrome B27   ++++ 
Acute anterior uveitis B27   +++ 
Reactive arthritis (Yersinia, Salmonella, Shigella, Chlamydia)  B27   +++ 
Psoriatic spondylitis B27   +++ 
Collagen-Vascular Diseases  
Juvenile arthritis, pauciarticular DR8

DR5
   ++

++
 
Rheumatoid arthritis DR4 DRB1*0401, 每04, 每05 +++ 
Sj?gren's syndrome DR3   ++ 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
  White DR3   + 
  Japanese DR2   ++ 
Autoimmune Gut and Skin  
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy (celiac disease) DQ2 DQA1*0501 +++ 
    DQB1*0201   
Chronic active hepatitis DR3   ++ 
Dermatitis herpetiformis DR3   +++ 
Psoriasis vulgaris Cw6   ++ 
Pemphigus vulgaris DR4 DRB1*0402 +++ 
  DQ1 DQB1*0503   
Bullous pemphigoid variant DQ7 DQB1*0301 + 
Autoimmune Endocrine  
Type 1 diabetes mellitus DQ8  DQB1*0302  +++  
  DR4  DRB1*0401, 每04    
  DR3    ++ 
  DR2 DQB1 *0602 〞a
  
Hyperthyroidism (Graves') B8   + 
  DR3   + 
Hyperthyroidism (Japanese) B35   + 
Adrenal insufficiency DR3   ++ 
Autoimmune Neurologic  
Myasthenia gravis B8    +  
  DR3   + 
Multiple sclerosis DR2 DRB1*1501  ++ 
    DRB5*0101   
Other  
Beh?et's disease B51   ++ 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia B47 21﹞OH (Cyp21B) +++ 
Narcolepsy DR2 DQB1*0602 ++++ 
Goodpasture's syndrome (anti-GBM) DR2   ++ 
Abacavir hypersensitivity B57 B*5701 ++++ 
 


aStrong negative association; i.e., genetic association with protection from diabetes.
 

As might be predicted from the known function of the class I and class II gene products, almost all of the diseases associated with specific HLAalleles have an immunologic component to their pathogenesis. The recent development of soluble HLA-peptide recombinant molecules as biological probes of T cell function, often in multivalent complexes referred to as "MHC tetramers," represents an opportunity to use HLA genetic associations to develop biomarkers for detection of early disease progression. However, it should be stressed that even the strong HLA associations with disease (those associations with relative risk of 10) implicate normal, rather than defective, alleles. Most individuals who carry these susceptibility genes do not express the associated disease; in this way, the particular HLA gene is permissive for disease but requires other environmental (e.g., the presence of specific antigens) or genetic factors for full penetrance. In each case studied, even in diseases with very strong HLA associations, the concordance of disease in monozygotic twins is higher than in HLA-identical dizygotic twins or other sibling pairs, indicating that non-HLA genes contribute to susceptibility and can significantly modify the risk attributable to HLA.

Another group of diseases is genetically linked to HLA, not because of the immunologic function of HLA alleles but rather because they are caused by autosomal dominant or recessive abnormal alleles at loci that happen to reside in or near the HLA region. Examples of these are 21-hydroxylase deficiency (Chap. 342), hemochromatosis (Chap. 357), and spinocerebellar ataxia (Chap. 374).

Class I Associations with Disease

Although the associations of human disease with particular HLAalleles or haplotypes predominantly involve the class II region, there are also several prominent disease associations with class I alleles. These include the association of Beh?et's disease (Chap. 327) with HLA-B51, psoriasis vulgaris (Chap. 52) with HLA-Cw6, and, most notably, the spondyloarthritides (Chap. 325) with HLA-B27. Twenty-five HLA-B locus alleles, designated HLA-B*2701每B*2725, encode the family of B27 class I molecules. All of the subtypes share a common B pocket in the peptide-binding groove〞a deep, negatively charged pocket that shows a strong preference for binding the arginine side chain. In addition, B27 is among the most negatively charged of HLA class I heavy chains, and the overall preference is for positively charged peptides. HLA-B*2705 is the predominant subtype in whites and most other non-Asian populations, and this subtype is very highly associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (Chap. 325), both in its idiopathic form and in association with chronic inflammatory bowel disease or psoriasis vulgaris. It is also associated with reactive arthritis (ReA) (Chap. 325), with other idiopathic forms of peripheral arthritis (undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy), and with recurrent acute anterior uveitis. B27 is found in 50每90% of individuals with these conditions, compared with a prevalence of 7% in North American whites.

It can be concluded that the B27 molecule itself is involved in disease pathogenesis, based on strong evidence from clinical epidemiology and on the occurrence of a spondyloarthropathy-like disease in HLA-B27 transgenic rats. The association of B27 with these diseases may derive from the specificity of a particular peptide or family of peptides bound to B27 or through another mechanism that is independent of the peptide specificity of B27. In particular, HLA-B27 has been shown to form heavy chain homodimers, utilizing the cysteine residue at position 67 of the B57  chain, in the absence of 2-microglobulin. These homodimers are expressed on the surface of lymphocytes and monocytes from patients with AS, and receptors including KIR3DL1, KIR3DL2, and ILT4 are capable of binding to them, promoting the activation and survival of cells expressing these receptors. Alternatively, this dimerization "misfolding" of B27 may initiate an intracellular stress signalling response, called the unfolded protein response (UPR), capable of modulating immune cell function. Whether these interactions contribute to disease susceptibility or pathogenesis is currently unknown.

Class II Disease Associations

As can be seen in Table 315-1, the majority of associations of HLA and disease are with class II alleles. Several diseases have complex HLA genetic associations.

Celiac Disease

In the case of celiac disease (Chap. 294), it is probable that the HLA-DQ genes are the primary basis for the disease association. HLA-DQ genes present on both the celiac-associated DR3 and DR7 haplotypes include the DQB1*0201gene, and further detailed studies have documented a specific class II  dimer encoded by the DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201 genes, which appears to account for most of the HLA genetic contribution to celiac disease susceptibility. This specific HLA association with celiac disease may have a straightforward explanation: peptides derived from the wheat gluten component gliaden are bound to the molecule encoded by DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201 and presented to T cells. Gliaden-derived peptides that are implicated in this immune activation bind the DQ class II dimer best when the peptide contains a glutamine to glutamic acid substitution. It has been proposed that tissue transglutaminase, an enzyme present at increased levels in the intestinal cells of celiac patients, converts glutamine to glutamic acid in gliadin, creating peptides that are capable of being bound by the DQ2 molecule and presented to T cells.

Pemphigus Vulgaris

In the case of pemphigus vulgaris (Chap. 54), there are two HLAgenes associated with disease, DRB1*0402 and DQB1*0503. Peptides derived from desmoglien3, an epidermal autoantigen, bind to the DRB1*0402- and DQB1*0503-encoded HLA molecules, and this combination of specific peptide binding and disease-associated class II molecule is sufficient to stimulate desmoglien-specific T cells. A bullous pemphigoid clinical variant, not involving desmoglien recognition, has been found to be associated with HLA-DQB1*0301.

Juvenile Arthritis

Pauciarticular juvenile arthritis (Chap. 321) is an autoimmune disease associated with genes at the DRB1 locus and also with genes at the DPB1 locus. Patients with both DPB1*0201 and a DRB1 susceptibility allele (usually DRB1*08 or -*05) have a higher relative risk than expected from the additive effect of those genes alone. In juvenile patients with rheumatoid factor每positive polyarticular disease, heterozygotes carrying both DRB1*0401 and -*0404 have a relative risk > 100, reflecting an apparent synergy in individuals inheriting both of these susceptibility genes.

Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus

Type 1 (autoimmune) diabetes mellitus (Chap. 344) is associated with MHCgenes on more than one haplotype. The presence of both the DR3 and DR4 haplotypes in one individual confers a twentyfold increased risk for type 1 diabetes; the strongest single association is with DQB1*0302, and all haplotypes that carry a DQB1*0302gene are associated with type 1 diabetes, whereas related haplotypes that carry a different DQB1 gene are not. However, the relative risk associated with inheritance of this gene can be modified, depending on other HLA genes present either on the same or a second haplotype. For example, the presence of a DR2-positive haplotype containing a DQB1*0602 gene is associated with decreased risk. This gene, DQB1*0602, is considered "protective" for type 1 diabetes. Even some DRB1 genes that can occur on the same haplotype as DQB1*0302 may modulate risk, so that individuals with the DR4 haplotype that contains DRB1*0403 are less susceptible to type 1 diabetes than individuals with other DR4-DQB1*0302 haplotypes.

Although the presence of a DR3 haplotype in combination with the DR4-DQB1*0302 haplotype is a very high-risk combination for diabetes susceptibility, the specific gene on the DR3 haplotype that is responsible for this synergy is not yet identified. There are some characteristic structural features of the diabetes-associated DQ molecule encoded by DQB1*0302, particularly the capability for binding peptides that have negatively charged amino acids near their C-termini. This may indicate a role for specific antigenic peptides or T cell interactions in the immune response to islet-associated proteins.

HLA and Rheumatoid Arthritis

The HLAgenes associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (Chap. 321) encode a distinctive sequence of amino acids from codons 67每74 of the DR molecule: RA-associated class II molecules carry the sequence LeuLeuGluGlnArgArgAlaAla or LeuLeuGluGlnLysArgAlaAla in this region, while non-RA- associated genes carry one or more differences in this region. These residues form a portion of the molecule that lies in the middle of the -helical portion of the DRB1-encoded class II molecule, termed the shared epitope.

The highest risk for susceptibility to RA comes in individuals who carry both a DRB1*0401 and DRB1*0404gene. These DR4-positive RA-associated alleles are most frequent among patients with more severe, erosive disease. Several mechanisms have been proposed that link the shared epitope to immune reactivity in RA. This portion of the class II molecule may allow preferential binding of an arthritogenic peptide, it may favor the expansion of a type of self-reactive T lymphocyte, or it may itself form part of the pMHC ligand recognized by TCR that initiates synovial tissue recognition.

Molecular Mechanisms for HLA-Disease Associations

As noted above, HLA molecules play a key role in the selection and establishment of the antigen-specific T cell repertoire and a major role in the subsequent activation of those T cells during the initiation of an immune response. Precise genetic polymorphisms characteristic of individual alleles dictate the specificity of these interactions and thereby instruct and guide antigen-specific immune events. These same genetically determined pathways are therefore implicated in disease pathogenesis when specific HLA genes are responsible for autoimmune disease susceptibility.

The fate of developing T cells within the thymus is determined by the affinity of interaction between T cell receptor and HLA molecules bearing self-peptides, and thus the particular HLA types of each individual control the precise specificity of the T cell repertoire (Chap. 314). The primary basis for HLA-associated disease susceptibility may well lie within this thymic maturation pathway. The positive selection of potentially autoreactive T cells, based on the presence of specific HLA susceptibility genes, may establish the threshold for disease risk in a particular individual.

At the time of onset of a subsequent immune response, the primary role of the HLA molecule is to bind peptide and present it to antigen-specific T cells. The HLA complex can therefore be viewed as encoding genetic determinants of precise immunologic activation events. Antigenic peptides that bind particular HLA molecules are capable of stimulating T cell immune responses; peptides that do not bind are not presented to T cells and are not immunogenic. This genetic control of the immune response is mediated by the polymorphic sites within the HLA antigen每binding groove that interact with the bound peptides. In autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases, it is likely that specific tissue antigens that are targets for pathogenic lymphocytes are complexed with the HLA molecules encoded by specific susceptibility alleles. In autoimmune diseases with an infectious etiology, it is likely that immune responses to peptides derived from the initiating pathogen are bound and presented by particular HLA molecules to activate T lymphocytes that play a triggering or contributory role in disease pathogenesis. The concept that early events in disease initiation are triggered by specific HLA-peptide complexes offers some prospects for therapeutic intervention, since it may be possible to design compounds that interfere with the formation or function of specific HLA-peptide每T cell receptor interactions.

When considering mechanisms of HLA associations with immune response and disease, it is well to remember that just as HLA genetics are complex, so are the mechanisms likely to be heterogeneous. Immune-mediated disease is a multistep process in which one of the HLA-associated functions is to establish a repertoire of potentially reactive T cells, while another HLA-associated function is to provide the essential peptide-binding specificity for T cell recognition. For diseases with multiple HLA genetic associations, it is possible that both of these interactions occur and synergize to advance an accelerated pathway of disease.
 
Further Readings

Caillat-Zucman S: Molecular mechanisms of HLA association with autoimmune diseases. Tissue Antigens 73:1, 2008[PMID: 19017300]  [Full Text]

 
Carrington M et al: KIR-HLA intercourse in HIV disease. Trends Immunol 16:620, 2008[PMID: 18976921]  [Full Text]

 
Horton R et al: Variation analysis and gene annotation of eight MHC haplotypes: The MHC Haplotype Project. Immunogenetics 60:1, 2008[PMID: 18193213]  [Full Text]

 
Jones EY et al: MHC class II proteins and disease: A structural perspective. Nat Rev Immunol 6:271, 2006[PMID: 16557259]  [Full Text]

 
Nepom GT: Major histocompatibility complex-directed susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis. Adv Immunol 68:315, 1998[PMID: 9505093]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞: Tetramer analysis of human autoreactive CD4-positive T cells. Adv Immunol 88:51, 2005 

 
Shiina T et al: The HLA genomic loci map: Expression, interaction, diversity and disease. J Hum Genet 54:15, 2009[PMID: 19158813]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 316. Primary Immune Deficiency Diseases >
 

Primary Immune Deficiency Diseases: Introduction

Immunity is intrinsic to life and an important tool in the fight for survival against pathogenic microorganisms. The human immune system can be divided into two major components: the innate immune system and the adaptive immune system (Chap. 314). The innate immune system provides the rapid triggering of inflammatory responses based on the recognition (at the cell surface or within cells) of either molecules expressed by microorganisms or molecules that serve as "danger signals" released by cells under attack. These receptor/ligand interactions trigger signaling events that ultimately lead to inflammation. Virtually all cell lineages (not just immune cells) are involved in innate immune responses; however, myeloid cells (i.e., neutrophils and macrophages) play a major role because of their phagocytic capacity. The adaptive immune system operates by clonal recognition of antigens followed by a dramatic expansion of antigen-reactive cells and execution of an immune effector program. Most of the effector cells die off rapidly, whereas memory cells persist. Although both T and B lymphocytes recognize distinct chemical moieties and execute distinct adaptive immune responses, the latter is largely dependent on the former in generating long-lived humoral immunity. Adaptive responses utilize components of the innate immune system; for example, the antigen-presentation capabilities of dendritic cells help to determine the type of effector response. Not surprisingly, immune responses are controlled by a series of regulatory mechanisms.

Hundreds of gene products have been characterized as effectors or mediators of the immune system (Chap. 314). Whenever the expression or function of one of these products is genetically impaired (provided the function is nonredundant), a primary immunodeficiency (PID) occurs.

Primary immunodeficiencies are genetic diseases with primarily Mendelian inheritance. More than 200 conditions have now been described and deleterious mutations in approximately 150 genes have been identified. The overall prevalence of PIDs has been estimated in various countries at 5 per 100,000 individuals; however, given the difficulty in diagnosing these rare and complex diseases, this figure is probably an underestimate. Primary immunodeficiencies can involve all possible aspects of immune responses, from innate through adaptive, cell differentiation, and effector function and regulation. For the sake of clarity, PIDs should be classified according to (1) the arm of the immune system that is defective and (2) the mechanism of the defect (when known). Table 316-1 classifies the most prevalent PIDs according to this manner of classification; however, one should bear in mind that the classification of PIDs sometimes involves arbitrary decisions because of overlap and, in some cases, lack of data.

Table 316每1. Classification of Primary Immune Deficiency Diseases

 
 
Deficiencies of the Innate Immune System  
 Phagocytic cells:
- Impaired production: severe congenital neutropenia (SCN)
- Asplenia
- Impaired adhesion: leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD)
- Impaired killing: chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)
 Innate immunity receptors and signal transduction:
- Defects in Toll-like receptor signaling
- Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease
 Complement deficiencies:
- Classical, alternative, and lectin pathways
- Lytic phase 
Deficiencies of the Adaptive Immune System  
 T lymphocytes:   
  - Impaired development Severe combined immune deficiencies (SCIDs) DiGeorge syndrome 
  - Impaired survival, migration, function Severe combined immunodeficiencies

Hyper-IgE syndrome (autosomal dominant) 

CD40 ligand deficiency

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome 

Ataxia-telangiectasia and other DNA repair deficiencies
 
 B lymphocytes:   
  - Impaired development  XL and AR agammaglobulinemia  
  - Impaired function Hyper-IgM syndrome

Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) 

IgA deficiency
 
Regulatory Defects  
 Innate immunity Autoinflammatory syndromes (outside the scope of this chapter)

Severe colitis
 
 Adaptive immunity Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)

Autoimmune lymphoproliferation syndrome (ALPS)

Autoimmunity and inflammatory diseases (IPEX, APECED)
 
 


Abbreviations: APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dysplasia; AR, autosomal recessive; IPEX, immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome; XL, X-linked.
 

The consequences of PIDs vary widely as a function of the molecules that are defective. This concept translates into multiple levels of vulnerability to infection by pathogenic and opportunistic microorganisms, ranging from extremely broad [as in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)] to narrowly restricted to a single microorganism [as in Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease (MSMD)]. The locations of the sites of infection and the causal microorganisms involved will thus help physicians arrive at proper diagnoses. Primary immunodeficiencies can also lead to immunopathologic responses such as allergy (as in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome), lymphoproliferation, and autoimmunity. A combination of recurrent infections, inflammation, and autoimmunity can be observed in a number of PIDs, thus creating obvious therapeutic challenges. Finally, some PIDs increase the risk of cancer, notably but not exclusively lymphocytic cancers, e.g., lymphoma.
 
Diagnosis of Primary Immunodeficiencies

The most frequent symptom prompting the diagnosis of a PID is the presence of recurrent or unusually severe infections. As mentioned above, recurrent allergic or autoimmune manifestations may also alert the physician to a possible diagnosis of PID. In such cases, a detailed account of the subject's personal and family medical history should be obtained. It is of the utmost importance to gather as much medical information as possible on relatives and up to several generations of ancestors. In addition to the obvious focus on primary symptoms, the clinical examination should evaluate the size of lymphoid organs and, when appropriate, look for the characteristic signs of a number of complex syndromes that may be associated with a PID.

The performance of laboratory tests should be guided to some extent by the clinical findings. Infections of the respiratory tract (bronchi, sinuses) mostly suggest a defective antibody response. In general, invasive bacterial infections can result from complement deficiencies, signaling defects of innate immune responses, asplenia, or defective antibody responses. Viral infections, recurrent Candida infections, and opportunistic infections are generally suggestive of impaired T cell immunity. Skin infections and deep-seated abscesses primarily reflect innate immune defects (such as chronic granulomatous disease); however, they may also appear in the autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome. Table 316-2 summarizes the laboratory tests that are most frequently used to diagnose a PID. More specific tests (notably genetic tests) are then used to make a definitive diagnosis.

Table 316每2. Test Most Frequently Used to Diagnose a Primary Immune Deficiency (PID)

 
 
Test Information PID Disease 
 Blood cell counts and cell morphology Neutrophil counts  Severe congenital neutropenia,  LAD  
Lymphocyte counts*
  T cell ID 
Eosinophilia WAS, Hyper-IgE syndrome 
Howell-Jolly bodies Asplenia 
 Chest x-ray Thymic shadow 

Costochondral junctions
 SCID, DiGeorge syndrome 

Adenosine deaminase deficiency
 
 Bone x-ray Metaphyseal ends Cartilage hair hypoplasia 
 Immunoglobulin serum levels IgG, IgA, IgM 

IgE
 B cell ID 

Hyper-IgE syndrome, WAS, T cell ID
 
 Lymphocyte phenotype T, B lymphocyte counts T cell ID, agammaglobulinemia 
 Dihydrorhodamine fluorescence (DHR) assay 

Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) assay
 Reactive oxygen species production by PMN Chronic granulomatous disease 
 CH50, AP50 Classic and alternative complement pathways Complement deficiencies 
 Ultrasonography of the abdomen Spleen size Asplenia 
 


*Normal counts vary with age. For example, the lymphocyte count is between 3000 and 9000/L of blood below the age of 3 months and between 1500 and 2500/L in adults.

Abbreviations: ID, immunodeficiency; LAD, leukocyte adhesion deficiency; PMNs, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; WAS, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
 

The primary immunodeficiencies discussed below have been grouped together according to the affected cells and the mechanisms involved (Table 316-1, Fig. 316-1).

Figure 316-1

 
 
 
Differentiation of phagocytic cells and related primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) differentiate into common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and then granulocyte-monocyte progenitors (GM-prog.), which, in turn, differentiate into neutrophils (MB: myeloblasts; Promyelo: promyelocytes; myelo: myelocytes) or monocytes (monoblasts and promonocytes). Upon activation, neutrophils adhere to the vascular endothelium, transmigrate, and phagocytose the targets. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are delivered to the microorganism-containing phagosomes. Macrophages in tissues kill using the same mechanism. Following activation by interferon  (not shown here), macrophages can be armed to kill intracellular pathogens such as mycobacteria. For sake of simplicity, not all cell differentiation stages are shown. The abbreviations for PIDs are contained in boxes placed at corresponding stages of the pathway. SCN, severe congenital neutropenia; WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency myelokathexis; LAD, leukocyte adhesion deficiencies; CGD, chronic granulomatous diseases; MSMD, Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease.
 
 
 
Primary Immunodeficiencies of the Innate Immune System

Primary immunodeficiencies of the innate immune system are relatively rare and account for approximately 10% of all PIDs.

Severe Congenital Neutropenia

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) consists of a group of inherited diseases that are characterized by severely impaired neutrophil counts [<500 polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN)/L of blood]. The condition is usually manifested from birth. Severe congenital neutropenia may also be cyclic (with a 3-week periodicity), and other neutropenia syndromes can also be intermittent. Although the most frequent inheritance pattern for SCN is autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive conditions also exist. Bacterial infections at the interface between the body and the external milieu (e.g., the orifices, wounds, and the respiratory tract) are common manifestations. Bacterial infections can rapidly progress through soft tissue and are followed by dissemination in the bloodstream. Severe visceral fungal infections can also ensue. The absence of pus is a hallmark of this condition.

Diagnosis of SCN requires examination of the bone marrow. Most SCNs are associated with a block in granulopoiesis at the promyelocytic stage (Fig. 316-1). Severe congenital neutropenia has multiple etiologies, and to date mutations in 11 different genes have been identified. Most of these mutations result in isolated SCN, whereas others are syndromic (Chap. 60). The most frequent forms of SCN are caused by the premature cell death of granulocyte precursors, as observed in deficiencies of GFI1, HAX1, and elastase 2 (ELA2), with the latter accounting for 50% of SCN sufferers. Certain ELA2 mutations cause cyclic neutropenia syndrome. A gain-of-function mutation in the WASP gene (see the section on "Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome" below) causes X-linked SCN, which is also associated with monocytopenia.

As mentioned above, SCN exposes the patient to life-threatening, disseminated bacterial and fungal infections. Treatment requires careful hygiene measures, notably in infants. Later in life, special oral and dental care is essential, along with the prevention of bacterial infection by prophylactic administration of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Subcutaneous injection of the cytokinegranulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) usually improves neutrophil development and thus prevents infection in most SCN diseases. However, there are two caveats: (1) a few cases of SCN with ELA2 mutation are refractory to G-CSF and may require curative treatment via allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) and (2) a subset of G-CSF-treated patients carrying ELA2 mutations are at a greater risk of developing acute myelogenous leukemia associated (in most cases) with somatic gain-of-function mutations of the G-CSF receptor gene.

Asplenia

Primary failure of the development of a spleen is an extremely rare disease that can be either syndromic (in Ivemark syndrome) or isolated with an autosomal dominant expression; in the latter case, the gene remains to be identified. Due to the absence of natural filtration of microbes in the blood, asplenia predisposes affected individuals to fulminant infections by encapsulated bacteria. Although most infections occur in the first years of life, cases may also arise in adulthood. The diagnosis is confirmed by abdominal ultrasonography and the detection of Howell-Jolly bodies in red blood cells. Effective prophylactic measures (twice-daily oral penicillin and appropriate vaccination programs) usually prevent fatal outcomes. The genetic causes of asplenia remain unknown.

Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency (LAD)

Leukocyte adhesion deficiency consists of three autosomal recessive conditions (LAD I, II, and III) (Chap. 60). The most frequent condition (LAD I) is caused by mutations in the 2 integrin gene; following leukocyte activation, 2 integrins mediate adhesion to inflamed endothelium expressing cognate ligands. LAD III results from a defect in a regulatory protein (kindlin, also known as Fermt 3) involved in activating the ligand affinity of 2 integrins. The extremely rare LAD II condition is the end result of a defect in selectin-mediated leukocyte rolling that occurs prior to 2 integrin binding. There is a primary defect in fucose transporter such that oligosaccharide selectin ligands are missing in this syndromic condition.

Given that neutrophils are not able to reach infected tissues, LAD renders the individual susceptible to bacterial and fungal infections in a way that is similar to that of patients with SCN. LAD also causes impaired wound healing and delayed loss of the umbilical cord. A diagnosis can be suspected in cases of pus-free skin/tissue infections and massive hyperleukocytosis (>30,000/L) in the blood (mostly granulocytes). Patients with LAD III also develop bleeding because the 2 integrin in platelets is not functional. Use of immunofluorescence and functional assays to detect 2 integrin can help form a diagnosis. Severe forms of LAD may require hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), although gene therapy is also now being considered. Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (a very rare condition caused by a mutation in the gene for transcription factor C/EBP) results in a condition that is clinically similar to LAD.

Chronic Granulomatous Diseases

Chronic granulomatous diseases (CGDs) are characterized by impaired phagocytic killing of microorganisms by neutrophils and macrophages (Chap. 60). The incidence is approximately 1 per 200,000 live births. About 70% of cases are associated with X-linked recessive inheritance versus autosomal inheritance in the remaining 30%. CGD causes deep-tissue bacterial and fungal abscesses in macrophage-rich organs such as the lymph nodes, liver, and lungs. Recurrent skin infections (such as folliculitis) are common and can prompt an early diagnosis of CGD. The infectious agents are typically catalase-positive bacteria (such as Staphylococcus aureus and Serratia marcescens) but also include Burkholderia cepacia, pathogenic mycobacteria (in certain regions of the world), and fungi (mainly filamentous molds, such as Aspergillus).

CGD is caused by defective production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the phagolysosome membrane following phagocytosis of microorganisms. It results from the lack of a component of NADPH oxidase (gp91phox or p22phox) or of the associated adapter/ activating proteins (p47phox, p67phox, or p40phox) that mediate the transport of electrons into the phagolysosome for creating ROS by interaction with O2. Under normal circumstances, these ROS either directly kill engulfed microorganisms or enable the rise in pH needed to activate the phagosomal proteases that contribute to microbial killing. Diagnosis of CGD is based on assays of ROS production in neutrophils and monocytes (Table 316-2). As its name suggests, CGD is also a granulomatous disease. Macrophage-rich granulomas can often arise in the liver, spleen, and other organs. These are sterile granulomas that cause disease by obstruction (bladder, pylorus, etc.) or inflammation (colitis, restrictive lung disease).

The management of infections in patients with CGD can be a complex process. The treatment of bacterial infections is generally based on combination therapy with antibiotics that are able to penetrate into cells. The treatment of fungal infections requires aggressive, long-term use of antifungals. Inflammatory/granulomatous lesions are usually steroid-sensitive; however, glucocorticoids often contribute to the spread of infections. Hence, there is strong need for new therapeutic options in what is still a poorly understood disease.

The treatment of CGD mostly relies on preventing infections. It has been unambiguously demonstrated that prophylactic usage of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is both well tolerated and highly effective in reducing the risk of bacterial infection. Daily administration of azole derivatives (notably intraconazole) also reduces the frequency of fungal complications. It has long been suggested that interferon- administration is helpful, although medical experts continue to disagree over this controversial issue. Most patients do reasonably well with prophylaxis and careful management. However, some patients develop severe and persistent fungal infections and/or chronic inflammatory complications that ultimately require HSCT. The latter is an established curative approach for CGD; however, the risk-versus-benefit ratio must be carefully assessed on a case-by-case basis. Gene therapy approaches are also being evaluated.

Mendelian Susceptibility to Mycobacterial Disease (MSMD)

This group of diseases is characterized by a defect in the IL-12 interferon (IFN)- axis (including IL-12p40, IL-12 receptor (R) 1, interferon- R1 and R2, and STAT1 deficiencies), which ultimately leads to impaired IFN--dependent macrophage activation. Both recessive and dominant inheritance modes have been observed. The hallmark of this PID is a specific and narrow vulnerability to tuberculous and nontuberculous mycobacteria. The most severe phenotype (as observed in complete IFN- receptor deficiency) is characterized by disseminated infection that can be fatal even when aggressive and appropriate antimycobacterial therapy is applied. In addition to mycobacterial infections, MSMD patients (and particularly those with an IL-12/IL-12 R deficiency) are prone to developing Salmonella infections. Although MSMDs are very rare, they should be considered in any patient with persistent mycobacterial infection. Treatment with interferon  may efficiently bypass an IL-12/IL-12 R deficiency.

Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) Pathway Deficiencies

In a certain group of patients with early-onset, invasive Streptococcus pneumoniae infections or (less frequently) Staphylococcus aureus or other pyogenic infections, conventional screening for PIDs does not identify the cause of the defect in host defense. It has been established that these patients carry recessive mutations in genes that encode essential adaptor molecules (IRAK4 and MYD88) involved in the signaling pathways of the majority of known Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (Chap. 314). Remarkably, susceptibility to infection appears to decrease after the first few years of life〞perhaps an indication that adaptive immunity (once triggered by an initial microbial challenge) is then able to prevent recurrent infections.

Certain TLRs (TLR-3, -7, -8, and -9) are involved in the recognition of RNA and DNA and usually become engaged during viral infections. Very specific susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis has been described in patients with a deficiency in Unc93b (a molecule associated with TLR-3, -7, -8, and -9 and probably required for correct subcellular localization) or TLR-3. The fact that no other TLR deficiencies have been found〞despite extensive screening of patients with unexplained, recurrent infections〞strongly suggests that these receptors are functionally redundant. Hypomorphic mutations in NEMO/IKK- (a member of the NF-B complex, which is activated downstream of TLR receptors) lead to a complex, variable immunodeficiency and a number of associated features. Susceptibility to both invasive, pyogenic infections and mycobacteria may be observed in this particular setting.

Complement Deficiency

The complement system is composed of a complex cascade of plasma proteins (Chap. 314) that leads to the deposition of C3b fragments on the surface of particles and the formation of immune complexes that can culminate in the activation of a lytic complex at the bacterial surface. C3 cleavage can be mediated via three pathways: the classic, alternate, and lectin pathways. C3b coats particles as part of the opsonization process that facilitates phagocytosis following binding to cognate receptors. A deficiency in any component of the classic pathway (C1q, C1r, C1s, C4, and C2) can predispose an individual to bacterial infections that are tissue-invasive or that occur in the respiratory tract. Likewise, a C3 deficiency or a deficiency in factor I (a protein that regulates C3 consumption, thus leading to a C3 deficiency due to its absence) also results in the same type of vulnerability to infection. It has recently been reported that a very rare deficiency in Ficolin-3 predisposes affected individuals to bacterial infections. Deficiencies in the alternative pathway (factors D and properdin) are associated with the occurrence of invasive Neisseria infections.

Lastly, deficiencies of any complement component involved in the lytic phase (C5, C6, C7, C8, and, to a lesser extent, C9) predispose affected individuals to systemic infection by Neisseria. This is explained by the critical role of complement in the lysis of the thick cell wall possessed by this class of bacteria.

Diagnosis of a complement deficiency relies primarily on testing the status of the classic and alternate pathway via functional assays, i.e., the CH50 and AP50 tests, respectively. When either pathway is profoundly impaired, determination of the status of the relevant components in that pathway enables a precise diagnosis. Appropriate vaccinations and daily administration of oral penicillin are efficient means of preventing recurrent infections. It is noteworthy that several complement deficiencies (in the classic pathway and the lytic phase) may also predispose affected individuals to autoimmune diseases (notably systemic lupus erythematosus; Chap. 319).
 
Primary Immunodeficiencies of the Adaptive Immune System

T Lymphocyte Deficiencies (Table 316-1, Figs. 316-2 and 316-3)

Figure 316-2

 
 
 
T cell differentiation, effector pathways, and related primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) differentiate into common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), which, in turn, give rise to the T cell precursors that migrate to the thymus. The development of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells is shown. Known T cell effector pathways are indicated, i.e.,  cells, cytotoxic T cells (Tc), TH1, TH2, TH17, TFh (follicular helper) CD4 effector T cells, regulatory T cells (Treg), and natural killer T cells (NKTs); abbreviations for PIDs are contained in boxes. Vertical bars indicate a complete deficiency; broken bars a partial deficiency. SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; ZAP 70, zeta-associated protein deficiency, MHCII, major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency; TAP, TAP1 and 2 deficiencies; Orai1, Stim1 deficiencies; HLH, hematopoietic lymphohistiocytosis; MSMD, Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease; Tyk2, DOCK8, autosomal recessive form of hyper-IgE syndrome; STAT3, autosomal dominant form of hyper-IgE syndrome; CD40L, ICOS, SAP deficiencies; IPEX, immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome; XLP, X-linked proliferative syndromes.
 
 

Figure 316-3

 
 
 
T cell differentiation and severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs). The vertical bars indicate the six mechanisms currently known to lead to SCID. The names of deficient proteins are indicated in the boxes adjacent to the vertical bars. A broken line means that deficiency is partial or involves only some of the indicated immunodeficiencies. HSCs, hematopoietic stem cells; CLPs, common lymphoid progenitors; ADA, adenosine deaminase deficiency; NKs, natural killer cells; TCR, T cell receptor; DNAL4, DNA ligase 4.
 
 

Given the central role of T lymphocytes in adaptive immune responses (Chap. 314), PIDs involving T cells generally have severe pathologic consequences; this explains the poor overall prognosis and the need for early diagnosis and the early intervention with appropriate therapy. Several differentiation pathways of T cell effectors have been described, one or all of which may be affected by a given PID (Fig. 316-2). Follicular helper CD4+ T cells in germinal centers are required for T-dependent antibody production, including the generation of Ig class-switched, high-affinity antibodies. CD4+ TH1 cells provide cytokine-dependent (mostly interferon--dependent) help to macrophages for intracellular killing of various microorganisms, including mycobacteria and Salmonella. CD4+ TH2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and thus recruit and activate eosinophils and other cells required to fight helminth infections. CD4+ TH17 cells produce IL-17 and IL-22 cytokines that recruit neutrophils to the skin and lungs to fight bacterial and fungal infections. Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells can kill infected cells, notably in the context of viral infections. In addition, certain T cell deficiencies predispose affected individuals to Pneumocystis jiroveci lung infections early in life and to chronic gut/biliary duct/liver infections by Cryptosporidia and related genera later on in life. Lastly, naturally occuring or induced regulatory T cells are essential for controlling inflammation (notably reactivity to commensal bacteria in the gut) and autoimmunity. The role of other T cell subsets with limited T cell receptor (TCR) diversity [such as TCR T cells or natural killer T (NKT) cells] in PIDs is less well known; however, these subsets can be defective in certain PIDs and this finding can sometimes contribute to the diagnosis (e.g., NKT cell deficiency in X-linked proliferative syndrome). T cell deficiencies account for approximately 20% of all cases of PID.

Severe Combined Immunodeficiencies

Severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCIDs) constitute a group of rare PIDs characterized by a profound block in T cell development and thus the complete absence of these cells. The developmental block is always the consequence of an intrinsic deficiency. The incidence of SCID is estimated to be 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 live births. Given the severity of the T cell deficiency, clinical consequences occur early in life (usually within 3 to 6 months of birth). The most frequent clinical manifestations are recurrent oral candidiasis, failure to thrive, and protracted diarrhea and/or acute interstitial pneumonitis caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci (although the latter can also be observed in the first year of life in children with B cell deficiencies). Severe viral infections or invasive bacterial infections can also occur. Patients may also experience complications related to infections caused by live vaccines (notably bacille Calmette-Gu谷rin; BCG) that may lead not only to local and regional infection but also to disseminated infection manifested by fever, splenomegaly, and skin and lytic bone lesions. A scaly skin eruption can be observed in a context of maternal T cell engraftment (see below). A diagnosis of SCID can be suspected on the basis of the patient's clinical history and, possibly, a family history of deaths in very young children (suggestive of either X-linked or recessive inheritance). Lymphocytopenia is strongly suggestive of SCID in more than 90% of cases (Table 316-2). The absence of a thymic shadow on a chest x-ray can also be suggestive of SCID. An accurate diagnosis relies on precise determination of the number of circulating T, B, and NK lymphocytes and their subsets. T cell lymphopenia may be masked in some patients by the presence of maternal T cells (derived from maternal-fetal blood transfers) that cannot be eliminated. Although counts are usually low (<500/L of blood), higher maternal T cell counts may, under some circumstances, initially mask the presence of SCID. Thus, screening for maternal cells by using adequate genetic markers should be performed whenever necessary. Inheritance pattern analysis and lymphocyte phenotyping can discriminate between various forms of SCID and provide guidance in the choice of accurate molecular diagnostic tests (see below). To date, six distinct causative mechanisms for SCID (Fig. 316-3) have been identified:

Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Caused by a Cytokine-Signaling Deficiency

The most frequent SCID phenotype (accounting for 40每50% of all cases) is the absence of both T and NK cells. This outcome results from a deficiency in either the common  chain (c) receptor (c) that is shared by several cytokine receptors (the IL-2, -4, -7, -9, -15, and -21 receptors) or Jak-associated kinase (JAK) 3 that binds to the cytoplasmic portion of the c chain receptor and induces signal transduction following cytokine binding. The former form of SCID (c deficiency) has an X-linked inheritance mode, while the second is autosomal recessive. A lack of the IL-7R chain (which, together with c, forms the IL-7 receptor) induces a selective T cell deficiency.

Purine Metabolism Deficiency

Ten to 20% of SCID patients exhibit a deficiency in adenosine deaminase (ADA), an enzyme of purine metabolism that deaminates adenosine (ado) and deoxyadenosine (dAdo). An ADA deficiency results in the accumulation of ado and dAdo metabolites that induce premature cell death of lymphocyte progenitors. The condition results in the absence of B and NK lymphocytes as well as T cells. The clinical expression of complete ADA deficiency typically occurs very early in life. Since ADA is a ubiquitous enzyme, its deficiency can also cause bone dysplasia with abnormal costochondral junctions and metaphyses (found in 50% of cases) and neurologic defects. The very rare purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency causes a profound although incomplete T cell deficiency that is often associated with severe neurologic impairments.

Defective Rearrangements of T and B Cell Receptors

A series of SCID conditions are characterized by a selective deficiency in T and B lymphocytes with autosomal recessive inheritance. These conditions account for 20每30% of SCID cases and result from mutations in genes encoding proteins that mediate the recombination of V(D)J gene elements in T and B cell antigen receptor genes (required for the generation of diversity in antigen recognition). The main deficiencies involve RAG-1, RAG-2, DNA-dependent protein kinase, and Artemis. A less severe (albeit variable) immunologic phenotype can result from other deficiencies in the same pathway, i.e., DNA ligase 4 and Cernunnos deficiencies. Given that these latter factors are involved in DNA repair, these deficiencies also cause developmental defects.

Defective (Pre-)T Cell Receptor Signaling in the Thymus

A selective T cell defect can be caused by a series of rare deficiencies in molecules involved in signaling via the pre-TCR or the TCR. These include deficiencies in CD3 subunits associated with the (pre)TCR (i.e., CD3, , and ) and CD45.

Reticular Dysgenesis

Reticular dysgenesis is an extremely rare form of SCID that causes T and NK deficiencies with severe neutropenia and sensorineural deafness. It results from an adenylate kinase 2 deficiency.

Defective Egress of Lymphocytes

Defective egress of lymphocytes from the thymus has been found in a patient with very low T cell counts but a normal thymic shadow. This condition was found to result from a deficiency in coronin-1A.

Patients with SCID require appropriate care with aggressive anti-infective therapies, immunoglobulin replacement, and (when necessary) parenteral nutrition support. In most cases, curative treatment relies on HSCT. Today, HSCT provides a very high curative potential for SCID patients who are otherwise in reasonably good condition. In this regard, the feasibility of neonatal screening is now being evaluated. Gene therapy has been found to be successful for cases of X-linked SCID (c deficiency) and SCID caused by an ADA deficiency, although toxicity has become an issue in the treatment of the former disease. Lastly, a third option for the treatment of ADA deficiency consists of enzyme substitution with a pegylated enzyme.

Thymic Defects

A profound T cell defect can also result from faulty development of the thymus, as is most often observed in rare cases of DiGeorge syndrome〞a relatively common condition leading to a constellation of developmental defects. In approximately 1% of such cases, the thymus is completely absent, leading to virtually no mature T cells. However, expansion of oligoclonal T cells can occur and is associated with skin lesions. Diagnosis (using immunofluorescence in situ hybridization) is based on the identification of a hemizygous deletion in the long arm of chromosome 22. To recover the capability for T cell differentiation, these cases require a thymic graft. CHARGE (coloboma of the eye, heart anomaly, choanal atresia, retardation, genital and ear anomalies) syndrome (CHD7 deficiency) is a less frequent cause of impaired thymus development. Lastly, the very rare "nude" defect is characterized by the absence of both hair and the thymus.

Omenn Syndrome

Omenn syndrome consists of a subset of T cell deficiencies that present with a unique phenotype, including early-onset erythrodermia, alopecia, hepatosplenomegaly, and failure to thrive. These patients usually display T cell lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, and low B cell counts. It has been found that the T cells of these patients exhibit a low TCR heterogeneity. This peculiar syndrome is the consequence of hypomorphic mutations in genes usually associated with SCID, i.e., RAG-1, RAG-2, or (less frequently) Artemis or IL-7R. The impaired homeostasis of differentiating T cells thus causes this immune system每associated disease. These patients are very fragile, requiring simultaneous anti-infective therapy, nutritional support, and immunosuppression. HSCT provides a curative approach.

Functional T Cell Defects (Fig. 316-2)

A subset of T cell PIDs with autosomal inheritance is characterized by partially preserved T cell differentiation but defective activation resulting in abnormal effector function. There are many causes of these defects, but all lead to susceptibility to viral and opportunistic infections, chronic diarrhea, and failure to thrive, with onset during childhood. Careful phenotyping and in vitro functional assays are required to identify these diseases, the best characterized of which are the following.

Zeta-Associated Protein 70 (ZAP70) Deficiency

Zeta-associated protein 70 is recruited to the TCR following antigen recognition. A ZAP70 deficiency leads typically to an almost complete absence of CD8+ T cells; CD4+ T cells are present but cannot be activated in vitro by TCR stimulation.

Calcium Signaling Defects

A small number of patients have been reported who exhibit a profound defect in in vitro T and B cell activation as a result of defective antigen receptor-mediated Ca2+ influx. This defect is caused by a mutation in the calcium channel gene (ORAI-) or its activator (STIM-1). It is noteworthy that these patients are also prone to autoimmune manifestations (blood cytopenias) and exhibit a nonprogressive muscle disease.

Human Leukocyteantigen (HLA) Class II Deficiency

Defective expression of HLA class II molecules is the hallmark of a group of four recessive genetic defects all of which affect molecules (RFX5, RFXAP, RFXANK, and CIITA) involved in the transactivation of the genes coding for HLA class II. As a result, low but variable CD4+ T cell counts are observed in addition to defective antigen-specific T and B cell responses. These patients are particularly susceptible to herpesvirus, adenovirus, and enterovirus infections and chronic gut/liver Cryptosporidium infections.

HLA Class I Deficiency

Defective expression of molecules involved in antigen presentation by HLA class I molecules (i.e., TAP-1, TAP-2, and Tapasin) leads to reduced CD8+ T cell counts, loss of HLA class I antigen expression, and a particular phenotype consisting of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and severe vasculitis.

Other Defects

A variety of other T cell PIDs have been described, some of which are associated with a precise molecular defect [e.g., IL-2-inducible T cell kinase (ITK) deficiency]. These conditions are also characterized by profound vulnerability to infections, such as severe Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)每induced B cell proliferation and autoimmune disorders in ITK deficiency. Milder phenotypes are associated with CD8 and CD3 deficiencies.

HSCT is indicated for most of these diseases, although the prognosis is worse than in SCID because many patients are chronically infected at the time of diagnosis. Fairly aggressive immunosuppression and myeloablation may be necessary to achieve engraftment of allogeneic stem cells.

T Cell Primary Immunodeficiencies with DNA Repair Defects

This is a group of PIDs characterized by a combination of T and B cell defects of variable intensity, together with a number of nonimmunologic features resulting from DNA fragility. The autosomal recessive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is the most frequently encountered condition in this group. It has an incidence of 1:40,000 live births and causes B cell defects (low IgA, IgG2 deficiency, and low antibody production), which often require immunoglobulin replacement. Ataxia telangiectasia is associated with a progressive T cell immunodeficiency. As the name suggests, the hallmark features of AT are telangiectasia and cerebellar ataxia. The latter manifestations may not be detectable before the age of 3每4 years, so that AT should be considered in young children with IgA deficiency and recurrent and problematic infections. Diagnosis is based on a cytogenetic analysis showing excessive chromosomal rearrangements (mostly affecting chromosomes 7 and 14) in lymphocytes. Ataxia telangiectasia is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding the ATM protein〞a kinase that plays an important role in the detection and repair of DNA lesions (or cell death if the lesions are too numerous) by triggering several different pathways. Overall, AT is a progressive disease that carries a very high risk of lymphoma, leukemia, and (during adulthood) carcinomas. A variant of AT ("AT-like disease") is caused by mutation in the MRE11 gene.

Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a less common condition that also results from chromosome instability (with the same cytogenetic abnormalities as in AT). NBS is characterized by a severe T and B cell combined immune deficiency with autosomal recessive inheritance. Individuals with NBS exhibit microcephaly and a bird-like face, but have neither ataxia nor telangiectasia. The risk of malignancies is very high. Nijmegen breakage syndrome results from a deficiency in Nibrin (NBSI, a protein associated with MRE11 and Rad50 that is involved in checking DNA lesions) caused by hypomorphic mutations.

Severe forms of dyskeratosis congenita (also known as Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome) combine a progressive immunodeficiency that can also include an absence of B and NK lymphocytes, progressive bone marrow failure, microcephaly, in utero growth retardation, and gastrointestinal disease. The disease can be X-linked or, more rarely, autosomal recessive. It is caused by the mutation of genes encoding telomere maintenance proteins, including dyskerin (DKC1).

Finally, the immunodeficiency with centromeric and facial anomalies (ICF) is a complex syndrome of autosomal recessive inheritance that variably combines a mild T cell immune deficiency with a more severe B cell immune deficiency, coarse face, digestive disease, and mild mental retardation. A diagnostic feature is the detection by cytogenetic analysis of multiradial aspects in multiple chromosomes (most frequently 1, 9, and 16) corresponding to an abnormal DNA structure secondary to defective DNA methylation. It is the consequence of a deficiency in the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B.

T Cell Primary Immunodeficiencies with Hyper-IgE

Several T cell PIDs are associated with elevated serum IgE levels (as in Omenn syndrome). A condition sometimes referred to as autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome is notably characterized by recurrent bacterial infections in the skin and respiratory tract and severe skin and mucosal infections by pox viruses and human papillomaviruses, together with severe allergic manifestations. T and B lymphocyte counts are low. Mutations in the DOCK8gene have been found in a subset of these patients.

A very rare, related condition with autosomal recessive inheritance that causes a similar susceptibility to infection with various microbes (see above), including mycobacteria, reportedly results from a deficiency in Tyk-2, a JAK family kinase involved in the signaling of many different cytokine receptors.

Autosomal Dominant Hyper-IgE Syndrome (Hies)

This unique condition, the autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome, is usually diagnosed by the combination of recurrent skin and lung infections that can be complicated by pneumatoceles. Infections are caused by pyogenic bacteria and fungi. Several other manifestations characterize HIES, including facial dysmorphy, defective loss of primary teeth, hyperextensibility, scoliosis, and osteoporosis. Elevated serum IgE levels are typical of this syndrome. Recently, defective TH17 effector responses have been shown to account at least in part for the specific patterns of susceptibility to particular microbes. This condition is caused by a heterozygous (dominant) mutation in the gene encoding the transcription factor STAT3 that is required in a number of signaling pathways following binding of cytokine to cytokine receptors (such as that of IL-6 and the IL-6 receptor).

Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia

The autosomal recessive cartilage hair hypoplasia (CHH) disease is characterized by short-limb dwarfism, metaphyseal dysostosis, and sparse hair, together with a combined T and B cell PID of extremely variable intensity (ranging from quasi-SCID to no clinically significant immune defects). The condition can predispose to erythroblastopenia, autoimmunity, and tumors. It is caused by mutations in the RMRP gene for a noncoding ribosome-associated RNA.

CD40 Ligand and CD40 Deficiencies

Hyper-IgM syndrome (HIGM) is a well-known PID that is usually classified as a B cell immune deficiency (see Fig. 316-4 and below). It results from defective immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR) in germinal centers and leads to profound deficiency in production of IgG, IgA, and IgE (although IgM production is maintained). Approximately half of HIGM sufferers are also prone to opportunistic infections, e.g., interstitial pneumonitis caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci (in young children), protracted diarrhea and cholangitis caused by Cryptosporidium, and infection of the brain with Toxoplasma gondii.

Figure 316-4

 
 
 
B cell differentiation and related primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) differentiate into common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), which give rise to pre-B cells. The B cell differentiation pathway goes through the pre每B cell stage (expression of the  heavy chain and surrogate light chain), the immature B cell stage (expression of surface IgM), and the mature B cell stage (expression of surface IgM and IgD). The main phenotypic characteristics of these cells are indicated. In lymphoid organs, B cells can differentiate into plasma cells and produce IgM or undergo (in germinal centers) Ig class switch recombination (CSR) and somatic mutation of the variable region of V genes (SHM) that enable selection of high-affinity antibodies. These B cells produce antibodies of various isotypes and generate memory B cells. PIDs are indicated in the purple boxes. CVID: common variable immunodeficiency.
 
 

In the majority of cases, this condition has an X-linked inheritance and is caused by a deficiency in CD40 ligand (L). CD40L induces signaling events in B cells that are necessary for both CSR and adequate activation of other CD40-expressing cells that are involved in innate immune responses against the above-mentioned microorganisms. More rarely, the condition is caused by a deficiency in CD40 itself. The poorer prognosis of CD40L and CD40 deficiencies (relative to most other HIGM conditions) implies that (1) thorough investigations have to be performed in all cases of HIGM and (2) potentially curative HSCT should be discussed on a case-by-case basis for this group of patients.

Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a complex, recessive, X-linked disease with an incidence of approximately 1 in 200,000 live births. It is caused by mutations in the WASP gene that affect not only T lymphocytes but also the other lymphocyte subsets, dendritic cells, and platelets. WAS is typically characterized by the following clinical manifestations: recurrent bacterial infections, eczema, and bleeding caused by thrombocytopenia. However, these manifestations are highly variable〞mostly as a consequence of the many different WASP mutations that have been observed. Null mutations predispose affected individuals to invasive and bronchopulmonary infections, viral infections, severe eczema, and autoimmune manifestations. The latter include autoantibody-mediated blood cytopenia, glomerulonephritis, skin and visceral vasculitis (including brain vasculitis), erythema nodosum, and arthritis. Another possible consequence of WAS is lymphoma, which may be virally induced (e.g., by EBV or Kaposi's sarcoma每associated herpesvirus). Thrombocytopenia can be severe and compounded by the peripheral destruction of platelets associated with autoimmune disorders. Hypomorphic mutations usually lead to milder outcomes that are generally limited to thrombocytopenia. It is noteworthy that even patients with "isolated" X-linked thrombocytopenia can develop severe autoimmune disease or lymphoma later in life. The immunologic workup is not very informative; there can be a relative CD8+ T cell deficiency, frequently accompanied by low serum IgM levels and decreased antigen-specific antibody responses. A typical feature is reduced-sized platelets on a blood smear. Diagnosis is based on intracellular immunofluorescence analysis of WAS protein (WASp) expression in blood cells. WASp regulates the actin cytoskeleton and thus plays an important role in many lymphocyte functions, including cell adhesion and migration and the formation of synapses between antigen-presenting and target cells. Predisposition to autoimmune disorders may (at least in part) be related to defective regulatory T cells. The treatment of WAS should match the severity of disease expression. Prophylactic antibiotics, immunoglobulin G (IgG) supplementation, and careful topical treatment of eczema are indicated. Although splenectomy improves platelet count in a majority of cases, this intervention is associated with a significant risk of infection (both pre- and post-HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is curative, with fairly good results overall. Gene therapy trials are also under way.

A few other complex PIDs are worth mentioning. Sp110 deficiency causes a T cell PID with liver venoocclusive disease and hypogammaglobulinemia. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is probably a heterogeneous disease, considering the different inheritance patterns that have been observed. In some cases, chronic candidiasis is associated with late-onset bronchopulmonary infections, bronchiectasis, and brain aneurysms. Moderate forms of CMC are related to autoimmunity and AIRE deficiency (see below). In this setting, predisposition to candida infection is associated with the detection of autoantibodies to TH17 cytokines. Recently, innate immunodeficiencies (CARD9 and possibly Dectin-1) have been found in a few families with CMC.

B Lymphocyte Deficiencies (Table 316-1, Fig. 316-4)

Deficiencies that predominantly affect B lymphocytes are the most frequent PIDs and account for 60每70% of all cases. B lymphocytes make antibodies. Pentameric IgMs are found in the vascular compartment and are also secreted at mucosal surfaces. IgG antibodies diffuse freely into extravascular spaces, whereas IgA antibodies are produced and secreted predominantly from mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues. Although Ig isotypes have distinct effector functions, including Fc receptor每mediated and (indirectly) C3 receptor每dependent phagocytosis of microorganisms, they share the ability to recognize and neutralize a given pathogen. Defective antibody production therefore allows the establishment of invasive, pyogenic bacterial infections as well as recurrent sinus and pulmonary infections (mostly caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and, less frequently, by gram-negative bacteria). If left untreated, recurrent bronchial infections lead to bronchiectasis and, ultimately, cor pulmonale and death. Parasitic infections such as caused by Giardia lambliasis as well as bacterial infections caused by Helicobacter and Campylobacter of the gut are also observed. A complete lack of antibody production (namely agammaglobulinemia) can also predispose affected individuals to severe, chronic, disseminated enteroviral infections causing meningoencephalitis, hepatitis, and a dermatomyositis-like disease.

Even with the most profound of B cell deficiencies, infections rarely occur before the age of 6 months; this is because of transient protection provided by the transplacental passage of immunoglobulins during the last trimester of pregnancy. Conversely, a genetically nonimmunodeficient child born to a mother with hypogammaglobulinemia is, in the absence of maternal Ig substitution, usually prone to severe bacterial infections in utero and for several months after birth.

Diagnosis of B cell PIDs relies on the determination of serum Ig levels (Table 316-2). Determination of antibody production following immunization with tetanus toxoid vaccine or nonconjugated pneumococcal polysaccharide antigens can also help diagnose more subtle deficiencies. Another useful test is B cell phenotype determination in switched 每S每 CD27+ and nonswitched memory B cells (+S+ CD27+). In agammaglobulinemic patients, examination of bone marrow B cell precursors (Fig. 316-4) can help obtain a precise diagnosis and guide the choice of genetic tests.

Agammaglobulinemia

Agammaglobulinemia is characterized by a profound defect in B cell development (<1% of the normal B cell blood count). In most patients, very low residual Ig isotypes can be detected in the serum. In 85% of cases, agammaglobulinemia is caused by a mutation in the BTK gene that is located on the X-chromosome. The BTK gene product is a kinase that participates in (pre) B cell receptor signaling. When the kinase is defective, there is a block (albeit a leaky one) at the pre-B to B cell stage (Fig. 316-4). Detection of BTK by intracellular immunofluorescence of monocytes, and lack thereof in patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia, is a useful diagnostic test. Not all of the mutations in BTK result in agammaglobulinemia, since some patients have a milder form of hypogammaglobulinemia and low but detectable B cell counts. These cases should not be confused with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID, see below). About 10% of agammaglobulinemia cases are caused by alterations in genes encoding elements of the pre-B cell receptor, i.e., the  heavy chain, the 5 surrogate light chain, Ig or Ig, and the scaffold protein BLNK. In 5% of cases, the defect is unknown. It is noteworthy that agammaglobulinemia can be observed in patients with ICF syndrome, despite the presence of normal peripheral B cell counts. Lastly, agammaglobulinemia can be a manifestation of a myelodysplastic syndrome (associated or not with neutropenia). Treatment of agammaglobulinemic patients is based on immunoglobulin replacement (see below). Profound hypogammaglobulinemia is also observed in adults, in association with thymoma.

Hyper-IgM (Higm) Syndromes

Hyper-IgM syndrome is a rare B cell PID characterized by defective Ig CSR. It results in very low serum levels of IgG and IgA and elevated or normal serum IgM levels. The clinical severity is similar to that seen in agammaglobulinemia, although chronic lung disease and sinusitis are less frequent and enteroviral infections are uncommon. As discussed above, a diagnosis of HIGM involves screening for an X-linked CD40L deficiency and an autosomal recessive CD40 deficiency, which affect both B and T cells. In 50% of cases affecting only B cells, these isolated HIGM syndromes result from mutations in the gene encoding activation-induced deaminase, the protein that induces CSR in B cell germinal centers. These patients usually have enlarged lymphoid organs. In the other 50% of cases, the etiology is unknown (except for rare UNG and PMS2 deficiencies). Furthermore, IgM-mediated autoimmunity and lymphomas can occur in HIGM syndrome. It is noteworthy that HIGM can result from fetal rubella syndrome or can be a predominant immunologic feature of other PIDs, such as the immunodeficiency associated with ectodermic anhydrotic hypoplasia X-linked NEMO deficiency and the combined T and B cell PIDs caused by DNA repair defects such as ataxia-telangectasia and Cernunnos deficiency.

Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID)

CVID is an ill-defined condition characterized by low serum levels of one or more Ig isotypes. Its prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 20,000. The condition is recognized predominantly in adults, although clinical manifestations can occur earlier in life. Hypogammaglobulinemia is associated with at least partially defective antibody production in response to vaccine antigens. B lymphocyte counts are often normal but can be low. Besides infections, CVID patients may develop lymphoproliferation (splenomegaly), granulomatous lesions, colitis, antibody-mediated autoimmune disease, and lymphomas. A family history is found in 10% of cases. A clear-cut dominant inheritance pattern is found in some families, whereas recessive inheritance is observed more rarely. In most cases, no molecular cause can be identified. A small number of patients in Germany were found to carry mutations in the ICOS gene encoding a T cell-membrane protein that contributes to B cell activation and survival. In 10% of patients with CVID, monoallelic or biallelic mutations of the gene encoding TACI (a member of the TNF receptor family that is expressed on B cells) have been found. In fact, heterozygous TACI mutations correspond to a genetic susceptibility factor, since similar heterozygous mutations are found in 1% of controls. The BAFF receptor was found to be defective in a kindred with CVID, although not all individuals carrying the mutation have CVID.

A diagnosis of CVID should be made after excluding the presence of hypomorphic mutations associated with agammaglobulinemia or more subtle T cell defects; this is particularly the case in children. It is possible that many cases of CVID result from a constellation of factors, rather than a single genetic defect. Recently, rare cases of hypogammaglobulinemia were found to be associated with CD19 and CD81 deficiencies. These patients have B cells that can be identified by typing for other B cell markers.

Selective Ig Isotype Deficiencies

IgA deficiency and CVID represent polar ends of a clinical spectrum due to the same underlying gene defect(s) in a large subset of these patients. IgA deficiency is the most common PID; it can be found in 1 in every 600 individuals. It is asymptomatic in most cases; however, individuals may present with increased numbers of acute and chronic respiratory infections that may lead to bronchiectasis. In addition, over their lifetime, these patients experience an increased susceptibility to drug allergies, atopic disorders, and autoimmune diseases. Symptomatic IgA deficiency is probably related to CVID, since it can be found in relatives of patients with CVID. Furthermore, IgA deficiency may progress to CVID. It is thus important to assess serum Ig levels in IgA-deficient patients (especially when infections occur frequently) in order to detect changes that should prompt the initiation of immunoglobulin replacement. Selective IgG2 (+G4) deficiency (which in some cases may be associated with IgA deficiency) can also result in recurrent sinopulmonary infections and should thus be specifically sought in this clinical setting. These conditions are ill-defined and a pathophysiologic explanation has not been found.

Selective Antibody Deficiency to Polysaccharide Antigens

Some patients with normal serum Ig levels are prone to S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae infections of the respiratory tract. Defective production of antibodies against polysaccharide antigens (such as those in the S. pneumoniae cell wall) can be observed and is probably causative. This condition may correspond to a defect in marginal zone B cells, a B cell subpopulation involved in T-independent antibody responses.

Immunoglobulin Replacement

IgG antibodies have a half-life of 21每28 days. Thus, injection of plasma-derived polyclonal IgG containing a myriad of high-affinity antibodies can provide protection against disease-causing microorganisms in patients with defective IgG antibody production. This form of therapy should not be based on laboratory data alone (i.e., IgG and/or antibody deficiency) but should be guided by the occurrence or not of infections; otherwise, patients might be subjected to unjustified IgG infusions. Immunoglobulin replacement can be performed by IV or subcutaneous routes. In the former case, injections have to be repeated every 3每4 weeks, with a residual target level of 800 mg/mL in patients who had very low IgG levels prior to therapy. Subcutaneous injections are typically performed once a week, although the frequency can be adjusted on a case-by-case basis. A trough level of 800 mg/mL is desirable. Whatever the mode of administration, the main goal is to reduce the frequency of the respiratory tract infections and prevent chronic lung and sinus disease. The two routes appear to be equally safe and efficacious and so the choice should be left to the preference of the patient.

In patients with chronic lung disease, chest physical therapy with good pulmonary toilet and the cyclic use of antibiotics are also needed. Immunoglobulin replacement is well tolerated by most patients, although the selection of the best-tolerated Ig preparation may be necessary in certain cases. Since IgG preparations contain a small proportion of IgAs, caution should be taken in patients with residual antibody production capacity and a complete IgA deficiency, as these subjects may develop anti-IgA antibodies that can trigger anaphylactic shock. These patients should be treated with IgA-free IgG preparations. Immunoglobulin replacement is a lifelong therapy; its rationale and procedures have to be fully understood and mastered by the patient and his or her family, in order to guarantee the strict observance required for efficacy.
 
Primary Immunodeficiencies Affecting Regulatory Pathways 

(Table 316-1)

An increasing number of PIDs have been found to cause homeostatic dysregulation of the immune system, either alone or in association with increased vulnerability to infections. Defects of this type affecting the innate immune system and autoinflammatory syndromes will not be covered in this chapter. However, three specific entities (hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, lymphoproliferation, and autoimmunity) will be described below.

Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis

Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is characterized by an unremitting activation of CD8+ T lymphocytes and macrophages that leads to organ damage (notably in the liver, bone marrow, and central nervous system). This syndrome results from a broad set of inherited diseases, all of which impair T and NK lymphocyte cytotoxicity. The manifestations of HLH are often induced by a viral infection. EBV is the most frequent trigger. In severe forms of HLH, disease onset may start during the first year of life or even (in rare cases) at birth.

Diagnosis relies on the identification of the characteristic symptoms of HLH (fever, hepatosplenomegay, edema, neurologic diseases, blood cytopenia, increased liver enzymes, hypofibrinogenemia, high triglyceride levels, elevated markers of T cell activation, and hemophagocytic features in the bone marrow or cerebrospinal fluid). Functional assays of postactivation cytotoxic granule exocytosis (CD107 fluorescence at the cell membrane) can suggest genetically determined HLH. The conditions can be classified into three subsets:

Familial HLH with autosomal recessive inheritance, including perforin deficiency (30% of cases) that can be recognized by assessing intracellular perforin expression; Munc13-4 deficiency (30% of cases); syntaxin 11 deficiency (10% of cases); Munc18-2 deficiency (20% of cases); and a few residual cases that lack a known molecular defect.

HLH with partial albinism. Three conditions combine HLH and abnormal pigmentation, where hair examination can help in the diagnosis: Chediak-Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome, and Hermansky Pudlak syndrome type II. Chediak-Higashi syndrome is also characterized by the presence of giant lysosomes within leukocytes (Chap. 60), in addition to a primary neurologic disorder with slow progression of symptoms over time.

X-linked proliferative syndrome (XLP) is characterized in most patients by the induction of HLH following EBV infection, while other patients develop progressive hypogammaglobulinemia similar to what is observed in CVID and/or certain lymphomas. XLP is caused by a mutation in the SH2DIA gene that encodes the adaptor protein SAP (associated with a SLAM family receptor). Several immunologic abnormalities have been described, including low 2B4-mediated NK cell cytotoxicity, impaired differentiation of NKT cells, defective antigen-induced T cell death, and defective T cell helper activity for B cells. A related disorder (XLP2) has recently been described. It is also X-linked and induces HLH (frequently after EBV infection), although the clinical manifestation may be less pronounced. The condition is associated with a deficiency of the antiapoptotic molecule XIAP. The pathophysiology of XLP2 and its relationship to XLP1 remain unclear.

HLH is a life-threatening complication. The treatment of this condition requires aggressive immunosuppression with either the cytotoxic agent VP-16 or anti-T cell antibodies. Once remission has been achieved, HSCT should be performed, since it provides the only curative form of therapy.

Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is characterized by nonmalignant T and B lymphoproliferation causing splenomegaly and enlarged lymph nodes; 70% of patients also display autoimmune manifestations such as autoimmune cytopenias, Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome, uveitis, and hepatitis (Chaps. 59 and 314). A hallmark of ALPS is the presence of CD4 -CD8- TCR+ T cells (2每50%) in the blood of affected individuals. Hypergammaglobulinemia involving IgG and IgA is also frequently observed. The syndrome is caused by a defect in Fas-mediated apoptosis of lymphocytes, which can thus accumulate and mediate autoimmunity. Furthermore, ALPS can lead to malignancies.

Most patients carry a heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding Fas that is characterized by dominant inheritance and variable penetrance, depending on the nature of the mutation. A rare and severe form of the disease with early onset can be observed in patients carrying a biallelic mutation of Fas, which profoundly impairs the protein's expression and/or function. Fas-ligand, caspase 10, caspase 8, and neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homologue (NRAS) mutations have also been reported in a few cases of ALPS. Many cases of ALPS have not been precisely delineated at the molecular level. Treatment of ALPS is essentially based on the use of proapoptotic drugs, which need to be carefully administered in order to avoid toxicity.

Colitis, Autoimmunity, and Primary Immunodeficiencies

Several PIDs (most of which are T cell-related) can cause severe gut inflammation. The prototypic example is immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome (IPEX), characterized by a widespread inflammatory enteropathy, food intolerance, skin rashes, autoimmune cytopenias, and diabetes. The syndrome is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor FOXP3, which is required for the acquisition of effector function by regulatory T cells. In most cases of IPEX, CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells are absent from the blood. This condition has a poor prognosis and requires aggressive immunosuppression. The only possible curative approach is allogeneic HSCT. IPEX-like syndromes that lack a FOXP3 mutation have also been described. In some cases, a CD25 deficiency has been found. Defective CD25 expression also impairs regulatory cell expansion/function. This functional T cell deficiency means that CD25-deficient patients are also at increased risk of opportunistic infections. It is noteworthy that abnormalities in regulatory T cells have been described in other PID settings, such as in Omenn syndrome, STAT5b deficiency, STIM1 (Ca flux) deficiency, and WAS; these abnormalities may account (at least in part) for the occurrence of inflammation and autoimmunity. The autoimmune features observed in a small fraction of patients with DiGeorge syndrome may have the same cause. Recently, severe inflammatory gut disease has been described in patients with a deficiency in the IL-10 receptor.

A distinct autoimmune entity is observed in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dysplasia (APECED) syndrome, which is characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance. It consists of multiple autoimmune manifestations that can affect solid organs in general and endocrine glands in particular. Mild, chronic Candida infection is often associated with this syndrome. The condition is due to mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene and results in impaired thymic expression of self-antigens by medullary epithelial cells and impaired negative selection of self-reactive T cells that leads to autoimmune manifestations.
 
Conclusion

The variety and complexity of the clinical manifestations of the many different PIDs strongly indicate that it is important to raise awareness of these diseases. Indeed, early diagnosis is essential for establishing an appropriate therapeutic regimen. Hence, patients with suspected PIDs must always be referred to experienced clinical centers that are able to perform appropriate molecular and genetic tests. A precise molecular diagnosis is not only necessary for initiating the most suitable treatment but it is also important for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis.

One pitfall that may hamper diagnosis is the high variability that is associated with many PIDs. Variable disease expression can result from the differing consequences of various mutations associated with a given condition, as exemplified by WAS and, to a lesser extent, X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). There can also be effects of modifier genes (as also suspected in XLA) and environmental factors such as EBV infection that can be the main trigger of disease in X-linked lymphoproliferative (XLP) conditions. Furthermore, it has recently been established that somatic mutations in an affected gene can attenuate the phenotype of a number of T cell PIDs. This has been described for ADA deficiency, X-linked SCID, RAG deficiencies, NF-B essential modulator (NEMO) deficiency, and, most frequently, in WAS. In contrast, somatic mutations can create disease states analogous to PID, as reported for ALPS. Lastly, cytokine-neutralizing autoantibodies can mimic a PID, as shown for interferon .

Many aspects of the pathophysiology of PIDs are still unknown, and the disease-causing gene mutations have not been identified in all cases (as illustrated by CVID and IgA deficiency). However, our medical understanding of PIDs has now reached the stage where scientifically based approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of these diseases can be implemented.
 
Further Readings

Boztug K, Klein C: Novel genetic etiologies of severe congenital neutropenia. Curr Opin Immunol 21:472, 2009[PMID: 19782549]  [Full Text]

 
Browne SK, Holland SM: Anticytokine autoantibodies in infectious diseases: Pathogenesis and mechanisms. Lancet Infect Dis 10:875, 2010[PMID: 21109174]  [Full Text]

 
Fischer A: Human primary immunodeficiency diseases. Immunity 27:835, 2007[PMID: 18093537]  [Full Text]

 
Nelson KS, Lewis DB: Adult-onset presentations of genetic immunodeficiencies: Genes can throw slow curves. Curr Opin Infect Dis 23:359, 2010[PMID: 20712480]  [Full Text]

 
Notarangelo LD, et al: Primary immunodeficiencies: 2009 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 124:1161, 2009[PMID: 20004777]  [Full Text]

 
Ochs HD et al: Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases. A Molecular and Genetic Approach. New York, Oxford University Press, 1999 

 
Seger RA: Modern management of chronic granulomatous disease. Br J Haematol 140:255, 2008[PMID: 18217895]  [Full Text]

 
Stiehm ER et al: Immunologic Disorders in Infants and Children. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2004 

 
Wood P et al: Recognition, clinical diagnosis and management of patients with primary antibody deficiencies: A systematic review. Clin Exp Immunol 149:410, 2007[PMID: 17565605]  [Full Text]

 
 

^^
 Chapter 317. Allergies, Anaphylaxis, and Systemic Mastocytosis >
 

Allergies, Anaphylaxis, and Systemic Mastocytosis: Introduction

The term atopic allergy implies a familial tendency to manifest such conditions as asthma, rhinitis, urticaria, and eczematous dermatitis (atopic dermatitis) alone or in combination, and in association with the presence of IgE. However, individuals without an atopic background may also develop hypersensitivity reactions, particularly urticaria and anaphylaxis, associated with the presence of IgE. Inasmuch as the mast cell is the key effector cell of the biologic response in allergic rhinitis, urticaria, anaphylaxis, and systemic mastocytosis, its developmental biology, activation pathway, product profile, and target tissues will be considered in the introduction to these clinical disorders.

The binding of IgE to human mast cells and basophils, a process termed sensitization, prepares these cells for subsequent antigen-specific activation. The sensitization of the high-affinity Fc receptor for IgE, designated FcRI, also stabilizes the cellular expression of the receptor. FcRI is composed of one , one , and two disulfide-linked  chains, which together cross the plasma membrane seven times. The  chain is responsible for IgE binding, and the  and  chains provide for signal transduction that follows the aggregation of the sensitized tetrameric receptors by polymeric antigen. Signal transduction is initiated through the action of an Src family每related tyrosine kinase, termed Lyn, that is constitutively associated with the  chain. Lyn transphosphorylates the canonical immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) of the  and  chains of the receptor, resulting in recruitment of more active Lyn to the  chain and of Syk tyrosine kinase. The phosphorylated tyrosines in the ITAMs function as binding sites for the tandem src homology two (SH2) domains within Syk. Syk activates not only phospholipase C, which associates with the Linker of Activated T Cells at the plasma membrane, but also phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to provide phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate, which allows membrane targeting of the Tec family kinase Btk and its activation by Lyn. In addition, the Src family tyrosine kinase Fyn becomes activated after aggregation of IgE receptors and phosphorylates the adapter protein Gab2 that enhances activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Indeed, this additional input is essential for mast cell activation, but it can be partially inhibited by Lyn, indicating that the extent of mast cell activation is in part regulated by the interplay between these Src family kinases. Activated phospholipase C cleaves phospholipid membrane substrates to provide inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and 1,2-diacylglycerols (1,2-DAGs) so as to mobilize intracellular calcium and activate protein kinase C, respectively. The subsequent opening of calcium-regulated activated channels provides the sustained elevations of intracellular calcium required to recruit the mitogen-activated protein kinases, ERK, JNK, and p38 (serine/threonine kinases), which provide cascades to augment arachidonic acid release and to mediate nuclear translocation of transcription factors for various cytokines. The calcium ion每dependent activation of phospholipases cleaves membrane phospholipids to generate lysophospholipids, which, like 1,2-DAG, may facilitate the fusion of the secretory granule perigranular membrane with the cell membrane, a step that releases the membrane-free granules containing the preformed mediators of mast cell effects.

The secretory granule of the human mast cell has a crystalline structure, unlike mast cells of lower species. IgE-dependent cell activation results in solubilization and swelling of the granule contents within the first minute of receptor perturbation; this reaction is followed by the ordering of intermediate filaments about the swollen granule, movement of the granule toward the cell surface, and fusion of the perigranular membrane with that of other granules and with the plasmalemma to form extracellular channels for mediator release while maintaining cell viability.

In addition to exocytosis, aggregation of FcRI initiates two other pathways for generation of bioactive products, namely, lipid mediators and cytokines. The biochemical steps involved in expression of such cytokines as tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), interleukin (IL) 1, IL-6, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and others, including an array of chemokines, have not been specifically defined for mast cells. Inhibition studies of cytokine production (IL-1, TNF-, and IL-6) in mouse mast cells with cyclosporine or FK506 reveal binding to the ligand-specific immunophilin and attenuation of the calcium ion- and calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine phosphatase, calcineurin.

Lipid mediator generation (Fig. 317-1) involves translocation of calcium ion每dependent cytosolic phospholipase A2 to the outer nuclear membrane, with subsequent release of arachidonic acid for metabolic processing by the distinct prostanoid and leukotriene pathways. The constitutive prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase-1 (PGHS-1/cyclooxygenase-1) and the de novo inducible PGHS-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) convert released arachidonic acid to the sequential intermediates, prostaglandins G2 and H2. The glutathione-dependent hematopoietic prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) synthase then converts PGH2 to PGD2, the predominant mast cell prostanoid. The PGD2 receptors, DP1 and DP2, are distributed to smooth muscle as well as to TH2 lymphocytes, eosinophils, and basophils implicated in allergic inflammation.

Figure 317-1

 
 
 
Pathways for biosynthesis and release of membranederived lipid mediators from mast cells. In the 5-lipoxygenase pathway leukotriene A4 (LTA4) is the intermediate from which the terminal-pathway enzymes generate the distinct final products, leukotriene C4 (LTC4) and leukotriene B4 (LTB4), which leave the cell by separate saturable transport systems. Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase and a dipeptidase then cleave glutamic acid and glycine from LTC4 to form LTD4 and LTE4, respectively. The major mast cell product of the cyclooxygenase system is PGD2.
 
 


For the leukotriene biosynthetic pathway, the released arachidonic acid is metabolized by 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) in the presence of an integral nuclear membrane protein, the 5-LO activating protein (FLAP). The calcium ion每dependent translocation of 5-LO to the nuclear membrane converts the arachidonic acid to the sequential intermediates, 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (5-HPETE) and leukotriene (LT) A4. LTA4 is conjugated with reduced glutathione by LTC4 synthase, an integral nuclear membrane protein homologous to FLAP. Intracellular LTC4 is released by a carrier-specific export step for extracellular metabolism to the additional cysteinyl leukotrienes, LTD4 and LTE4, by the sequential removal of glutamic acid and glycine. Alternatively, cytosolic LTA4 hydrolase converts some LTA4 to the dihydroxy leukotriene LTB4, which also undergoes specific export. Two receptors for LTB4, BLT1 and BLT2, mediate chemotaxis of human neutrophils. Two receptors for the cysteinyl leukotrienes, CysLT1 and CysLT2, are present on smooth muscle of the airways and the microvasculature and on hematopoietic cells such as macrophages, eosinophils, and mast cells. Whereas the CysLT1 receptor has a preference for LTD4 and is blocked by the receptor antagonists in clinical use, the CysLT2 receptor is equally responsive to LTD4 and LTC4, is unaffected by these antagonists, and is a negative regulator of the function of the CysLT1 receptor. The lysophospholipid formed during the release of arachidonic acid from 1-O-alkyl-2-acyl-sn-glyceryl-3-phosphorylcholine can be acetylated in the second position to form platelet-activating factor (PAF).

Unlike most other cells of bone marrow origin, mast cells leave the marrow and circulate as committed progenitors lacking their definitive secretory granules and characteristic FcRI. These committed progenitors express the receptor, c-kit, for stem cell factor (SCF), and unlike other lineages, they retain and increase its expression with maturation. The SCF interaction with c-kit is an absolute requirement for the development of constitutive tissue mast cells residing in skin and connective tissue sites and for the TH2 cell-dependent comitogenesis providing mast cells to mucosal surfaces. Indeed, in clinical T cell deficiencies, mast cells are absent from the intestinal mucosa but are present in the submucosa. Based on the immunodetection of secretory granule neutral proteases, mast cells in the lung parenchyma and intestinal mucosa selectively express tryptase, and those in the intestinal and airway submucosa, skin, lymph nodes, and breast parenchyma express tryptase, chymase, and carboxypeptidase A (CPA). The secretory granules of mast cells selectively positive for tryptase exhibit closed scrolls with a periodicity suggestive of a crystalline structure by electron microscopy; whereas the secretory granules of mast cells with multiple proteases are scroll-poor, with an amorphous or lattice-like appearance.

Mast cells are distributed at cutaneous and mucosal surfaces and in submucosal tissues about venules and could influence the entry of foreign substances by their rapid response capability (Fig. 317-2). Upon stimulus-specific activation and secretory granule exocytosis, histamine and acid hydrolases are solubilized, whereas the neutral proteases, which are cationic, remain largely bound to the anionic proteoglycans, heparin and chrondroitin sulfate E, with which they function as a complex. Histamine and the various lipid mediators (PGD2, LTC4/D4/E4, PAF) alter venular permeability, thereby allowing influx of plasma proteins such as complement and immunoglobulins, whereas LTB4 mediates leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion and subsequent directed migration (chemotaxis). The accumulation of leukocytes and plasma opsonins would facilitate defense of the microenvironment. The inflammatory response can also be detrimental, as in bronchial asthma, where the smooth-muscle constrictor activity of the cysteinyl leukotrienes is evident and much more potent than that of histamine.

Figure 317-2

 
 
 
Bioactive mediators of three categories generated by IgE-dependent activation of murine mast cells can elicit common but sequential target cell effects leading to acute and sustained inflammatory responses. LT, leukotriene; PAF, platelet-activating factor; PGD2, prostaglandin D2; IL, interleukin; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; INF, interferon; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
 

The cellular component of the mast cell-mediated inflammatory response would be augmented and sustained by cytokines and chemokines of mast cell origin. IgE-dependent activation of human skin mast cells in situ elicits TNF- production and release, which in turn induces endothelial cell responses favoring leukocyte adhesion. Similarly, activation of purified human lung mast cells or cord blood-derived cultured mast cells in vitro results in substantial production of proinflammatory (TNF-) and immunomodulatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-13) and chemokines. Bronchial biopsy specimens from patients with bronchial asthma reveal that mast cells are immunohistochemically positive for IL-4 and IL-5, but that the predominant localization of IL-4, IL-5, and GM-CSF is to T cells, defined as TH2 by this profile. IL-4 modulates the T cell phenotype to the TH2 subtype, determines the isotype switch to IgE (as does IL-13), and upregulates FcRI-mediated expression of cytokines by mast cells.

An immediate and late cellular phase of allergic inflammation can be induced in the skin, nose, or lung of some allergic humans with local allergen challenge. In the immediate phase of a local challenge, there is pruritus and watery discharge from the nose, bronchospasm and mucus secretion in the lungs, and a wheal-and-flare response with pruritus in the skin. The reduced nasal patency, reduced pulmonary function, or evident erythema with swelling at the skin site in a late-phase response at 6-8 hours is associated with biopsy findings of infiltrating and activated TH2 cells, eosinophils, basophils, and even some neutrophils. This allergic inflammation proceeding from early mast cell activation to late cellular infiltration has been used as an experimental surrogate of perennial rhinitis or bronchial asthma. However, in bronchial asthma, there is an intrinsic hyperreactivity of the airways independent of the associated inflammation.

Consideration of the mechanism of immediate-type hypersensitivity diseases in the human has focused largely on the IgE-dependent recognition of otherwise nontoxic substances. A region of chromosome 5 (5q23-31) contains genes implicated in the control of IgE levels including IL-4 and IL-13, as well as IL-3 and IL-9, which are involved in mucosal mast cell hyperplasia, and IL-5 and GM-CSF, which are central to eosinophil development and their enhanced tissue viability. Genes with linkage to the specific IgE response to particular allergens include those encoding the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and certain chains of the T cell receptor (TCR-). The complexity of atopy and the associated diseases includes susceptibility, severity, and therapeutic responses, each of which is among the separate variables modulated by both innate and adaptive immune stimuli.

The induction of allergic disease requires sensitization of a predisposed individual to a specific allergen. The greatest propensity for the development of atopic allergy occurs in childhood and early adolescence. The allergen is processed by antigen-presenting cells of the monocytic lineage located throughout the body at surfaces that contact the outside environment, such as the nose, lungs, eyes, skin, and intestine. These antigen-presenting cells present the epitope-bearing peptides via their MHC to T helper cells and their subsets. The T cell response depends both on cognate recognition and on the cytokine microenvironment provided by the antigen-presenting dendritic cells, with IL-4 directing a TH2 subset, interferon (IFN)  a TH1 profile, and IL-6 with transforming growth factor  (TGF) a TH17 subset. Allergens not only present antigenic epitopes via dendritic cells but also contain pattern recognition ligands that facilitate the immune response by direct initiation of cytokine generation from innate cell types such as basophils, mast cells, eosinophils, and others. The TH2 response is associated with activation of specific B cells that can also present allergens or that transform into plasma cells for antibody production. Synthesis and release into the plasma of allergen-specific IgE results in sensitization of FcR1-bearing cells such as mast cells and basophils, which become activated on exposure to the specific allergen. In certain diseases, including those associated with atopy, the monocyte and eosinophil populations can express a trimeric FcR1, which lacks the  chain, and yet respond to its aggregation.
 
Anaphylaxis

Definition

The life-threatening anaphylactic response of a sensitized human appears within minutes after systemic exposure to specific antigen and is manifested by respiratory distress due to laryngeal edema and/or intense bronchospasm, often followed by vascular collapse, or by shock without antecedent respiratory difficulty. Cutaneous manifestations exemplified by pruritus and urticaria with or without angioedema are characteristic of such systemic anaphylactic reactions. Gastrointestinal manifestations include nausea, vomiting, crampy abdominal pain, and diarrhea.

Predisposing Factors and Etiology

There is no convincing evidence that age, sex, race, or geographic location predisposes a human to anaphylaxis except through exposure to some immunogen. According to most studies, atopy does not predispose individuals to anaphylaxis from penicillin therapy or venom of a stinging insect but is a risk factor for allergens in food or latex.

The materials capable of eliciting the systemic anaphylactic reaction in humans include the following: heterologous proteins in the form of hormones (insulin, vasopressin, parathormone); enzymes (trypsin, chymotrypsin, penicillinase, streptokinase); pollen extracts (ragweed, grass, trees); nonpollen allergen extracts (dust mites, dander of cats, dogs, horses, and laboratory animals); food (peanuts, milk, eggs, seafood, nuts, grains, beans, gelatin in capsules); monoclonal antibodies; occupation-related products (latex rubber products); Hymenoptera venom (yellow jacket, yellow and baldfaced hornets, paper wasp, honey bee, imported fire ants); polysaccharides such as dextran and thiomersal as a vaccine preservative; drugs such as protamine; antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, amphotericin B, nitrofurantoin, quinolones); chemotherapy agents (carboplatin, paclitaxel, doxorubicin); local anesthetics (procaine, lidocaine); muscle relaxants (suxamethonium, gallamine, pancuronium); vitamins (thiamine, folic acid); diagnostic agents (sodium dehydrocholate, sulfobromophthalein); and occupation-related chemicals (ethylene oxide). Drugs are considered to function as haptens that form immunogenic conjugates with host proteins. The conjugating hapten may be the parent compound, a nonenzymatically derived storage product, or a metabolite formed in the host.

Pathophysiology and Manifestations

Individuals differ in the time of appearance of symptoms and signs, but the hallmark of the anaphylactic reaction is the onset of some manifestation within seconds to minutes after introduction of the antigen, generally by injection or less commonly by ingestion. There may be upper or lower airway obstruction or both. Laryngeal edema may be experienced as a "lump" in the throat, hoarseness, or stridor, while bronchial obstruction is associated with a feeling of tightness in the chest and/or audible wheezing. Patients with bronchial asthma are predisposed to severe involvement of the lower airways. Flushing with diffuse erythema and a feeling of warmth may occur. A characteristic feature is the eruption of well-circumscribed, discrete cutaneous wheals with erythematous, raised, serpiginous borders and blanched centers. These urticarial eruptions are intensely pruritic and may be localized or disseminated. They may coalesce to form giant hives, and they seldom persist beyond 48 h. A localized, nonpitting, deeper edematous cutaneous process, angioedema, may also be present. It may be asymptomatic or cause a burning or stinging sensation.

In fatal cases with clinical bronchial obstruction, the lungs show marked hyperinflation on gross and microscopic examination. The microscopic findings in the bronchi, however, are limited to luminal secretions, peribronchial congestion, submucosal edema, and eosinophilic infiltration, and the acute emphysema is attributed to intractable bronchospasm that subsides with death. The angioedema resulting in death by mechanical obstruction occurs in the epiglottis and larynx, but the process also is evident in the hypopharynx and to some extent in the trachea. On microscopic examination, there is wide separation of the collagen fibers and the glandular elements; vascular congestion and eosinophilic infiltration also are present. Patients dying of vascular collapse without antecedent hypoxia from respiratory insufficiency have visceral congestion with a presumptive loss of intravascular blood volume. The associated electrocardiographic abnormalities, with or without infarction, in some patients may reflect a primary cardiac event mediated by mast cells or may be secondary to a critical reduction in blood volume.

The angioedematous and urticarial manifestations of the anaphylactic syndrome have been attributed to the release of endogenous histamine. A role for the cysteinyl leukotrienes in causing marked bronchiolar constriction seems likely. Vascular collapse without respiratory distress in response to experimental challenge with the sting of a hymenopteran was associated with marked and prolonged elevations in blood histamine and intravascular coagulation and kinin generation. The finding that patients with systemic mastocytosis and episodic vascular collapse excrete large amounts of PGD2 metabolites in addition to histamine suggests that PGD2 is also of importance in the hypotensive anaphylactic reactions. The PAF level can be elevated in the serum of patients with anaphylaxis, and its concentration is correlated inversely with the constitutive level of the acetylhydrolase involved in its inactivation. The actions of the array of mast cell-derived mediators are likely additive or synergistic at the target tissues.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of an anaphylactic reaction depends on a history revealing the onset of symptoms and signs within minutes after the responsible material is encountered. It is appropriate to rule out a complement-mediated immune complex reaction, an idiosyncratic response to a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), or the direct effect of certain drugs or diagnostic agents on mast cells. Intravenous administration of a chemical mast cell-degranulating agent, including opiate derivatives and radiographic contrast media, may elicit generalized urticaria, angioedema, and a sensation of retrosternal oppression with or without clinically detectable bronchoconstriction or hypotension. Aspirin and other NSAIDs such as indomethacin, aminopyrine, and mefenamic acid may precipitate a life-threatening episode of obstruction of upper or lower airways, especially in patients with asthma, that is clinically indistinguishable from anaphylaxis but is not associated with the presence of specific IgE or elevation of blood tryptase. This syndrome, which is commonly associated with nasal polyposis, is due to inhibition of PGHS-1 with corresponding unregulated, amplified generation of the cysteinyl leukotrienes via the 5-LO/LTC4 synthase pathway. In the transfusion anaphylactic reaction that occurs in patients with IgA deficiency, the responsible specificity resides in IgG or IgE anti-IgA; the mechanism of the reaction mediated by IgG anti-IgA is presumed to be complement activation with secondary mast cell participation.

The presence of specific IgE in the blood of patients with systemic anaphylaxis was demonstrated historically by passive transfer of the serum intradermally into a normal recipient, followed 24 h later by antigen challenge into the same site, with subsequent development of a wheal and flare (the Prausnitz-K邦stner reaction). In current clinical practice, immunoassays using purified antigens can demonstrate the presence of specific IgE in the serum of patients with anaphylactic reactions, and intracutaneous skin testing may be performed after the patient has recovered to elicit a local wheal and flare in response to the putative antigen. Elevations of tryptase levels in serum implicate mast cell activation in a systemic reaction and are particularly informative for anaphylaxis with episodes of hypotension during general anesthesia or when there has been a fatal outcome. However, because of the short half-life of tryptase, elevated levels are best detected within 4 hours of a systemic reaction.

Treatment: Anaphylaxis

Early recognition of an anaphylactic reaction is mandatory, since death occurs within minutes to hours after the first symptoms. Mild symptoms such as pruritus and urticaria can be controlled by administration of 0.3 to 0.5 mL of 1:1000 (1 mg/mL) epinephrine SC or IM, with repeated doses as required at 5- to 20-min intervals for a severe reaction. If the antigenic material was injected into an extremity, the rate of absorption may be reduced by prompt application of a tourniquet proximal to the reaction site, administration of 0.2 mL of 1:1000 epinephrine into the site, and removal without compression of an insect stinger, if present. An IV infusion should be initiated to provide a route for administration of 2.5 mL epinephrine, diluted 1:10,000, at 5- to 10-min intervals, volume expanders such as normal saline, and vasopressor agents such as dopamine if intractable hypotension occurs. Replacement of intravascular volume due to postcapillary venular leakage may require several liters of saline. Epinephrine provides both a- and -adrenergic effects, resulting in vasoconstriction, bronchial smooth-muscle relaxation, and attenuation of enhanced venular permeability. When epinephrine fails to control the anaphylactic reaction, hypoxia due to airway obstruction or related to a cardiac arrhythmia, or both, must be considered. Oxygen alone via a nasal catheter or with nebulized albuterol may be helpful, but either endotracheal intubation or a tracheostomy is mandatory for oxygen delivery if progressive hypoxia develops. Ancillary agents such as the antihistamine diphenhydramine, 50-100 mg IM or IV, and aminophylline, 0.25-0.5 g IV, are appropriate for urticaria-angioedema and bronchospasm, respectively. Intravenous glucocorticoids, 0.5-1 mg/kg of medrol, are not effective for the acute event but may alleviate later recurrence of bronchospasm, hypotension, or urticaria.

Prevention

Prevention of anaphylaxis must take into account the sensitivity of the recipient, the dose and character of the diagnostic or therapeutic agent, and the effect of the route of administration on the rate of absorption. Beta blockers are relatively contraindicated in persons at risk for anaphylactic reactions, especially those sensitive to Hymenoptera venom or those undergoing immunotherapy for respiratory system allergy. If there is a definite history of a past anaphylactic reaction to a medication, even though mild, it is advisable to select a structurally unrelated agent. A knowledge of cross-reactivity among agents is critical since, for example, cephalosporins have a cross-reactive ring structure with the penicillins. When skin testing, a prick or scratch skin test should precede an intradermal test, since the latter has a higher risk of causing anaphylaxis. These tests should be performed before the administration of certain materials that are likely to elicit anaphylactic reactions, such as allergenic extracts. Skin testing for antibiotics or chemotherapeutic agents should be performed only on patients with a positive clinical history consistent with an IgE-mediated reaction and in imminent need of the antibiotic in question; skin testing is of no value for non-IgE-mediated eruptions. With regard to penicillin, two-thirds of patients with a positive reaction history and positive skin tests to benzylpenicilloyl-polylysine (BPL) and/or the minor determinant mixture (MDM) of benzylpenicillin products experience allergic reactions with treatment, and these reactions are almost uniformly of the anaphylactic type in those patients with minor determinant reactivity. Even patients without a history of previous clinical reactions have a 2-6% incidence of positive skin tests to the two test materials, and about 3 per 1000 with a negative history experience anaphylaxis with therapy, with a mortality of about 1 per 100,000.

If an agent carrying a risk of an anaphylactic response is required because a non-cross-reactive alternative is not available, desensitization can be performed with most antibiotics and other classes of therapeutic agents by the IV, SC, or oral route. Typically, graded quantities of the drug are given by the selected route starting below the threshold dose for an adverse reaction and then doubling each dose until a therapeutic dosage is achieved. Due to the risk of systemic anaphylaxis during the course of desensitization, such a procedure should be performed under the supervision of a specialist and in a setting in which resuscitation equipment is at hand and an IV line is in place. Once a desensitized state is achieved, it is critical to continue administration of the therapeutic agent at regular intervals throughout the treatment period to prevent the reestablishment of a significant pool of sensitized cells.

A different form of protection involves the development of blocking antibody of the IgG class, which protects against Hymenoptera venom-induced anaphylaxis by interacting with antigen so that less reaches the sensitized tissue mast cells. The maximal risk for systemic anaphylactic reactions in persons with Hymenoptera sensitivity occurs in association with a currently positive skin test. Although there is only low-grade cross-reactivity between honey bee and yellow jacket venoms, there is a high degree of cross-reactivity between yellow jacket venom and the rest of the vespid venoms (yellow or baldfaced hornets and wasps). Prevention involves modification of outdoor activities to exclude bare feet, wearing perfumed toiletries, eating in areas attractive to insects, clipping hedges or grass, and hauling away trash or fallen fruit. As with each anaphylactic sensitivity, the individual should wear an informational bracelet and have immediate access to an unexpired autoinjectable epinephrine kit. The limitations of lifestyle and the psychological duress can be addressed by venom immunotherapy. Although it has been recommended that venom therapy be continued indefinitely or until the skin and specific serum IgE tests are unremarkable, there is evidence that 5 years of treatment induces a state of resistance to sting reactions that is independent of serum levels of specific IgG or IgE. For children with a systemic reaction limited to skin, the likelihood of progression to more serious respiratory or vascular manifestations is low, and thus immunotherapy is not recommended.
 
Urticaria and Angioedema

Definition

Urticaria and angioedema may appear separately or together as cutaneous manifestations of localized nonpitting edema; a similar process may occur at mucosal surfaces of the upper respiratory or gastrointestinal tract. Urticaria involves only the superficial portion of the dermis, presenting as well-circumscribed wheals with erythematous raised serpiginous borders and blanched centers that may coalesce to become giant wheals. Angioedema is a well-demarcated localized edema involving the deeper layers of the skin, including the subcutaneous tissue. Recurrent episodes of urticaria and/or angioedema of less than 6 weeks' duration are considered acute, whereas attacks persisting beyond this period are designated chronic.

Predisposing Factors and Etiology

Urticaria and angioedema probably occur more frequently than usually described because of the evanescent, self-limited nature of such eruptions, which seldom require medical attention when limited to the skin. Although persons in any age group may experience acute or chronic urticaria and/or angioedema, these lesions increase in frequency after adolescence, with the highest incidence occurring in persons in the third decade of life; indeed, one survey of college students indicated that 15-20% had experienced a pruritic wheal reaction.

The classification of urticaria-angioedema presented in Table 317-1 focuses on the different mechanisms for eliciting clinical disease and can be useful for differential diagnosis; nonetheless, most cases of chronic urticaria are idiopathic. Urticaria and/or angioedema occurring during the appropriate season in patients with seasonal respiratory allergy or as a result of exposure to animals or molds is attributed to inhalation or physical contact with pollens, animal dander, and mold spores, respectively. However, urticaria and angioedema secondary to inhalation are relatively uncommon compared to urticaria and angioedema elicited by ingestion of fresh fruits, shellfish, fish, milk products, chocolate, legumes including peanuts, and various drugs that may elicit not only the anaphylactic syndrome with prominent gastrointestinal complaints but also chronic urticaria.

Table 317-1 Classification of Urticaria and/or Angioedema

 
 
1. IgE-dependent 

Specific antigen sensitivity (pollens, foods, drugs, fungi, molds, Hymenoptera venom, helminths)

Physical: dermographism, cold, solar

Autoimmune


2. Bradykinin-mediated 

Hereditary angioedema: C1 inhibitor deficiency: null (type 1) and dysfunctional (type 2)

Acquired angioedema: C1 inhibitor deficiency: anti-idiotype and anti-C1 inhibitor

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors


3. Complement-mediated 

Necrotizing vasculitis

Serum sickness

Reactions to blood products


4. Nonimmunologic 

Direct mast cell-releasing agents (opiates, antibiotics, curare, D-tubocurarine, radiocontrast media)

Agents that alter arachidonic acid metabolism (aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, azo dyes, and benzoates)


5. Idiopathic
 
 

 

Additional etiologies include physical stimuli such as cold, heat, solar rays, exercise, and mechanical irritation. The physical urticarias can be distinguished by the precipitating event and other aspects of the clinical presentation. Dermographism, which occurs in 1-4% of the population, is defined by the appearance of a linear wheal at the site of a brisk stroke with a firm object or by any configuration appropriate to the eliciting event (Fig. 317-3). Dermographism has a prevalence that peaks in the second to third decades. It is not influenced by an atopic diathesis and has a duration generally of <5 years. Pressure urticaria, which often accompanies chronic idiopathic urticaria, presents in response to a sustained stimulus such as a shoulder strap or belt, running (feet), or manual labor (hands). Cholinergic urticaria is distinctive in that the pruritic wheals are of small size (1-2 mm) and are surrounded by a large area of erythema; attacks are precipitated by fever, a hot bath or shower, or exercise and are presumptively attributed to a rise in core body temperature. Exercise-related anaphylaxis can be precipitated by exertion alone or can be dependent on prior food ingestion. The clinical presentation can be limited to flushing, erythema, and pruritic urticaria but may progress to angioedema of the face, oropharynx, larynx, or intestine or to vascular collapse; it is distinguished from cholinergic urticaria by presenting with wheals of conventional size and by not occurring with fever or a hot bath. Cold urticaria is local at body areas exposed to low ambient temperature or cold objects (ice cube) but can progress to vascular collapse with immersion in cold water (swimming). Solar urticaria is subdivided into six groups by the response to specific portions of the light spectrum. Vibratory angioedema may occur after years of occupational exposure or can be idiopathic; it may be accompanied by cholinergic urticaria. Other rare forms of physical allergy, always defined by stimulus-specific elicitation, include local heat urticaria, aquagenic urticaria from contact with water of any temperature (sometimes associated with polycythemia vera), and contact urticaria from direct interaction with some chemical substance.

Figure 317-3

 
 
 
Dermographic urticarial lesion induced by stroking the forearm lightly with the edge of a tongue blade. The photograph, taken after 2 minutes, demonstrates a prominent wheal and flare reaction in the shape of an X. (Photograph provided by Allen P. Kaplan, MD, Medical University of South Carolina.)
 
 

Angioedema without urticaria due to the generation of bradykinin occurs with C1 inhibitor (C1INH) deficiency that may be inborn as an autosomal dominant characteristic or may be acquired through the appearance of an autoantibody. The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can provoke a similar clinical presentation in 0.1-0.5% of hypertensive patients due to attenuated degradation of bradykinin. The urticaria and angioedema associated with classic serum sickness or with hypocomplementemic cutaneous necrotizing angiitis are believed to be immune-complex diseases. The drug reactions to mast cell granule-releasing agents and to NSAIDs may be systemic, resembling anaphylaxis, or limited to cutaneous sites.
 
Pathophysiology and Manifestations

Urticarial eruptions are distinctly pruritic, may involve any area of the body from the scalp to the soles of the feet, and appear in crops of 12- to 36-hour duration, with old lesions fading as new ones appear. Most of the physical urticarias (cold, cholinergic, dermatographism) are an exception, with individual lesions lasting less than 2 hours. The most common sites for urticaria are the extremities and face, with angioedema often being periorbital and in the lips. Although self-limited in duration, angioedema of the upper respiratory tract may be life-threatening due to laryngeal obstruction, while gastrointestinal involvement may present with abdominal colic, with or without nausea and vomiting, and may result in unnecessary surgical intervention. No residual discoloration occurs with either urticaria or angioedema unless there is an underlying process leading to superimposed extravasation of erythrocytes.

The pathology is characterized by edema of the superficial dermis in urticaria and of the subcutaneous tissue and deep dermis in angioedema. Collagen bundles in affected areas are widely separated, and the venules are sometimes dilated. Any perivenular infiltrate consists of lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils that are present in varying combination and numbers.

Perhaps the best-studied example of IgE- and mast cell-mediated urticaria and angioedema is cold urticaria. Cryoglobulins or cold agglutinins may be recognized in up to 5% of these patients. Immersion of an extremity in an ice bath precipitates angioedema of the distal portion with urticaria at the air interface within minutes of the challenge. Histologic studies reveal marked mast cell degranulation with associated edema of the dermis and subcutaneous tissues. The histamine level in the plasma of venous effluent of the cold-challenged and angioedematous extremity is markedly increased, but no such increase appears in the plasma of effluent of the contralateral normal extremity. Elevated levels of histamine have been found in the plasma of venous effluent and in the fluid of suction blisters at experimentally induced lesional sites in patients with dermographism, pressure urticaria, vibratory angioedema, light urticaria, and heat urticaria. By ultrastructural analysis, the pattern of mast cell degranulation in cold urticaria resembles an IgE-mediated response with solubilization of granule contents, fusion of the perigranular and cell membranes, and discharge of granule contents, whereas in a dermographic lesion there is additional superimposed zonal (piecemeal) degranulation. Elevations of plasma histamine levels with biopsy-proven mast cell degranulation have also been demonstrated with generalized attacks of cholinergic urticaria and exercise-related anaphylaxis precipitated experimentally in subjects exercising on a treadmill while wearing a wet suit; however, only subjects with cholinergic urticaria have a concomitant decrease in pulmonary function.

Up to 40% of patients with chronic urticaria have an autoimmune cause for their disease including autoantibodies to IgE (5-10%) or, more commonly, to the a chain of FcRI (35-45%). In these patients, autologous serum injected into their own skin can induce a wheal and flare reaction involving mast cell activation. The presence of these antibodies can also be recognized by their capacity to release histamine or induce activation markers such as CD63 or CD203 on basophils. An association with antibodies to microsomal peroxidase and/or thyroglobulin has been observed often with clinically significant Hashimoto's thyroiditis. In vitro studies reveal that these autoantibodies can mediate basophil degranulation with enhancement by serum as a source of the anaphylatoxic fragment, C5a.

Hereditary angioedema is an autosomal dominant disease due to a deficiency of C1INH (type 1) in about 85% of patients and to a dysfunctional protein (type 2) in the remainder. In the acquired form of C1INH deficiency, there is excessive consumption due either to immune complexes formed between anti-idiotypic antibody and monoclonal IgG presented by B cell lymphomas or to an autoantibody directed to C1INH. C1INH blocks the catalytic function of activated factor XII (Hageman factor) and of kallikrein, as well as the C1r/C1s components of C1. During clinical attacks of angioedema, C1INH-deficient patients have elevated plasma levels of bradykinin, particularly in the venous effluent of an involved extremity, and reduced levels of prekallikrein and high-molecular-weight kininogen, from which bradykinin is cleaved. The parallel decline in the complement substrates C4 and C2 reflects the action of activated C1 during such attacks. Mice with targeted disruption of the gene for C1INH exhibit a chronic increase in vascular permeability. The pathobiology is aggravated by administration of an ACE inhibitor (captopril) and is attenuated by breeding the C1INH null strain to a bradykinin 2 receptor (Bk2R) null strain. As ACE is also described as kininase II, the use of blockers results in impaired bradykinin degradation and explains the angioedema that occurs idiosyncratically in hypertensive patients with a normal C1INH.
 
Diagnosis

The rapid onset and self-limited nature of urticarial and angioedematous eruptions are distinguishing features. Additional characteristics are the occurrence of the urticarial crops in various stages of evolution and the asymmetric distribution of the angioedema. Urticaria and/or angioedema involving IgE-dependent mechanisms are often appreciated by historic considerations implicating specific allergens or physical stimuli, by seasonal incidence, and by exposure to certain environments. Direct reproduction of the lesion with physical stimuli is particularly valuable because it so often establishes the cause of the lesion. The diagnosis of an environmental allergen based on the clinical history can be confirmed by skin testing or assay for allergen-specific IgE in serum. IgE-mediated urticaria and/or angioedema may or may not be associated with an elevation of total IgE or with peripheral eosinophilia. Fever, leukocytosis, and an elevated sedimentation rate are absent.

The classification of urticarial and angioedematous states presented in Table 317-1 in terms of possible mechanisms necessarily includes some differential diagnostic points. Hypocomplementemia is not observed in IgE-mediated mast cell disease and may reflect either an acquired abnormality generally attributed to the formation of immune complexes or a genetic deficiency of C1INH. Chronic recurrent urticaria, generally in females, associated with arthralgias, an elevated sedimentation rate, and normo- or hypocomplementemia suggests an underlying cutaneous necrotizing angiitis. Vasculitic urticaria typically persists longer than 72 hours, whereas conventional urticaria often has a duration of 12-36 hours. Confirmation depends on a biopsy that reveals cellular infiltration, nuclear debris, and fibrinoid necrosis of the venules. The same pathobiologic process accounts for the urticaria in association with such diseases as systemic lupus erythematosus or viral hepatitis with or without associated arteritis. Serum sickness per se or a similar clinical entity due to drugs includes not only urticaria but also pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, and arthralgia or arthritis. Urticarial reactions to blood products or intravenous administration of immunoglobulin are defined by the event and generally are not progressive unless the recipient is IgA-deficient in the former case or the reagent is aggregated in the latter.

The diagnosis of hereditary angioedema is suggested not only by family history but also by the lack of pruritus and of urticarial lesions, the prominence of recurrent gastrointestinal attacks of colic, and episodes of laryngeal edema. Laboratory diagnosis depends on demonstrating a deficiency of C1INH antigen (type 1) or a nonfunctional protein (type 2) by a catalytic inhibition assay. While levels of C1 are normal, its substrates, C4 and C2, are chronically depleted and fall further during attacks due to the activation of additional C1. Patients with the acquired forms of C1INH deficiency have the same clinical manifestations but differ in the lack of a familial element. Furthermore, their sera exhibit a reduction of C1 function and C1q protein as well as C1INH, C4, and C2. Inborn C1INH deficiency and ACE inhibitor-elicited angioedema are associated with elevated levels of bradykinin.

Urticaria and angioedema can be differentiated from contact sensitivity, a vesicular eruption that progresses to chronic thickening of the skin with continued allergenic exposure. They can also be differentiated from atopic dermatitis, a condition that may present as erythema, edema, papules, vesiculation, and oozing proceeding to a subacute and chronic stage in which vesiculation is less marked or absent and scaling, fissuring, and lichenification predominate in a distribution that characteristically involves the flexor surfaces. In cutaneous mastocytosis, the reddish brown macules and papules, characteristic of urticaria pigmentosa, urticate with pruritus upon trauma; and in systemic mastocytosis, without or with urticaria pigmentosa, there is episodic systemic flushing with or without urtication but no angioedema.

Treatment: Urticaria and Angioedema

Identification of the etiologic factor(s) and subsequent elimination provide the most satisfactory therapeutic program; this approach is feasible to varying degrees with IgE-mediated reactions to allergens or physical stimuli. For most forms of urticaria, H1 antihistamines such as chlorpheniramine or diphenhydramine effectively attenuate both urtication and pruritus, but because of their side effects, nonsedating agents such as loratadine, desloratadine, and fexofenadine, or low-sedating agents such as cetirizine or levocetirizine generally are used first. Cyproheptadine in dosages beginning at 8 mg and ranging up to 32 mg daily and especially hydroxyzine in dosages beginning at 40 mg and ranging up to 200 mg daily have proven effective when H1 antihistamines fail. The addition of an H2 antagonist such as cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine in conventional dosages may add benefit when H1 antihistamines are inadequate. Doxepin, a dibenzoxepin tricyclic compound with both H1 and H2 receptor antagonist activity, is yet another alternative. A CysLT1 receptor antagonist such as montelukast, 10 mg/d, or zafirlukast, 20 mg twice a day, can be important add-on therapy. Topical glucocorticoids are of no value, and systemic glucocorticoids are generally avoided in idiopathic, allergen-induced, or physical urticarias due to their long-term toxicity. Systemic glucocorticoids are useful in the management of patients with pressure urticaria, vasculitic urticaria (especially with eosinophil prominence), idiopathic angioedema with or without urticaria, or chronic urticaria that responds poorly to conventional treatment. With persistent vasculitic urticaria, hydroxychloroquine, dapsone, or colchicine may be added to the regimen after hydroxyzine and before or along with systemic glucocorticoids. Cyclosporine can be efficacious for patients with chronic idiopathic or chronic autoimmune urticaria that is severe and poorly responsive to other modalities and/or where a glucocorticoid requirement is excessive. For chronic urticaria induced by autoantibody activation of mast cells and basophils, monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies such as omalizumab may be considered.

The therapy of inborn C1INH deficiency has been simplified by the finding that attenuated androgens correct the biochemical defect and afford prophylactic protection; their efficacy is attributed to production by the normal gene of an amount of functional C1INH sufficient to control the spontaneous activation of C1. The antifibrinolytic agent -aminocaproic acid may be used for preoperative prophylaxis but is contraindicated in patients with thrombotic tendencies or ischemia due to arterial atherosclerosis. Infusion of isolated C1INH protein may be used for prophylaxis or treatment of an acute attack; a bradykinin 2 receptor antagonist and ecallantide, a kallikrein inhibitor, which are administered SC, are each being assessed for amelioration of attacks. For acquired C1INH deficiency, treatment of the underlying hematologicmalignancy is recommended.
 
Systemic Mastocytosis

Definition

Systemic mastocytosis is defined by a clonal expansion of mast cells that in most instances is indolent and nonneoplastic. The mast cell expansion is generally recognized only in bone marrow and in the normal peripheral distribution sites of the cells, such as skin, gastrointestinal mucosa, liver, and spleen. Mastocytosis occurs at any age and has a slight preponderance in males. The prevalence of systemic mastocytosis is not known, a familial occurrence is rare, and atopy is not increased.

Classification and Pathophysiology

A consensus classification for mastocytosis recognizes cutaneous mastocytosis with variants and four systemic forms (Table 317-2). The form designated as indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM) accounts for the majority of patients; it implies that there is no evidence of an associated hematologic disorder, liver disease, or lymphadenopathy and is not known to alter life expectancy. In systemic mastocytosis associated with clonal hematologic non-mast cell lineage disease (SM-AHNMD), the prognosis is determined by the nature of the associated disorder, which can range from dysmyelopoiesis to leukemia. In aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM), mast cell infiltration/proliferation in multiple organs such as liver, spleen, gut, CNS, and/or bone results in a poor prognosis; a subset of patients with this form has prominent eosinophilia with hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy. Mast cell leukemia is the rarest form of the disease and is invariably fatal at present; the peripheral blood contains circulating, metachromatically staining, atypical mast cells.

Table 317-2 Classification of Mastocytosis

 
 
Cutaneous mastocytosis (CM)

    Urticaria pigmentosa (UP)/maculopapularcutaneous mastocytosis (MPCM)

     Variants: plaque form, nodular form; telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP); diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM)

     Solitary mastocytoma of skin

Indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM)

Systemic mastocytosis with an associated clonal hematologic non-mast cell lineage disease (SM-AHNMD)

Aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM)

Variant: lymphadenopathic mastocytosis with eosinophilia

Mast cell leukemia (MCL)

Mast cell sarcoma (MCS)
 
 


Source: Modified from SH Swerdlow et al (eds): World Health Organization Classification of Tumors: Pathology and Genetics in Tumors of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon, IARC Press, 2008.
 

A point mutation of A to T at codon 816 of c-kit that causes an aspartic acid to valine substitution is found in multiple cell lineages in patients with mastocytosis, resulting in a somatic gain-in-function mutation. This substitution, as well as other rare mutations of c-kit, is characteristic of adults with SM-AHNMD but is also present in patients with ISM or cutaneous mastocytosis, as might be anticipated because mast cells are of bone marrow lineage. The prognosis for patients with cutaneous mastocytosis and for almost all with ISM is a normal life expectancy, while that for patients with SM-AHNMD is determined by a non-mast cell component. In infants and children with cutaneous manifestations, namely, urticaria pigmentosa or bullous lesions, visceral involvement is usually lacking, and resolution is common because gain-in-function mutations are infrequent.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations of systemic mastocytosis, distinct from a leukemic complication, are due to tissue occupancy by the mast cell mass, the tissue response to that mass, and the release of bioactive substances acting at both local and distal sites. The pharmacologically induced manifestations are pruritus, flushing, palpitations and vascular collapse, gastric distress, lower abdominal crampy pain, and recurrent headache. The increase in local cell burden is evidenced by the lesions of urticaria pigmentosa at skin sites and is a direct cause of bone pain and/or malabsorption. Mast cell-mediated fibrotic changes occur in liver, spleen, and bone marrow but not in gastrointestinal tissue or skin. Immunofluorescent analysis of bone marrow and skin lesions in ISM and of spleen, lymph node, and skin in ASM has revealed only one mast cell phenotype, namely, scroll-poor cells expressing tryptase, chymase, and CPA.

The cutaneous lesions of urticaria pigmentosa are reddish-brown macules or papules that respond to trauma with urtication and erythema (Darier's sign). The apparent incidence of these lesions is =90% in patients with ISM and <50% in those with SM-AHNMD or ASM. Approximately 1% of patients with ISM have skin lesions that appear as tan-brown macules with striking patchy erythema and associated telangiectasia (telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans). In the upper gastrointestinal tract, gastritis and peptic ulcer are significant problems. In the lower intestinal tract, the occurrence of diarrhea and abdominal pain is attributed to increased motility due to mast cell mediators; this problem can be aggravated by malabsorption, which can also cause secondary nutritional insufficiency and osteomalacia. The periportal fibrosis associated with mast cell infiltration and a prominence of eosinophils may lead to portal hypertension and ascites. In some patients, flushing and recurrent vascular collapse are markedly aggravated by an idiosyncratic response to a minimal dosage of NSAIDs. The neuropsychiatric disturbances are clinically most evident as impaired recent memory, decreased attention span, and "migraine-like" headaches. Patients may experience exacerbation of a specific clinical sign or symptom with alcohol ingestion, use of mast cell-interactive narcotics, or ingestion of NSAIDs.

Diagnosis

Although the diagnosis of mastocytosis is generally suspected on the basis of the clinical history and physical findings, and can be supported by laboratory procedures, it can be established only by a tissue diagnosis. By convention, the diagnosis of systemic mastocytosis depends heavily on bone marrow biopsy to meet the criteria of one major plus one minor or three minor findings (Table 317-3). The bone marrow provides the major criterion by revealing aggregates of mast cells, often in paratrabecular and perivascular locations with lymphocytes and eosinophils, as well as the minor criteria of an abnormal mast cell morphology, an aberrant mast cell membrane immunophenotype, or a codon 816 mutation in any cell type. A serum total tryptase level and/or a 24-hour urine collection for measurement of histamine, histamine metabolites, or metabolites of PGD2 are noninvasive approaches to consider before bone marrow biopsy. The a form of tryptase is elevated in more than one-half of patients with systemic mastocytosis and provides a minor criterion; the  form is increased in patients undergoing an anaphylactic reaction. Additional studies directed by the presentation include a bone scan or skeletal survey; contrast studies of the upper gastrointestinal tract with small-bowel follow-through, CT scan, or endoscopy; and a neuropsychiatric evaluation, including an electroencephalogram.

Table 317-3 Diagnostic Criteria for Systemic Mastocytosis*

 
 
Major: Multifocal dense infiltrates of mast cells in bone marrow or other extracutaneous tissues with confirmation by immunodetection of tryptase or metachromasia

Minor: Abnormal mast cell morphology with a spindle shape and/or multilobed or eccentric nucleus

     Aberrant mast cell surface phenotype with expression of CD25 (IL-2 receptor) and CD2 in addition to C117 (c-kit)

     Detection of codon 816 mutation in peripheral blood cells, bone marrow cells, or lesional tissue

     Total serum tryptase (mostly alpha) greater than 20 ng/mL
 
 


*Diagnosis requires either the major and one minor or three minor criteria.
 

The differential diagnosis requires the exclusion of other flushing disorders. The 24-hour urine assessment of 5-hydroxy-indoleacetic acid and metanephrines should exclude a carcinoid tumor or a pheochromocytoma. Most patients with recurrent anaphylaxis, including the idiopathic group, present with angioedema and/or wheezing, which are not manifestations of systemic mastocytosis.
 
Treatment: Systemic Mastocytosis

The management of systemic mastocytosis uses a stepwise and symptom/sign-directed approach that includes an H1 antihistamine for flushing and pruritus, an H2 antihistamine or proton pump inhibitor for gastric acid hypersecretion, oral cromolyn sodium for diarrhea and abdominal pain, and aspirin for severe flushing with or without associated vascular collapse, despite use of H1 and H2 antihistamines, to block biosynthesis of PGD2. Systemic glucocorticoids appear to alleviate the malabsorption. Headaches are generally managed with tricyclic antidepressants and other neurotransmitter-modifying agents. Ketotifen has been used to alleviate flushing in patients with gastric intolerance to NSAIDs and in patients with bone pain or intractable headaches. The efficacy of IFN- in ASM is controversial, perhaps because of dosage limitations due to side effects. Treatment with hydroxyurea to reduce the mast cell lineage progenitors has a benefit in ASM. Chemotherapy is appropriate for the frank leukemias. Although c-kit is a receptor tyrosine kinase, the gain-in-function mutation of codon 816 is not susceptible to inhibition by imatinib mesylate.
 
Allergic Rhinitis

Definition

Allergic rhinitis is characterized by sneezing; rhinorrhea; obstruction of the nasal passages; conjunctival, nasal, and pharyngeal itching; and lacrimation, all occurring in a temporal relationship to allergen exposure. Although commonly seasonal due to elicitation by airborne pollens, it can be perennial in an environment of chronic exposure. In North America, the incidence of allergic rhinitis is about 7%. The overall prevalence in North America is nearly 20%, with the peak prevalence of nearly 40% occurring in childhood and adolescence.

Predisposing Factors and Etiology

Allergic rhinitis generally occurs in atopic individuals, i.e., in persons with a family history of a similar or related symptom complex and a personal history of collateral allergy expressed as eczematous dermatitis, urticaria, and/or asthma (Chap. 254). Up to 40% of patients with rhinitis manifest asthma, whereas 70% of individuals with asthma experience rhinitis. Symptoms generally appear before the fourth decade of life and tend to diminish gradually with aging, although complete spontaneous remissions are uncommon. A relatively small number of weeds that depend on wind rather than insects for cross-pollination, as well as grasses and some trees, produce sufficient quantities of pollen suitable for wide distribution by air currents to elicit seasonal allergic rhinitis. The dates of pollination of these species generally vary little from year to year in a particular locale but may be quite different in another climate. In the temperate areas of North America, trees typically pollinate from March through May, grasses in June and early July, and ragweed from mid-August to early October. Molds, which are widespread in nature because they occur in soil or decaying organic matter, may propagate spores in a pattern that depends on climatic conditions. Perennial allergic rhinitis occurs in response to allergens that are present throughout the year, including desquamating epithelium in animal dander, cockroach-derived proteins, mold spores, or dust, which has mites such as Dermatophagoides farinae and D. pteronyssinus. Dust mites are scavengers of flecks of human skin and coat the digestate with mite-specific protein for excretion. In up to one-half of patients with perennial rhinitis, no clear-cut allergen can be demonstrated as causative. The ability of allergens to cause rhinitis rather than lower respiratory tract symptoms may be attributed to their large size, 10-100 m, and retention within the nose.

Pathophysiology and Manifestations

Episodic rhinorrhea, sneezing, obstruction of the nasal passages with lacrimation, and pruritus of the conjunctiva, nasal mucosa, and oropharynx are the hallmarks of allergic rhinitis. The nasal mucosa is pale and boggy, the conjunctiva congested and edematous, and the pharynx generally unremarkable. Swelling of the turbinates and mucous membranes with obstruction of the sinus ostia and eustachian tubes precipitates secondary infections of the sinuses and middle ear, respectively. Nasal polyps, representing mucosal protrusions containing edema fluid with variable numbers of eosinophils, can increase obstructive symptoms and can concurrently arise within the nasopharynx or sinuses. Nasal polyps may occur independent of allergic rhinitis in patients with the aspirin-intolerant triad of rhinosinusitis and asthma and in patients with chronic staphylococcal colonization, which produces superantigens leading to an intense TH2 inflammatory response.

The nose presents a large mucosal surface area through the folds of the turbinates and serves to adjust the temperature and moisture content of inhaled air and to filter out particulate materials >10 m in size by impingement in a mucous blanket; ciliary action moves the entrapped particles toward the pharynx. Entrapment of pollen and digestion of the outer coat by mucosal enzymes such as lysozymes release protein allergens generally of 10,000-40,000 molecular weight. The initial interaction occurs between the allergen and intraepithelial mast cells and then proceeds to involve deeper perivenular mast cells, both of which are sensitized with specific IgE. During the symptomatic season when the mucosae are already swollen and hyperemic, there is enhanced adverse reactivity to the seasonal pollen. Biopsy specimens of nasal mucosa during seasonal rhinitis show submucosal edema with infiltration by eosinophils, along with some basophils and neutrophils.

The mucosal surface fluid contains IgA that is present because of its secretory piece and also IgE, which apparently arrives by diffusion from plasma cells in proximity to mucosal surfaces. IgE fixes to mucosal and submucosal mast cells, and the intensity of the clinical response to inhaled allergens is quantitatively related to the naturally occurring pollen dose. In sensitive individuals, the introduction of allergen into the nose is associated with sneezing, "stuffiness," and discharge, and the fluid contains histamine, PGD2, and leukotrienes. Thus the mast cells of the nasal mucosa and submucosa generate and release mediators through IgE-dependent reactions that are capable of producing tissue edema and eosinophilic infiltration.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of seasonal allergic rhinitis depends largely on an accurate history of occurrence coincident with the pollination of the offending weeds, grasses, or trees. The continuous character of perennial allergic rhinitis due to contamination of the home or place of work makes historic analysis difficult, but there may be a variability in symptoms that can be related to exposure to animal dander, dust mite and/or cockroach allergens, fungal spores, or work-related allergens such as latex. Patients with perennial rhinitis commonly develop the problem in adult life, and manifest nasal congestion and a postnasal discharge, often associated with thickening of the sinus membranes demonstrated by radiography. Perennial nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia syndrome (NARES) occurs in the middle decades of life and is characterized by nasal obstruction, anosmia, chronic sinusitis, and frequent aspirin intolerance. The term vasomotor rhinitis or perennial nonallergic rhinitis designates a condition of enhanced reactivity of the nasopharynx in which a symptom complex resembling perennial allergic rhinitis occurs with nonspecific stimuli, including chemical odors, temperature and humidity variations, and position changes but occurs without tissue eosinophilia or an allergic etiology. Other entities to be excluded are structural abnormalities of the nasopharynx; exposure to irritants; gustatory rhinitis associated with cholinergic activation that occurs while eating or ingesting alcohol; hypothyroidism; upper respiratory tract infection; pregnancy with prominent nasal mucosal edema; prolonged topical use of a-adrenergic agents in the form of nose drops (rhinitis medicamentosa); and the use of certain therapeutic agents such as rauwolfia, -adrenergic antagonists, estrogens, progesterone, ACE inhibitors, aspirin and other NSAIDS, and drugs for erectile dysfunction (phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors).

The nasal secretions of allergic patients are rich in eosinophils, and a modest peripheral eosinophilia is a common feature. Local or systemic neutrophilia implies infection. Total serum IgE is frequently elevated, but the demonstration of immunologic specificity for IgE is critical to an etiologic diagnosis. A skin test by the intracutaneous route (puncture or prick) with the allergens of interest provides a rapid and reliable approach to identifying allergen-specific IgE that has sensitized cutaneous mast cells. A positive intracutaneous skin test with 1:10-1:20 weight/volume of extract has a high predictive value for the presence of allergy. An intradermal test with a 1:500-1:1000 dilution of 0.05 mL may follow if indicated by history when the intracutaneous test is negative, but while more sensitive, it is less reliable due to the reactivity of some asymptomatic individuals at the test dose. Skin testing by the intracutaneous route for food allergens can be supportive of the clinical history. A double-blind, placebo-controlled challenge may document a food allergy, but such a procedure does bear the risk of an anaphylactic reaction. An elimination diet is safer but is tedious and less definitive. Food allergy is uncommon as a cause of allergic rhinitis.

Newer methodology for detecting total IgE, including the development of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) employing anti-IgE bound to either a solid-phase or a liquid-phase particle, provides rapid and cost-effective determinations. Measurements of specific anti-IgE in serum are obtained by its binding to an allergen and quantitation by subsequent uptake of labeled anti-IgE. As compared to the skin test, the assay of specific IgE in serum is less sensitive but has high specificity.

Prevention

Avoidance of exposure to the offending allergen is the most effective means of controlling allergic diseases; removal of pets from the home to avoid animal danders, utilization of air-filtration devices to minimize the concentrations of airborne pollens, elimination of cockroach-derived proteins by chemical destruction of the pest and careful food storage, travel to areas where the allergen is not being generated, and even a change of domicile to eliminate a mold spore problem may be necessary. Control of dust mites by allergen avoidance includes use of plastic-lined covers for mattresses, pillows, and comforters; using a filter-equipped vacuum cleaner; washing bedding and clothes at temperatures >54.5∼C (above 130∼F); and elimination of carpets and drapes.
 
Treatment: Allergic Rhinitis

Although allergen avoidance is the most cost-effective means of managing allergic rhinitis, treatment with pharmacologic agents represents the standard approach to seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis. Oral antihistamines of the H1 class are effective for nasopharyngeal itching, sneezing, and watery rhinorrhea and for such ocular manifestations as itching, tearing, and erythema, but they are not efficacious for the nasal congestion. The older antihistamines are sedating, and they induce psychomotor impairment, including reduced eye-hand coordination and impaired automobile driving skills. Their anticholinergic (muscarinic) effects include visual disturbance, urinary retention, and constipation. Because the newer H1 antihistamines such as fexofenadine, loratadine, desloradine, cetirizine, levocetirizine, olopatadine, bilastine, and azelastine are less lipophilic and more H1 selective, their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier is reduced, and thus their sedating and anticholinergic side effects are minimized. These newer antihistamines do not differ appreciably in efficacy for relief of rhinitis and/or sneezing. Azelastine nasal spray may benefit individuals with nonallergic vasomotor rhinitis, but it has an adverse effect of dysgeusia (taste perversion) in some patients. Because antihistamines have little effect on congestion, -adrenergic agents such as phenylephrine or oximetazoline are generally used topically to alleviate nasal congestion and obstruction. However, the duration of their efficacy is limited because of rebound rhinitis (i.e., 7- to 14-day use can lead to rhinitis medicamentosa) and such systemic responses as hypertension. Oral -adrenergic agonist decongestants containing pseudoephedrine are standard for the management of nasal congestion, generally in combination with an antihistamine. While oral antihistamines typically reduce nasal and ocular symptoms by about one third, pseudoephedrine must be added to achieve a similar reduction in nasal congestion. These pseudoephedrine combination products can cause insomnia and are precluded from use in patients with narrow angle glaucoma, urinary retention, severe hypertension, marked coronary artery disease, or a first trimester pregnancy. The CysLT1 blocker montelukast is approved for treatment of both seasonal and perennial rhinitis, and it reduces both nasal and ocular symptoms by about 20%. Cromolyn sodium, a nasal spray, is essentially without side effects and is used prophylactically on a continuous basis during the season. The clinical efficacy of cromolyn sodium used prophylactically is less than that of second-generation oral antihistamines and less than that of intranasal glucocorticoids. Intranasal high-potency glucocorticoids are the most potent drugs available for the relief of established rhinitis, seasonal or perennial, and are effective in relieving nasal congestion. They provide efficacy with substantially reduced side effects as compared with this same class of agent administered orally. Their most frequent side effect is local irritation, with Candida overgrowth being a rare occurrence. The currently available intranasal glucocorticoids-beclomethasone, flunisolide, triamcinolone, budesonide, fluticasone propionate, fluticasone furoate, ciclesonide, and mometasone furoate-are equally effective for nasal symptom relief, including nasal congestion; these agents all achieve up to 70% overall symptom relief with some variation in the time period for onset of benefit. Topical ipratropium is an anticholinergic agent effective in reducing rhinorrhea, including that in patients with perennial symptoms, and it can be additionally efficacious when combined with intranasal glucocorticoids. Local treatment with cromolyn sodium is effective in treating mild allergic conjunctivitis. Topical antihistamines such as olopatadine, azelastine, ketotifen, or epinastine administered to the eye provide rapid relief of itching and redness and are more effective than oral antihistamines.

Immunotherapy, often termed hyposensitization, consists of repeated subcutaneous injections of gradually increasing concentrations of the allergen(s) considered to be specifically responsible for the symptom complex. Controlled studies of ragweed, grass, dust mite, and cat dander allergens administered for treatment of allergic rhinitis have demonstrated at least partial relief of symptoms and signs. The duration of such immunotherapy is 3-5 years, with discontinuation being based on minimal symptoms over two consecutive seasons of exposure to the allergen. Clinical benefit appears related to the administration of a high dose of relevant allergen, advancing from weekly to monthly intervals. Patients should remain at the treatment site for at least 20 minutes after allergen administration so that any anaphylactic consequence can be managed. Local reactions with erythema and induration are not uncommon and may persist for 1-3 days. Immunotherapy is contraindicated in patients with significant cardiovascular disease or unstable asthma and should be conducted with particular caution in any patient requiring -adrenergic blocking therapy because of the difficulty in managing an anaphylactic complication. The response to immunotherapy is derived from a complex of cellular and humoral effects that likely includes a modulation in T cell cytokine production. Immunotherapy should be reserved for clearly documented seasonal or perennial rhinitis that is clinically related to defined allergen exposure with confirmation by the presence of allergen-specific IgE. Systemic treatment with a monoclonal antibody to IgE (omalizumab) that blocks mast cell and basophil sensitization has efficacy for allergic rhinitis and can be used with immunotherapy to enhance safety and efficacy. However, current approval is only for treatment of patients with persistent allergic asthma not controlled by inhaled glucocorticoid therapy. A sequence for the management of allergic or perennial rhinitis based on an allergen-specific diagnosis and stepwise management as required for symptom control would include the following: (1) identification of the offending allergen(s) by history with confirmation of the presence of allergen-specific IgE by skin test and/or serum assay; (2) avoidance of the offending allergen; and (3) medical management in a stepwise fashion (Fig. 317-4). Mild intermittent symptoms of allergic rhinitis are treated with oral antihistamines, oral CysLT1 receptor antagonists, intranasal antihistamines, or intranasal cromolyn prophylaxis. Moderate to more severe allergic rhinitis is managed with intranasal glucocorticoids plus oral antihistamines, oral CysLT1 receptor antagonists, or antihistamine-decongestant combinations. Persistent allergic rhinitis requiring the daily use of intranasal glucocorticoids with add-on interventions such as oral antihistamines, decongestant combinations, or topical ipratropium merits consideration of allergen-specific immunotherapy. Even a brief course of oral prednisone can be indicated for rapid relief of severe allergic rhinitis symptoms.

Figure 317-4

 
 
 
Algorithm for the diagnosis and management of rhinitis. ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 
 
 
Further Readings

Austen KF, Kanaoka Y: Lipids, in The Innate Immune Response to Infection, SHE Kaufmann et al (eds). Washington, DC, ASM Press, 2004, pp 417-431 

 
Benoist C, Mathis D: Mast cells in autoimmune disease. Nature 420:875, 2002[PMID: 12490961]  [Full Text]

 
Galli SJ et al: Mast cells in the development of adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol 6:135, 2005[PMID: 15662442]  [Full Text]

 
Kaplan AP: Urticaria, in Allergy and Allergic Diseases, 2nd ed, AB Kay et al (eds). Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell, 2008, pp 1853-1875 

 
Kushnir-Sukov NM et al: Mastocytosis, in Allergy and Allergic Diseases, 2nd ed, AB Kay et al (eds). Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell, 2008, pp 1878-1893 

 
 

^^
 Chapter 318. Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Diseases >
 

Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Diseases: Introduction

One of the central features of the immune system is the capacity to mount an inflammatory response to nonself while avoiding harm to self tissues. While recognition of self plays an important role in shaping the repertoires of immune receptors on both T and B cells, and in the clearance of apoptotic debris from tissues throughout the body, the development of potentially harmful immune responses to self-antigens is, in general, precluded. The essential feature of an autoimmune disease is that tissue injury is caused by the immunologic reaction of the organism against its own tissues. Autoimmunity, on the other hand, refers merely to the presence of antibodies or T lymphocytes that react with self-antigens and does not necessarily imply that the self-reactivity has pathogenic consequences. Autoimmunity is present in all individuals; however, autoimmune disease represents the end result of the breakdown of one or more of the basic mechanisms regulating immune tolerance.

Autoimmunity is seen in normal individuals and in higher frequency in normal older people. Polyreactive autoantibodies that recognize many host antigens are present throughout life. Expression of these antibodies may be increased following some inciting events. These are usually of the IgM heavy chain isotype and are encoded by nonmutated germline immunoglobulin variable region genes. When autoimmunity is induced by an inciting event, such as infection or tissue damage from trauma or ischemia, the autoreactivity is in general self-limited. Such autoimmunity may, however, be persistent, and then may or may not result in ensuing pathology. Even in the presence of organ pathology, it may be difficult to determine whether the damage is mediated by autoreactivity. Following an inciting event, the development of self-reactivity may be the consequence of an ongoing pathologic process, and be nonpathogenic, or may contribute to tissue inflammation and damage.
 
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity

Since Ehrlich first postulated the existence of mechanisms to prevent the generation of self-reactivity in 1900, ideas concerning the nature of this inhibition have developed in parallel with a progressive increase in understanding of the immune system. Burnet's clonal selection theory included the idea that interaction of lymphoid cells with their specific antigens during fetal or early postnatal life would lead to elimination of such "forbidden clones." This idea became untenable, however, when it was shown that autoimmune diseases could be induced in experimental animals by simple immunization procedures, that autoantigen-binding cells could be demonstrated easily in the circulation of normal individuals, and that self-limited autoimmune phenomena frequently developed following tissue damage from infection or trauma. These observations indicated that clones of cells capable of responding to autoantigens were present in the repertoire of antigen-reactive cells in normal adults and suggested that mechanisms in addition to clonal deletion were responsible for preventing their activation.

Currently, three general processes are thought to be involved in the maintenance of selective unresponsiveness to autoantigens (Table 318-1): (1) sequestration of self-antigens, rendering them inaccessible to the immune system; (2) specific unresponsiveness (tolerance or anergy) of relevant T or B cells; and (3) limitation of potential reactivity by regulatory mechanisms.

Table 318-1 Mechanisms Preventing Autoimmunity

 
 
1. Sequestration of self-antigen 
2. Generation and maintenance of tolerance 
  a. Central deletion of autoreactive lymphocytes 
  b. Peripheral anergy of autoreactive lymphocytes 
  c. Receptor replacement in autoreactive lymphocytes 
3. Regulatory mechanisms 
 

 

Derangements of these normal processes may predispose to the development of autoimmunity (Table 318-2). In general, these abnormal responses require an exogenous trigger such as bacterial or viral infection or cigarette smoking and require the presence of endogenous abnormalities in the cells of the immune system. Microbial superantigens, such as staphylococcal protein A and staphylococcal enterotoxins, are substances that can stimulate a broad range of T and B cells based upon specific interactions with selected families of immune receptors, irrespective of their antigen specificity. If autoantigen-reactive T and/or B cells express these receptors, autoimmunity might develop. Alternatively, molecular mimicry or cross-reactivity between a microbial product and a self-antigen might lead to activation of autoreactive lymphocytes. One of the best examples of autoreactivity and autoimmune disease resulting from molecular mimicry is rheumatic fever, in which antibodies to the M protein of streptococci cross-react with myosin, laminin, and other matrix proteins as well as neuronal antigens. Deposition of these autoantibodies in the heart initiates an inflammatory response, whereas penetration of these antibodies into the brain can result in Sydenham's chorea. Molecular mimicry between microbial proteins and host tissues has been reported in type 1 diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. It is presumed that infectious agents may be able to overcome self-tolerance because they possess molecules, such as bacterial endotoxin, RNA, or DNA, that have adjuvant-like effects on the immune system that increase the immunogenicity of the microbial antigens. The adjuvants activate dendritic cells through pattern recognition receptors and stimulate the activation of previously quiescent lymphocytes that recognize both microbial and self antigen.

Table 318-2 Mechanisms of Autoimmunity

 
 
I. Exogenous 
  A. Molecular mimicry 
  B. Superantigenic stimulation 
  C. Microbial adjuvanticity 
II. Endogenous 
  A. Altered antigen presentation 
    1. Loss of immunologic privilege 
    2. Presentation of novel or cryptic epitopes (epitope spreading) 
    3. Alteration of self-antigen 
    4. Enhanced function of antigen-presenting cells 
       a. Co-stimulatory molecule expression 
       b. Cytokine production 
  B. Increased T cell help 
    1. Cytokine production 
    2. Co-stimulatory molecules 
  C. Increased B cell function 
  D. Apoptotic defects 
  E. Cytokine imbalance 
  F. Altered immunoregulation 
 

 

Endogenous derangements of the immune system may also contribute to the loss of immunologic tolerance to self-antigens and the development of autoimmunity (Table 318-2). Some autoantigens reside in immunologically privileged sites, such as the brain or the anterior chamber of the eye. These sites are characterized by the inability of engrafted tissue to elicit immune responses. Immunologic privilege results from a number of events, including the limited entry of proteins from those sites into lymphatics, the local production of immunosuppressive cytokines such as transforming growth factor , and the local expression of molecules such as Fas ligand that can induce apoptosis of activated T cells. Lymphoid cells remain in a state of immunologic ignorance (neither activated nor anergized) to proteins expressed uniquely in immunologically privileged sites. If the privileged site is damaged by trauma or inflammation, or if T cells are activated elsewhere, proteins expressed at this site can become the targets of immunologic assault. Such an event may occur in multiple sclerosis and sympathetic ophthalmia, in which antigens uniquely expressed in the brain and eye, respectively, become the target of activated T cells.

Alterations in antigen presentation may also contribute to autoimmunity. Peptide determinants (epitopes) of a self antigen that are not routinely presented to lymphocytes may be recognized as a result of altered proteolytic processing of the molecule and the ensuing presentation of novel peptides (cryptic epitopes). When B cells rather than dendritic cells present self antigen, they may also present cryptic epitopes that can activate autoreactive T cells. These cryptic epitopes will not have previously been available to effect the silencing of autoreactive lymphocytes. Furthermore, once there is immunologic recognition of one protein component of a multimolecular complex, reactivity may be induced to other components of the complex following internalization and presentation of all molecules within the complex (epitope spreading). Finally, inflammation, drug exposure, or normal senescence may cause a primary chemical alteration in proteins, resulting in the generation of immune responses that cross-react with normal self-proteins. For example, the induction and/or release of protein arginine deaminase enzymes results in the conversion of arginine residues to citrullines in a variety of proteins, thereby altering their capacity to induce immune responses. Production of anticitrullinated protein antibodies has been observed in rheumatoid arthritis, chronic lung disease, as well as normal smokers and may contribute to organ pathology. Alterations in the availability and presentation of autoantigens may be important components of immunoreactivity in certain models of organ-specific autoimmune diseases. In addition, these factors may be relevant in understanding the pathogenesis of various drug-induced autoimmune conditions. However, the diversity of autoreactivity manifest in non-organ-specific systemic autoimmune diseases suggests that these conditions might result from a more general activation of the immune system rather than from an alteration in individual self-antigens.

Many autoimmune diseases are characterized by the presence of antibodies that react with apoptotic material. Defects in the clearance of apoptotic material have been shown to elicit autoimmunity and autoimmune disease in a number of animal models. Moreover, defects in the clearance of apoptotic material have been found in subjects with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Apoptotic debris not quickly cleared by the immune system can function as endogenous ligands for a number of pattern recognition receptors on dendritic cells. Under such circumstances, there is activation of dendritic cells, and an immune response to apoptotic debris can develop. In addition, the presence of extracellular apoptotic material within germinal centers of secondary lymphoid organs may facilitate the direct activation of autoimmune B cell clones or function to select autoimmune B cell clones during immune responses.

A number of experimental models have suggested that intense stimulation of T lymphocytes can produce nonspecific signals that bypass the need for antigen-specific helper T cells and lead to polyclonal B cell activation with the formation of multiple autoantibodies. For example, antinuclear, antierythrocyte, and antilymphocyte antibodies are produced during the chronic graft-versus-host reaction. In addition, true autoimmune diseases, including autoimmune hemolytic anemia and immune complex每mediated glomerulonephritis, can also be induced in this manner. While it is clear that such diffuse activation of helper T cell activity can cause autoimmunity, nonspecific stimulation of B lymphocytes can also lead to the production of autoantibodies. Thus, the administration of polyclonal B cell activators, such as bacterial endotoxin, to normal mice leads to the production of a number of autoantibodies, including those directed to DNA and IgG (rheumatoid factor). Moreover, excess BAFF can also cause T cell每independent B cell activation and heavy chain class switching and the development of autoimmunity. SLE, for example, can be induced in mice through exuberant dendritic cell activation, a redundancy of TLR7 on the y chromosome (BXSByaa mice) or through exposure to CpG, a ligand for TLR 9. The ensuing induction of inflammatory mediators can cause a switch from production of nonpathogenic IgM autoantibodies to pathogenic IgG autoantibodies in the absence of antigen-specific T cell help.

Aberrant selection of the B or T cell repertoire at the time of antigen receptor expression can also predispose to autoimmunity. For example, B cell immunodeficiency caused by an absence of the B cell receptor每associated kinase, Bruton's tyrosine kinase, leads to X-linked agammaglobulinemia. This syndrome is characterized by reduced B cell activation, but also by diminished negative selection of autoreactive B cells probably caused by high levels of BAFF, resulting in increased autoreactivity within a diminished B cell repertoire. Likewise, negative selection of autoreactive T cells in the thymus requires expression of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene that enables the expression of tissue-specific proteins in thymic medullary epithelial cells. Peptides from these proteins are expressed in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and mediate the elimination of autoreactive T cells. The absence of AIRE gene expression leads to a failure of negative selection of autoreactive cells, autoantibody production, and severe inflammatory destruction of multiple organs. Individuals deficient in AIRE gene expression develop autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).

Primary alterations in the activity of T and/or B cells, cytokine imbalances, or defective immunoregulatory circuits may also contribute to the emergence of autoimmunity. Diminished production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin (IL) 10 has been reported to be associated with the development of autoimmunity. Overproduction of type 1 interferon has also been associated with autoimmunity. Overexpression of co-stimulatory molecules on T cells similarly can lead to autoantibody production.

Autoimmunity may also result from an abnormality of immunoregulatory mechanisms. Observations made in both human autoimmune disease and animal models suggest that defects in the generation and expression of regulatory T cell activity may allow for the production of autoimmunity. It has recently been appreciated that the IPEX (immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy X-linked) syndrome results from the failure to express the FOXP3 gene, which encodes a molecule critical in the differentiation of regulatory T cells. Administration of normal regulatory T cells or factors derived from them can prevent the development of autoimmune disease in rodent models of autoimmunity. Abnormalities in the function of regulatory T cells have been noted in a number of human autoimmune diseases, although it remains uncertain whether these are causative or are secondary abnormalities owing to inflammation. Finally, recent data indicate that B cells may also exert regulatory function, largely through the production of the cytokine IL-10. Deficiency of IL-10-producing regulatory B cells can prolong the course of an animal model of multiple sclerosis.

It should be apparent that no single mechanism can explain all the varied manifestations of autoimmunity. Furthermore, genetic evaluation has shown that a number of abnormalities often need to converge to induce an autoimmune disease. Additional factors that appear to be important determinants in the induction of autoimmunity include age, sex (many autoimmune diseases are far more common in women), genetic background, exposure to infectious agents, and environmental contacts. How all of these disparate factors affect the capacity to develop self-reactivity is currently being investigated intensively.
 
Genetic Considerations

Evidence in humans that there are susceptibility genes for autoimmunity comes from family studies and especially from studies of twins. Studies in type 1 diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and SLE have shown that approximately 15每30% of pairs of monozygotic twins show disease concordance, compared with <5% of dizygotic twins. The occurrence of different autoimmune diseases within the same family has suggested that certain susceptibility genes may predispose to a variety of autoimmune diseases. Genetic mapping has begun to identify chromosomal regions that predispose to specific autoimmune diseases. It is notable that some genes are associated with multiple autoimmune diseases, whereas others are more specifically associated with only one autoimmune condition. The gene encoding PTPN22 is associated with multiple autoimmune diseases. Its product is a phosphatase expressed by a variety of hematopoietic cells that downregulates antigen receptor每mediated stimulation of T and B cells. A gain-of-function polymorphism of this gene is associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, and SLE in some populations. The explanation of the association of this polymorphism with autoimmune disease is uncertain, but it is likely that it diminishes antigen receptor signaling during lymphocyte development permitting escape of autoreactive clones or decreased activation-induced apoptosis of autoantigen-reactive lymphocytes in the periphery. In recent years, genomewide association studies have demonstrated a variety of other genes that are involved in human autoimmune diseases. Most genes individually confer a relatively low risk for autoimmune diseases and are found in normal individuals. No gene has been identified that is essential for autoimmune diseases. In addition to this evidence from humans, certain inbred mouse strains reproducibly develop specific spontaneous or experimentally induced autoimmune diseases, whereas others do not. These findings have led to an extensive search for genes that determine susceptibility to autoimmune disease.

The strongest consistent association for susceptibility to autoimmune disease has been found with particular alleles of the MHC. It has been suggested that the association of MHC genotype with autoimmune disease relates to differences in the ability of different allelic variations of MHC molecules to present autoantigenic peptides to autoreactive T cells. An alternative hypothesis involves the role of MHC alleles in shaping the T cell receptor repertoire during T cell ontogeny in the thymus. Additionally, specific MHC gene products may themselves be the source of peptides that can be recognized by T cells. Cross-reactivity between such MHC peptides and peptides derived from proteins produced by common microbes may trigger autoimmunity by molecular mimicry. However, MHC genotype alone does not determine the development of autoimmunity. Identical twins are far more likely to develop the same autoimmune disease than MHC-identical nontwin siblings, suggesting that genetic factors other than the MHC also affect disease susceptibility. Recent studies of the genetics of type 1 diabetes mellitus, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis in humans and mice have shown that there are several independently segregating disease susceptibility loci in addition to the MHC. Genes that encode molecules of the innate immune response are also involved in autoimmunity. In humans, inherited homozygous deficiency of the early proteins of the classic pathway of complement (C1q, C4, or C2) as well as genes involved in the type 1 interferon pathway are very strongly associated with the development of SLE.

Immunopathogenic Mechanisms in Autoimmune Diseases

The mechanisms of tissue injury in autoimmune diseases can be divided into antibody-mediated and cell-mediated processes. Representative examples are listed in Table 318-3.

Table 318-3 Mechanisms of Tissue Damage in Autoimmune Disease

 
 
Effector
 Mechanism
 Target
 Disease
 
Autoantibody
 Blocking or inactivation
  Chain of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor

Phospholipid每2-glycoprotein 1 complex

Insulin receptor

Intrinsic factor
 Myasthenia gravis

Antiphospholipid syndrome

Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus

Pernicious anemia
 
  Stimulation
 TSH receptor (LATS)

Proteinase-3 (ANCA)

Epidermal cadherin1

Desmoglein 3
 Graves' disease

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)

Pemphigus vulgaris
 
  Complement activation

Immune-complex formation


Opsonization
 3 Chain of collagen IV

Double-stranded DNA

Ig

Platelet GpIIb:IIIa
 Goodpasture's syndrome

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Rheumatoid arthritis

Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura
 
    Rh antigens, I antigen
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
 
  Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
 Thyroid peroxidase, thyroglobulin
 Hashimoto's thyroiditis
 
T cells
 Cytokine production
 ?
 Rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes mellitus
 
  Cellular cytotoxicity
 ?
 Type 1 diabetes mellitus
 
 

 

The pathogenicity of autoantibodies can be mediated through several mechanisms, including opsonization of soluble factors or cells, activation of an inflammatory cascade via the complement system, and interference with the physiologic function of soluble molecules or cells.

In autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura, opsonization of platelets targets them for elimination by phagocytes. Likewise, in autoimmune hemolytic anemia, binding of immunoglobulin to red cell membranes leads to phagocytosis and lysis of the opsonized cell. Goodpasture's syndrome, a disease characterized by lung hemorrhage and severe glomerulonephritis, represents an example of antibody binding leading to local activation of complement and neutrophil accumulation and activation. The autoantibody in this disease binds to the 3 chain of type IV collagen in the basement membrane. In SLE, activation of the complement cascade at sites of immunoglobulin deposition in renal glomeruli is considered to be a major mechanism of renal damage. Moreover, the DNA- and RNA-containing immune complexes in SLE activate TLR 9 and 7, respectively, in dendritic cells and promote a proinflammatory, immunogenic milieu conducive to amplifying the autoimmune response.

Autoantibodies can also interfere with normal physiologic functions of cells or soluble factors. Autoantibodies against hormone receptors can lead to stimulation of cells or to inhibition of cell function through interference with receptor signaling. For example, long-acting thyroid stimulators, which are autoantibodies that bind to the receptor for thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), are present in Graves' disease and function as agonists, causing the thyroid to respond as if there were an excess of TSH. Alternatively, antibodies to the insulin receptor can cause insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus through receptor blockade. In myasthenia gravis, autoantibodies to the acetylcholine receptor can be detected in 85每90% of patients and are responsible for muscle weakness. The exact location of the antigenic epitope, the valence and affinity of the antibody, and perhaps other characteristics determine whether activation or blockade results from antibody binding.

Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with thromboembolic events in primary and secondary antiphospholipid syndrome and have also been associated with fetal wastage. The major antibody is directed to the phospholipid每2-glycoprotein I complex and appears to exert a procoagulant effect. In pemphigus vulgaris, autoantibodies bind to a component of the epidermal cell desmosome, desmoglein 3, and play a role in the induction of the disease. They exert their pathologic effect by disrupting cell-cell junctions through stimulation of the production of epithelial proteases, leading to blister formation. Cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), found in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), is an antibody to an intracellular antigen, the 29-kDa serine protease (proteinase-3). In vitro experiments have shown that IgG anti-c-ANCA causes cellular activation and degranulation of primed neutrophils.

It is important to note that autoantibodies of a given specificity may cause disease only in genetically susceptible hosts, as has been shown in experimental models of myasthenia gravis, SLE, rheumatic fever and rheumatoid arthritis. It is also important to be aware that once organ damage is initiated, new inflammatory cascades are initiated that can sustain and amplify the autoimmune process. Finally, some autoantibodies seem to be markers for disease but have as yet no known pathogenic potential.

Autoimmune Diseases

Manifestations of autoimmunity are found in a large number of pathologic conditions. However, their presence does not necessarily imply that the pathologic process is an autoimmune disease. A number of attempts to establish formal criteria for the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases have been made, but none is universally accepted. One set of criteria is shown in Table 318-4; however, this should be viewed merely as a guide in consideration of the problem.

Table 318-4 Human Autoimmune Disease: Presumptive Evidence for an Immunologic Pathogenesis

 
 
Major Criteria  
1. Presence of autoantibodies or evidence of cellular reactivity to self 
2. Documentation of relevant autoantibody or lymphocytic infiltrate in the pathologic lesion 
3. Demonstration that relevant autoantibody or T cells can cause tissue pathology 
  a. Transplacental transmission 
  b. Adaptive transfer into animals 
  c. In vitro impact on cellular function Supportive Evidence 
Supportive Evidence  
1. Reasonable animal model 
2. Beneficial effect from immunosuppressive agents 
3. Association with other evidence of autoimmunity 
4. No evidence of infection or other obvious cause 
 

 

To classify a disease as autoimmune, it is necessary to demonstrate that the immune response to a self-antigen causes the observed pathology. Initially, the demonstration that antibodies against the affected tissue could be detected in the serum of patients suffering from various diseases was taken as evidence that these diseases had an autoimmune basis. However, such autoantibodies are also found when tissue damage is caused by trauma or infection, and the autoantibody is secondary to tissue damage. Thus, it is necessary to show that autoimmunity is pathogenic before classifying a disease as autoimmune.

If the autoantibodies are pathogenic, it may be possible to transfer disease to experimental animals by the administration of autoantibodies, with the subsequent development of pathology in the recipient similar to that seen in the patient from whom the antibodies were obtained. This has been shown, for example, in Graves' disease. Some autoimmune diseases can be transferred from mother to fetus and are observed in the newborn babies of diseased mothers. The symptoms of the disease in the newborn usually disappear as the levels of the maternal antibody decrease. An exception, however, is congenital heart block, in which damage to the developing conducting system of the heart follows in utero transfer of anti-Ro antibody from the mother to the fetus. This can result in a permanent developmental defect in the heart.

In most situations, the critical factors that determine when the development of autoimmunity results in autoimmune disease have not been delineated. The relationship of autoimmunity to the development of autoimmune disease may relate to the fine specificity of the antibodies or T cells or their specific effector capabilities. In many circumstances, a mechanistic understanding of the pathogenic potential of autoantibodies has not been established. In some autoimmune diseases, biased production of cytokines by helper T (TH) cells may play a role in pathogenesis. In this regard, T cells can differentiate into specialized effector cells that predominantly produce interferon  (TH1), IL-4 (TH2), IL-17 (TH17) or provide help to B cells (T follicular helper, TFH) (Chap. 314). TH1 cells facilitate macrophage activation and classic cell-mediated immunity, whereas TH2 cells are thought to have regulatory functions and are involved in the resolution of normal immune responses and also the development of responses to a variety of parasites; TH17 cells produce a number of inflammatory cytokines, including IL-17 and IL-22, and TFH cells help B cells by constitutively producing IL-21. In a number of autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and Crohn's disease, there appears to be biased differentiation of TH1 cells, with resultant organ damage. More recently, studies suggest accentuated differentiation of TH17 cells associated with animal models of inflammatory arthritis and also rheumatoid arthritis, whereas increased differentiation of TFH cells has been associated with animal models of SLE.

Organ-Specific versus Systemic Autoimmune Diseases

Autoimmune diseases form a spectrum, from those specifically affecting a single organ to systemic disorders with involvement of many organs (Table 318-5). Hashimoto's autoimmune thyroiditis is an example of an organ-specific autoimmune disease (Chap. 341). In this disorder, there is a specific lesion in the thyroid associated with infiltration of mononuclear cells and damage to follicular cells. Antibody to thyroid constituents can be demonstrated in nearly all cases. Other organ- or tissue-specific autoimmune disorders include pemphigus vulgaris, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, Goodpasture's syndrome, myasthenia gravis, and sympathetic ophthalmia. One important feature of some organ-specific autoimmune diseases is the tendency for overlap, such that an individual with one specific syndrome is more likely to develop a second syndrome. For example, there is a high incidence of pernicious anemia in individuals with autoimmune thyroiditis. More striking is the tendency for individuals with an organ-specific autoimmune disease to develop multiple other manifestations of autoimmunity without the development of associated organ pathology. Thus, as many as 50% of individuals with pernicious anemia have non-cross-reacting antibodies to thyroid constituents, whereas patients with myasthenia gravis may develop antinuclear antibodies, antithyroid antibodies, rheumatoid factor, antilymphocyte antibodies, and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. Part of the explanation for this may relate to the genetic elements shared by individuals with these different diseases.

Table 318-5 Some Autoimmune Diseases

 
 
Organ Specific
 
Graves' disease
 Vitiligo
 
Hashimoto's thyroiditis
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
 
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura
 
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
 Pernicious anemia
 
Insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus
 Myasthenia gravis
 
Immune-mediated infertility
 Multiple sclerosis
 
Autoimmune Addison's disease
 Guillain-Barr谷 syndrome
 
Pemphigus vulgaris
 Stiff-man syndrome
 
Pemphigus foliaceus
 Acute rheumatic fever
 
Dermatitis herpetiformis
 Sympathetic ophthalmia
 
Autoimmune alopecia
 Goodpasture's syndrome
 
Organ Nonspecific (Systemic)
 
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)
 
Rheumatoid arthritis
 Antiphospholipid syndrome
 
Systemic necrotizing vasculitis
 Sj?gren's syndrome
 
 

 

Systemic autoimmune diseases differ from organ-specific diseases in that pathologic lesions are found in multiple diverse organs and tissues. The hallmark of these conditions is the demonstration of associated relevant autoimmune manifestations that are likely to be etiologic in the organ pathology. SLE represents the prototype of these disorders because of its abundance of autoimmune manifestations.

SLE is a disease of protean manifestations that characteristically involves the kidneys, joints, skin, serosal surfaces, blood vessels, and central nervous system (Chap. 319). The disease is associated with a vast array of autoantibodies whose production appears to be a part of a generalized hyperreactivity of the humoral immune system. Other features of SLE include generalized B cell hyperresponsiveness and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. Current evidence suggests that both hypo- and hyperresponsiveness to antigen can lead to survival and activation of autoreactive B cells in SLE.

Treatment: Autoimmune Diseases

Treatment of autoimmune diseases can focus on either suppressing the induction of autoimmunity, restoring normal regulatory mechanisms, or inhibiting the effector mechanisms. To eliminate autoreactive cells, immunosuppressive or ablative therapies are most commonly used. In recent years, cytokine blockade has been demonstrated to be effective in preventing immune activation in some diseases. New therapies have also been developed to target lymphoid cells more specifically, either by blocking a co-stimulatory signal needed for T or B cell activation, by blocking the migratory capacity of lymphocytes, or by eliminating the effector T cells or B cells. The efficacy of these therapies is not yet demonstrated. Newer trials are testing the possibility of using autoantigen itself to induce tolerance. One major advance in inhibiting effector mechanisms has been the introduction of cytokine blockade, targeting TNF or IL-1, that appears to limit organ damage in some diseases. Biologicals that interface with T cell activation (CTLA-4Ig) or delete B cells (anti-CD20 antibody) have also recently been approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Therapies that prevent target organ damage or support target organ function remain an important therapeutic approach to autoimmune disease.
 
Further Readings

Annunziato F et al: Type 17 T helper cells〞Origins, features and possible roles in rheumatic disease. Nat Rev 5:325, 2009[PMID: 19434074]  [Full Text]

 
Baechler EC et al: Gene expression profiling in human autoimmunity. Immunol Rev 210:120, 2006[PMID: 16623768]  [Full Text]

 
Drexler SK, Foxwell BM: The role of Toll-like receptors in chronic inflammation. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42:506, 2010[PMID: 19837184]  [Full Text]

 
Fujinami RS et al: Molecular mimicry, bystander activation, or viral persistence: Infections and autoimmune disease. Clin Microbiol Rev 19:80, 2006[PMID: 16418524]  [Full Text]

 
Gauld SB et al: Silencing of autoreactive B cells by anergy: A fresh perspective. Curr Opin Immunol 18:292, 2006[PMID: 16616480]  [Full Text]

 
Mackay IR: Clustering and commonalities among autoimmune diseases. J Autoimmun 33:170, 2009[PMID: 19837564]  [Full Text]

 
Maier LM, Hafler DA: Autoimmunity risk alleles in costimulation pathways. Immunol Rev 229:322, 2009[PMID: 19426231]  [Full Text]

 
Pisetsky DS: The role of innate immunity in the induction of autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 8:69, 2008[PMID: 18708168]  [Full Text]

 
Podojil JR, Miller SD: Molecular mechanisms of T-cell receptor and costimulatory molecule ligation/blockade in autoimmune disease therapy. Immunol Rev 229:337, 2009[PMID: 19426232]  [Full Text]

 
Rosen A, Casciola-Rosen L: Autoantigens in systemic autoimmunity: Critical partner in pathogenesis. J Intern Med 265:625, 2009[PMID: 19493056]  [Full Text]

 
 

^^
Chapter 319. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus >
 

Definition and Prevalence

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease in which organs and cells undergo damage initially mediated by tissue-binding autoantibodies and immune complexes. In most patients, autoantibodies are present for a few years before the first clinical symptom appears; clinical manifestations are heterogeneous. Ninety percent of patients at diagnosis are women of childbearing years; people of all genders, ages, and ethnic groups are susceptible. Prevalence of SLE in the United States is 10 to 400 per 100,000 depending on race and gender; highest prevalence is in black women and lowest is in white men.
 
Pathogenesis and Etiology

The proposed pathogenic mechanisms of SLE are illustrated in Fig. 319-1. Interactions between susceptibility genes and environmental factors result in abnormal immune responses, which vary among different patients. Those responses may include (1) activation of innate immunity (dendritic cells, monocyte/macrophages) by CpG DNA, DNA in immune complexes, viral RNA, and RNA in RNA/protein self-antigens; (2) lowered activation thresholds and abnormal activation pathways in adaptive immunity cells (T and B lymphocytes); (3) ineffective regulatory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells; and (4) reduced clearance of immune complexes and of apoptotic cells. Self-antigens (nucleosomal DNA/protein; RNA/protein in Sm, Ro, and La; phospholipids) are available for recognition by the immune system in surface blebs of apoptotic cells; thus antigens, autoantibodies, and immune complexes persist for prolonged periods of time, allowing inflammation and disease to develop. Immune cell activation is accompanied by increased secretion of proinflammatory type 1 and 2 interferons (IFNs), tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), interleukin (IL)-17 and B cell每maturation/survival cytokines B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS/BAFF), and IL-10. Upregulation of genes induced by interferons is a genetic "signature" in peripheral blood cells of SLE in approximately 50% of patients. Decreased production of other cytokines also contributes to SLE: Lupus T and natural killer (NK) cells fail to produce enough IL-2 and transforming growth factor  (TGF-) to induce and sustain regulatory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The result of these abnormalities is sustained production of autoantibodies (referred to in Fig. 319-1 and described in Table 319-1) and immune complexes; pathogenic subsets bind target tissues, with activation of complement, leading to release of cytokines, chemokines, vasoactive peptides, oxidants, and destructive enzymes. This is accompanied by influx into target tissues of T cells, monocyte/macrophages, and dendritic cells, as well as activation of resident macrophages and dendritic cells. In the setting of chronic inflammation, accumulation of growth factors and products of chronic oxidation contribute to irreversible tissue damage, including fibrosis/sclerosis, in glomeruli, arteries, brain, lungs, and other tissues.

Figure 319-1

 
 
 
Pathogenesis of SLE. Genes confirmed in more than one genome-wide association analysis in Northern European whites as increasing susceptibility to SLE or lupus nephritis are listed (reviewed in Moser KL et al, Recent insights into the genetic basis of SLE. Genes Immun 2009:10:373). Gene-environment interactions result in abnormal immune responses that generate pathogenic autoantibodies and immune complexes that deposit in tissue, activate complement, cause inflammation, and over time lead to irreversible organ damage. Ag, antigen; C1q, complement system; C3, complement component; CNS, central nervous system; DC, dendritic cell; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; FcR, immunoglobulin Fc-binding receptor; IL, interleukin; MCP, monocyte chemotactic protein; PTPN, phosphotyrosine phosphatase; UV, ultraviolet.
 
 
Table 319-1 Autoantibodies in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)

 
 
Antibody
 Prevalence, %
 Antigen Recognized
 Clinical Utility
 
Antinuclear antibodies
 98
 Multiple nuclear
 Best screening test; repeated negative tests make SLE unlikely
 
Anti-dsDNA
 70
 DNA (double-stranded)
 High titers are SLE-specific and in some patients correlate with disease activity, nephritis, vasculitis
 
Anti-Sm
 25
 Protein complexed to 6 species of nuclear U1 RNA
 Specific for SLE; no definite clinical correlations; most patients also have anti-RNP; more common in blacks and Asians than whites
 
Anti-RNP
 40
 Protein complexed to U1 RNA
 Not specific for SLE; high titers associated with syndromes that have overlap features of several rheumatic syndromes including SLE; more common in blacks than whites
 
Anti-Ro (SS-A)
 30
 Protein complexed to hY RNA, primarily 60 kDa and 52 kDa
 Not specific for SLE; associated with sicca syndrome, predisposes to subacutecutaneous lupus, and to neonatal lupus with congenital heart block; associated with decreased risk for nephritis
 
Anti-La (SS-B)
 10
 47-kDa protein complexed to hY RNA
 Usually associated with anti-Ro; associated with decreased risk for nephritis
 
Antihistone
 70
 Histones associated with DNA (in nucleosome, chromatin)
 More frequent in drug-induced lupus than in SLE
 
Antiphospholipid
 50
 Phospholipids, 2 glycoprotein 1 cofactor, prothrombin
 Three tests available〞ELISAs for cardiolipin and 2G1, sensitive prothrombin time (DRVVT); predisposes to clotting, fetal loss, thrombocytopenia
 
Antierythrocyte
 60
 Erythrocyte membrane
 Measured as direct Coombs' test; a small proportion develops overt hemolysis
 
Antiplatelet
 30
 Surface and altered cytoplasmic antigens on platelets
 Associated with thrombocytopenia but sensitivity and specificity are not good; this is not a useful clinical test
 
Antineuronal (includes anti-glutamate receptor)
 60
 Neuronal and lymphocyte surface antigens
 In some series a positive test in CSF correlates with active CNS lupus.
 
Antiribosomal P
 20
 Protein in ribosomes
 In some series a positive test in serum correlates with depression or psychosis due to CNS lupus
 
 


Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DRVVT, dilute Russell viper venom time; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
 

SLE is a multigenic disease. Rare single-gene defects confer high hazard ratios (HR) for SLE (5每25), including homozygous deficiencies of early components of complement (C1q,r,s; C2; C4) and a mutation in TREX1 on the X chromosome. In most genetically susceptible individuals, normal alleles of multiple genes each contribute a small amount to abnormal immune/inflammation/tissue damage responses; if enough predisposing variations are present, disease results. Thirty to forty predisposing genes (examples listed in Fig 319-1) have been identified in recent genome-wide association studies in thousands of Northern European white patients and controls. They confer HR for SLE of 1.5每3. Such relatively weak gene polymorphisms that increase risk for SLE can be classified by their potential role in pathogenesis. Predisposing, antigen-presenting human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-molecules are most commonly found, in multiple ethnic groups (HLA DRB1 *0301 and *1501, as well as multiple genes across the 120-gene region). Other genetic factors in whites include innate immunity pathway gene polymorphisms, especially associated with interferon alpha (STAT4, IRF5, IRAK1. TNFAIP3, PTPN22), genes in lymphocyte signaling pathways (PTPN22, PDCD-1, Ox40L, BANK-1, LYN, BLK), genes that affect clearance of apoptotic cells or immune complexes (C1q, FCRG IIA and IIIA, CRP, ITGAM), and genes that influence neutrophil adherence (ITGAM), and endothelial cell function (TREX-1). Some polymorphisms influence clinical manifestations; such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of STAT 4 that associate with severe disease, anti-DNA, nephritis, and anti-phospholipid syndrome (Chap. 320), and an allele of FCGRIIA encoding a receptor that binds immune complexes poorly and predisposes to nephritis. Some gene effects are in promoter regions (e.g., IL-10) and others are conferred by copy numbers (e.g., C4A). In addition to genome-encoded susceptibility and protective genes, the influence of certain micro (mi) RNAs on gene transcription, as well as posttranscriptional epigenetic modification of DNA, which is hypomethylated in SLE, also contribute to disease susceptibility.

Some genepolymorphisms contribute to several autoimmune diseases, such as STAT4 and CTLA4. All these gene polymorphisms/transcription/epigenetic combinations influence immune responses to the external and internal environment; when such responses are too high and/or too prolonged and/or inadequately regulated, autoimmune disease results.

Female sex is permissive for SLE with evidence for hormone effects, genes on the X chromosome, and epigenetic differences between genders playing a role. Females of many mammalian species make higher antibody responses than males. Women exposed to estrogen-containing oral contraceptives or hormone replacement have an increased risk of developing SLE (1.2每2-fold). Estradiol binds to receptors on T and B lymphocytes, increasing activation and survival of those cells, thus favoring prolonged immune responses. Genes on the X chromosome that influence SLE, such as TREX-1, may play a role in gender predisposition〞possibly because some genes on the second X in females are not silent. People with XXY karyotype (Klinefelter's syndrome) have a significantly increased risk for SLE.

Several environmental stimuli may influence SLE (Fig. 319-1). Exposure to ultraviolet light causes flares of SLE in approximately 70% of patients, possibly by increasing apoptosis in skin cells or by altering DNA and intracellular proteins to make them antigenic. It is likely that some infections induce a normal immune response that matures to contain some T and B cells that recognize self-antigens; such cells are not appropriately regulated, and autoantibody production occurs. Most SLE patients have autoantibodies for 3 years or more before the first symptoms of disease, suggesting that regulation controls the degree of autoimmunity for years before quantities and qualities of autoantibodies and pathogenic B and T cells cause clinical disease. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) may be one infectious agent that can trigger SLE in susceptible individuals. Children and adults with SLE are more likely to be infected by EBV than age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched controls. EBV contains amino acid sequences that mimic sequences on human spliceosomes (RNA/protein antigens) often recognized by autoantibodies in people with SLE. Current tobacco smoking increases risk for SLE [odds ratio (OR) 1.5]. Prolonged occupational exposure to silica (e.g., inhalation of soap powder dust) increases risk (OR 4.3) in black women. Thus, interplay between genetic susceptibility, environment, gender, and abnormal immune responses results in autoimmunity (Chap. 318).
 
Pathology

In SLE, biopsies of affected skin show deposition of Ig at the dermal-epidermal junction (DEJ), injury to basal keratinocytes, and inflammation dominated by T lymphocytes in the DEJ and around blood vessels and dermal appendages. Clinically unaffected skin may also show Ig deposition at the DEJ.

In renal biopsies, the pattern and severity of injury are important in diagnosis and in selecting the best therapy. Many clinical studies of lupus nephritis have used the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of lupus nephritis. However, the International Society of Nephrology (ISN) and the Renal Pathology Society (RPS) have published a newer, similar classification (Table 319-2) that is replacing WHO standards. An advantage of the ISN/RPS classification is the addition of "a" for active and "c" for chronic changes, giving the physician information regarding the potential reversibility of disease. All the classification systems focus on glomerular disease, although the presence of tubular interstitial and vascular disease is important to clinical outcomes. In general, class III and IV disease, as well as class V accompanied by III or IV disease, should be treated with aggressive immunosuppression if possible, because there is a high risk for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) if patients are untreated or undertreated. Treatment for lupus nephritis is not recommended in patients with class I or II disease or with extensive irreversible changes. In children, a diagnosis of SLE can be established on the basis of renal histology without meeting additional diagnostic criteria (Table 319-3).

Table 319-2 Classification of Lupus Nephritis (International Society of Nephrology and Renal Pathology Society)

 
 
Class I: Minimal Mesangial Lupus Nephritis

Normal glomeruli by light microscopy, but mesangial immune deposits by immunofluorescence.

Class II: Mesangial Proliferative Lupus Nephritis

Purely mesangial hypercellularity of any degree or mesangial matrix expansion by light microscopy, with mesangial immune deposits. A few isolated subepithelial or subendothelial deposits may be visible by immunofluorescence or electron microscopy, but not by light microscopy.

Class III: Focal Lupus Nephritis

Active or inactive focal, segmental or global endo- or extracapillary glomerulonephritis involving <50% of all glomeruli, typically with focal subendothelial immune deposits, with or without mesangial alterations.

    Class III (A): Active lesions〞focal proliferative lupus nephritis

     Class III (A/C): Active and chronic lesions〞focal proliferative and sclerosing lupus nephritis

     Class III (C): Chronic inactive lesions with glomerular scars〞focal sclerosing lupus nephritis

Class IV: Diffuse Lupus Nephritis

Active or inactive diffuse, segmental or global endo- or extracapillary glomerulonephritis involving 50% of all glomeruli, typically with diffuse subendothelial immune deposits, with or without mesangial alterations. This class is divided into diffuse segmental (IV-S) lupus nephritis when 50% of the involved glomeruli have segmental lesions, and diffuse global (IV-G) lupus nephritis when 50% of the involved glomeruli have global lesions. Segmental is defined as a glomerular lesion that involves less than one-half of the glomerular tuft. This class includes cases with diffuse wire loop deposits but with little or no glomerular proliferation.

     Class IV-S (A): Active lesions〞diffuse segmental proliferative lupus nephritis

     Class IV-G (A): Active lesions〞diffuse global proliferative lupus nephritis

     Class IV-S (A/C): Active and chronic lesions〞diffuse segmental proliferative and sclerosing lupus nephritis

     Class IV-G (A/C): Active and chronic lesions〞diffuse global proliferative and sclerosing lupus nephritis

     Class IV-S (C): Chronic inactive lesions with scars〞diffuse segmental sclerosing lupus nephritis

     Class IV-G (C): Chronic inactive lesions with scars〞diffuse global sclerosing lupus nephritis

Class V: Membranous Lupus Nephritis

Global or segmental subepithelial immune deposits or their morphologic sequelae by light microscopy and by immunofluorescence or electron microscopy, with or without mesangial alterations. Class V lupus nephritis may occur in combination with class III or IV, in which case both will be diagnosed. Class V lupus nephritis may show advanced sclerosis.

Class VI: Advanced Sclerotic Lupus Nephritis

90% of glomeruli globally sclerosed without residual activity.
 
 


Note: Indicate and grade (mild, moderate, severe) tubular atrophy, interstitial inflammation and fibrosis, severity of arteriosclerosis or other vascular lesions.

Source: JJ Weening et al: Kidney Int 65:521, 2004. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd., Copyright 2004.
 

Histologic abnormalities in blood vessels may also determine therapy. Patterns of vasculitis are not specific for SLE but may indicate active disease: leukocytoclastic vasculitis is most common (Chap. 326).

Lymph node biopsies are usually performed to rule out infection or malignancies. In SLE, they show nonspecific diffuse chronic inflammation.
 
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of SLE is based on characteristic clinical features and autoantibodies. Current criteria for classification are listed in Table 319-3, and an algorithm for diagnosis and initial therapy is shown in Fig. 319-2. The criteria are intended for confirming the diagnosis of SLE in patients included in studies; the author uses them in individual patients for estimating the probability that a disease is SLE. Any combination of 4 of 11 criteria, well documented at any time during an individual's history, makes it likely that the patient has SLE. (Specificity and sensitivity are 95% and 75%, respectively.) In many patients, criteria accrue over time. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are positive in >98% of patients during the course of disease; repeated negative tests suggest that the diagnosis is not SLE, unless other autoantibodies are present (Fig. 319-2). High-titer IgG antibodies to double-stranded DNA and antibodies to the Sm antigen are both specific for SLE and, therefore, favor the diagnosis in the presence of compatible clinical manifestations. The presence in an individual of multiple autoantibodies without clinical symptoms should not be considered diagnostic for SLE, although such persons are at increased risk.

Table 319-3 Diagnostic Criteria for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

 
 
Malar rash
 Fixed erythema, flat or raised, over the malar eminences
 
Discoid rash
 Erythematous circular raised patches with adherent keratotic scaling and follicular plugging; atrophic scarring may occur
 
Photosensitivity
 Exposure to ultraviolet light causes rash
 
Oral ulcers
 Includes oral and nasopharyngeal ulcers, observed by physician
 
Arthritis
 Nonerosive arthritis of two or more peripheral joints, with tenderness, swelling, or effusion
 
Serositis
 Pleuritis or pericarditis documented by ECG or rub or evidence of effusion
 
Renal disorder
 Proteinuria >0.5 g/d or 3+, or cellular casts
 
Neurologic disorder
 Seizures or psychosis without other causes
 
Hematologic disorder
 Hemolytic anemia or leukopenia (<4000/L) or lymphopenia (<1500/L) or thrombocytopenia(<100,000/L) in the absence of offending drugs
 
Immunologic disorder
 Anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm, and/or anti-phospholipid
 
Antinuclear antibodies
 An abnormal titer of ANA by immunofluorescence or an equivalent assay at any point in time in the absence of drugs known to induce ANAs
 
 


If 4 of these criteria, well documented, are present at any time in a patient's history, the diagnosis is likely to be SLE. Specificity is 95%; sensitivity is 75%.

Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibodies; dsDNA, double-strand DNA; ECG, electrocardiography.

Source: Criteria published by EM Tan et al: Arthritis Rheum 25:1271, 1982; update by MC Hochberg, Arthritis Rheum 40:1725, 1997.
 
Figure 319-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for diagnosis and initial therapy of SLE. ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CBC, complete blood count.
 
 
 
Interpretation of Clinical Manifestations

When a diagnosis of SLE is made, it is important to establish the severity and potential reversibility of the illness and to estimate the possible consequences of various therapeutic interventions. In the following sections, descriptions of some disease manifestations begin with relatively mild problems and progress to those more life-threatening.
 
Overview and Systemic Manifestations

At its onset, SLE may involve one or several organ systems; over time, additional manifestations may occur (Tables 319-3 and 319-4). Most of the autoantibodies characteristic of each person are present at the time clinical manifestations appear (Tables 319-1 and 319-3). Severity of SLE varies from mild and intermittent to severe and fulminant. Most patients experience exacerbations interspersed with periods of relative quiescence; permanent complete remissions (absence of symptoms with no treatment) are rare. Systemic symptoms, particularly fatigue and myalgias/arthralgias, are present most of the time. Severe systemic illness requiring glucocorticoid therapy can occur with fever, prostration, weight loss, and anemia with or without other organ-targeted manifestations.

Table 319-4 Clinical Manifestations of SLE and Prevalence over the Entire Course of Disease*

 
 
Manifestation
 Prevalence, %
 
Systemic: Fatigue, malaise, fever, anorexia, weight loss
 95
 
Musculoskeletal
 95
 
    Arthralgias/myalgias
 95
 
    Nonerosive polyarthritis
 60
 
    Hand deformities
 10
 
    Myopathy/myositis
 25/5
 
    Ischemic necrosis of bone
 15
 
Cutaneous
 80
 
    Photosensitivity
 70
 
    Malar rash
 50
 
    Oral ulcers
 40
 
    Alopecia
 40
 
    Discoid rash
 20
 
    Vasculitis rash
 20
 
    Other (e.g., urticaria, subacute cutaneous lupus)
 15
 
Hematologic
 85
 
    Anemia (chronic disease)
 70
 
    Leukopenia (<4000/L)
 65
 
    Lymphopenia (<1500/L)
 50
 
    Thrombocytopenia (100,000/L)
 15
 
    Lymphadenopathy
 15
 
    Splenomegaly
 15
 
    Hemolytic anemia
 10
 
Neurologic
 60
 
    Cognitive disorder
 50
 
    Mood disorder
 40
 
    Headache
 25
 
    Seizures
 20
 
    Mono-, polyneuropathy
 15
 
    Stroke, TIA
 10
 
    Acute confusional state or movement disorder
 2每5
 
    Aseptic meningitis, myelopathy
 <1
 
Cardiopulmonary
 60
 
    Pleurisy, pericarditis, effusions
 30每50
 
    Myocarditis, endocarditis
 10
 
    Lupus pneumonitis
 10
 
    Coronary artery disease
 10
 
    Interstitial fibrosis
 5
 
    Pulmonary hypertension, ARDS, hemorrhage
 <5
 
    Shrinking lung syndrome
 <5
 
Renal
 30每50
 
    Proteinuria 500 mg/24 h, cellular casts
 30每50
 
    Nephrotic syndrome
 25
 
    End-stage renal disease
 5每10
 
Gastrointestinal
 40
 
    Nonspecific (nausea, mild pain, diarrhea)
 30
 
    Abnormal liver enzymes
 40
 
    Vasculitis
 5
 
Thrombosis
 15
 
    Venous
 10
 
    Arterial
 5
 
Ocular
 15
 
    Sicca syndrome
 15
 
    Conjunctivitis, episcleritis
 10
 
    Vasculitis
 5
 
 


*Numbers indicate percent of patients who have the manifestation at some time during the course of illness.

Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
 

Musculoskeletal Manifestations

Most people with SLE have intermittent polyarthritis, varying from mild to disabling, characterized by soft tissue swelling and tenderness in joints, most commonly in hands, wrists, and knees. Joint deformities (hands and feet) develop in only 10% of patients. Erosions on joint x-rays are rare; their presence suggests a non-lupus inflammatory arthropathy such as rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 321); some experts think that erosions can occur in SLE. If pain persists in a single joint, such as knee, shoulder, or hip, a diagnosis of ischemic necrosis of bone should be considered, particularly if there are no other manifestations of active SLE. The prevalence of ischemic necrosis of bone is increased in SLE, especially in patients treated with systemic glucocorticoids. Myositis with clinical muscle weakness, elevated creatine kinase levels, positive MRI scan, and muscle necrosis and inflammation on biopsy can occur, although most patients have myalgias without frank myositis. Glucocorticoid therapies (commonly) and antimalarial therapies (rarely) can also cause muscle weakness; these adverse effects must be distinguished from active disease.

Cutaneous Manifestations

Lupus dermatitis can be classified as discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), systemic rash, subacutecutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE), or "other." Discoid lesions are roughly circular with slightly raised, scaly hyperpigmented erythematous rims and depigmented, atrophic centers in which all dermal appendages are permanently destroyed. Lesions can be disfiguring, particularly on the face and scalp. Treatment consists primarily of topical or locally injected glucocorticoids and systemic antimalarials. Only 5% of people with DLE have SLE (although one-half have positive ANA); however, among individuals with SLE, as many as 20% have DLE. The most common SLE rash is a photosensitive, slightly raised erythema, occasionally scaly, on the face (particularly the cheeks and nose〞the "butterfly" rash), ears, chin, V region of the neck and chest, upper back, and extensor surfaces of the arms. Worsening of this rash often accompanies flare of systemic disease. SCLE consists of scaly red patches similar to psoriasis, or circular flat red-rimmed lesions. Patients with these manifestations are exquisitely photosensitive; most have antibodies to Ro (SS-A). Other SLE rashes include recurring urticaria, lichen planus每like dermatitis, bullae, and panniculitis ("lupus profundus"). Rashes can be minor or severe; they may be the major disease manifestation. Small, painful ulcerations on the oral or nasal mucosa are common in SLE; the lesions resemble aphthous ulcers.

Renal Manifestations

Nephritis is usually the most serious manifestation of SLE, particularly since nephritis and infection are the leading causes of mortality in the first decade of disease. Since nephritis is asymptomatic in most lupus patients, urinalysis should be ordered in any person suspected of having SLE. The classification of lupus nephritis is primarily histologic (see "Pathology," above, and Table 319-2). Renal biopsy is useful in planning current and near-future therapies. Patients with dangerous proliferative forms of glomerular damage (ISN III and IV) usually have microscopic hematuria and proteinuria (>500 mg per 24 h); approximately one-half develop nephrotic syndrome, and most develop hypertension. If diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis (DPGN) is untreated, virtually all patients develop ESRD within 2 years of diagnosis. Therefore, aggressive immunosuppression is indicated (usually systemic glucocorticoids plus a cytotoxic drug), unless 90% of glomeruli have irreversible damage (Fig. 319-2, Table 319-5). Blacks are more likely to develop ESRD than are whites, even with the most current therapies. Overall in the United States, 20% of individuals with lupus DPGN die or develop ESRD within 10 years of diagnosis. Such individuals require aggressive control of SLE and of the complications of renal disease and of therapy. A small proportion of SLE patients with proteinuria (usually nephrotic) have membranous glomerular changes without proliferation on renal biopsy. Their outcome is better than for those with DPGN. Lupus nephritis tends to be an ongoing disease, with flares requiring retreatment or intensification of treatment over many years. For most people with lupus nephritis, accelerated atherosclerosis becomes important after several years of disease; attention must be given to control of systemic inflammation, blood pressure, hyperlipidemia, and hyperglycemia.

Table 319-5 Medications for the Management of SLE

 
 
Medication
 Dose Range
 Drug Interactions
 Serious or Common Adverse Effects
 
NSAIDs, salicylates (Ecotrina and St. Joseph's aspirina approved by FDA for use in SLE)
 Doses toward upper limit of recommended range usually required
 A2R/ACE inhibitors, glucocorticoids, fluconazole, methotrexate, thiazides
 NSAIDs: Higher incidence of aseptic meningitis, transaminitis, decreased renal function, vasculitis of skin; entire class, especially COX-2-specific inhibitors, may increase risk for myocardial infarction

Salicylates: ototoxicity, tinnitus

Both: GI events and symptoms, allergic reactions, dermatitis, dizziness, acute renal failure, edema, hypertension
 
Topical glucocorticoids
 Mid-potency for face; mid to high potency other areas
 None known
 Atrophy of skin, contact dermatitis, folliculitis, hypopigmentation, infection
 
Topical sunscreens
 SPF 15 at least; 30+ preferred
 None known
 Contact dermatitis
 
Hydroxychloroquinea (quinacrine can be added or substituted)
 200每400 mg qd (100 mg qd)
 None known
 Retinal damage, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, ataxia, cardiomyopathy, dizziness, myopathy, ototoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, pigmentation of skin, seizures, thrombocytopenia. Use in pregnancy may be acceptable. Pregnancy category DQuinacrine usually causes diffuse yellow skin coloration
 
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone)
 200 mg qd
 Unclear
 Acne, menstrual irregularities, high serum levels of testosterone
 
Methotrexate (for dermatitis, arthritis)
 10每25 mg once a week, PO or SC, with folic acid; decrease dose if CrCl <60 mL/min
 Acitretin, leflunomide, NSAIDs and salicylates, penicillins, probenecid, sulfonamides, trimethoprim
 Anemia, bone marrow suppression, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, infections, neurotoxicity, pulmonary fibrosis, pneumonitis, severe dermatitis, seizures. Teratogenic. Pregnancy category X
 
Glucocorticoids, orala (several specific brands are approved by FDA for use in SLE)
 Prednisone, prednisolone: 0.5每1 mg/kg per day for severe SLE0.07每0.3 mg/kg per day or qod for milder disease
 A2R/ACE antagonists, antiarrhythmics class III, 2, cyclosporine, NSAIDs and salicylates, phenothiazines, phenytoins, quinolones, rifampin, risperidone, thiazides, sulfonylureas, warfarin
 Infection, VZV infection, hypertension, hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, acne, allergic reactions, anxiety, aseptic necrosis of bone, cushingoid changes, CHF, fragile skin, insomnia, menstrual irregularities, mood swings, osteoporosis, psychosis
 
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate, IVa (FDA approved for lupus nephritis)
 For severe disease, 1 g IV qd x 3 days
 As for oral glucocorticoids
 As for oral glucocorticoids (if used repeatedly); anaphylaxis
 
Cyclophosphamideb,c?IV
 7每25 mg/kg q month x 6; consider mesna administration with dose
 Allopurinol, bone marrow suppressants, colony-stimulating factors, doxorubicin, rituximab, succinylcholine, zidovudine
 Infection, VZV infection, bone marrow suppression, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhagic cystitis (less with IV), carcinoma of the bladder, alopecia, nausea, diarrhea, malaise, malignancy, ovarian and testicular failure. Teratogenic. Pregnancy category D
 
Mycophenolate mofetilb or mycophenolic acid
 MMF: 2每3 g/d PO; max 1 g bid if CrCl <25 mL/min.MPA: 360每1080 mg bid. Caution if CrCl <25 mL/min
 Acyclovir, antacids, azathioprine, bile acid每binding resins, ganciclovir, iron, salts, probenecid, oral contraceptives
 Infection, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, lymphoma, lymphoproliferative disorders, malignancy, alopecia, cough, diarrhea, fever, GI symptoms, headache, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, hypokalemia, insomnia, peripheral edema, transaminitis, tremor, rash. Teratogenic. Pregnancy category D
 
Azathioprineb
 2每3 mg/kg per day PO; decrease frequency of dose if CrCl <50 mL/min
 ACE inhibitors, allopurinol, bone marrow suppressants, interferons, mycophenolate mofetil, rituximab, warfarin, zidovudine
 Infection, VZV infection, bone marrow suppression, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, malignancy, alopecia, fever, flulike illness, GI symptoms. Use in pregnancy may be acceptable. Pregnancy category D
 
Belimumab
 10 mg/kg i.v.
 wk 0,2,4 then monthly
 Infusion reactions Allergy Infections probable
 
Rituximab (for patients resistant to above therapies)
 375 mg/M2 q wk x 4 or 1 g q 2 wks x 2
 IVIg
 Infection (including PML), infusion reactions, headache, arrythmias, allergic responses. Pregnancy category C
 
Belimumab
 10 mg/kg i.v.
 IV Ig
 Infec
 
 


aIndicates medication is approved for use in SLE by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

bIndicates the medication has been used with glucocorticoids in the trials showing efficacy.

cSee text for low dose regimen.

Abbreviations: A2R, angiotensin 2 receptor; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CHF, congestive heart failure; CrCl, creatinine clearance; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastrointestinal; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; SPF, sun protection factor; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
 

Nervous System Manifestations

There are many central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system manifestations of SLE; in some patients these are the major cause of morbidity and mortality. It is useful to approach this diagnostically by asking first whether the symptoms result from SLE or another condition (such as infection in immunosuppressed individuals). If symptoms are related to SLE, it should be determined whether they are caused by a diffuse process (requiring immunosuppression) or vascular occlusive disease (requiring anticoagulation). The most common manifestation of diffuse CNS lupus is cognitive dysfunction, including difficulties with memory and reasoning. Headaches are also common. When excruciating, they often indicate SLE flare; when milder, they are difficult to distinguish from migraine or tension headaches. Seizures of any type may be caused by lupus; treatment often requires both antiseizure and immunosuppressive therapies. Psychosis can be the dominant manifestation of SLE; it must be distinguished from glucocorticoid-induced psychosis. The latter usually occurs in the first weeks of glucocorticoid therapy, at daily doses of 40 mg of prednisone or equivalent; psychosis resolves over several days after glucocorticoids are decreased or stopped. Myelopathy is not rare and is often disabling; rapid immunosuppressive therapy starting with glucocorticoids is standard of care.

Vascular Occlusions

The prevalence of transient ischemic attacks, strokes, and myocardial infarctions is increased in patients with SLE. These vascular events are increased in, but not exclusive to, SLE patients with antibodies to phospholipids (aPL). Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with hypercoagulability and acute thrombotic events, whereas chronic disease is associated with accelerated atherosclerosis (Chap. 320). Ischemia in the brain can be caused by focal occlusion (either noninflammatory or associated with vasculitis) or by embolization from carotid artery plaque or from fibrinous vegetations of Libman-Sacks endocarditis. Appropriate tests for aPL (see below) and for sources of emboli should be ordered in such patients to estimate the need for, intensity of, and duration of anti-inflammatory and/or anticoagulant therapies. In SLE, myocardial infarctions are primarily manifestations of accelerated atherosclerosis. The increased risk for vascular events is seven- to tenfold overall, and higher in women <45 years old with SLE. Characteristics associated with increased risk for atherosclerosis include older age, hypertension, dyslipidemia, dysfunctional proinflammatory high-density lipoproteins, repeated high scores for disease activity, high cumulative or daily doses of glucocorticoids, and high levels of homocysteine. When it is most likely that an event results from clotting, long-term anticoagulation is the therapy of choice. Two processes can occur at once〞vasculitis plus bland vascular occlusions〞in which case it is appropriate to treat with anticoagulation plus immunosuppression. Statin therapies reduce levels of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) in SLE patients; reduction of cardiac events by statins has been shown in SLE patients with renal transplants but not in other SLE cohorts to date.

Pulmonary Manifestations

The most common pulmonary manifestation of SLE is pleuritis with or without pleural effusion. This manifestation, when mild, may respond to treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); when more severe, patients require a brief course of glucocorticoid therapy. Pulmonary infiltrates also occur as a manifestation of active SLE and are difficult to distinguish from infection on imaging studies. Life-threatening pulmonary manifestations include interstitial inflammation leading to fibrosis, shrinking lung syndrome, and intra-alveolar hemorrhage; all of these probably require early aggressive immunosuppressive therapy as well as supportive care.

Cardiac Manifestations

Pericarditis is the most frequent cardiac manifestation; it usually responds to anti-inflammatory therapy and infrequently leads to tamponade. More serious cardiac manifestations are myocarditis and fibrinous endocarditis of Libman-Sacks. The endocardial involvement can lead to valvular insufficiencies, most commonly of the mitral or aortic valves, or to embolic events. It has not been proven that glucocorticoid or other immunosuppressive therapies lead to improvement of lupus myocarditis or endocarditis, but it is usual practice to administer a trial of high-dose steroids along with appropriate supportive therapy for heart failure, arrhythmia, or embolic events. As discussed above, patients with SLE are at increased risk for myocardial infarction, usually due to accelerated atherosclerosis, which probably results from immune attack, chronic inflammation, and/or chronic oxidative damage to arteries.

Hematologic Manifestations

The most frequent hematologic manifestation of SLE is anemia, usually normochromic normocytic, reflecting chronic illness. Hemolysis can be rapid in onset and severe, requiring high-dose glucocorticoid therapy, which is effective in most patients. Leukopenia is also common and almost always consists of lymphopenia, not granulocytopenia; this rarely predisposes to infections and by itself usually does not require therapy. Thrombocytopenia may be a recurring problem. If platelet counts are >40,000/L and abnormal bleeding is absent, therapy may not be required. High-dose glucocorticoid therapy (e.g., 1 mg/kg per day of prednisone or equivalent) is usually effective for the first few episodes of severe thrombocytopenia. Recurring or prolonged hemolytic anemia or thrombocytopenia, or disease requiring an unacceptably high dose of daily glucocorticoids, should be treated with an additional strategy (see "Treatment," below).

Gastrointestinal Manifestations

Nausea, sometimes with vomiting and diarrhea, can be manifestations of an SLE flare, as can diffuse abdominal pain probably caused by autoimmune peritonitis and/or intestinal vasculitis. Increases in serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) are common when SLE is active. These manifestations usually improve promptly during systemic glucocorticoid therapy. Vasculitis involving the intestine may be life-threatening; perforations, ischemia, bleeding, and sepsis are frequent complications. Aggressive immunosuppressive therapy with high-dose glucocorticoids is recommended for short-term control; evidence of recurrence is an indication for additional therapies.

Ocular Manifestations

Sicca syndrome (Sj?gren's syndrome; Chap. 324) and nonspecific conjunctivitis are common in SLE and rarely threaten vision. In contrast, retinal vasculitis and optic neuritis are serious manifestations: blindness can develop over days to weeks. Aggressive immunosuppression is recommended, although there are no controlled trials to prove effectiveness. Complications of glucocorticoid therapy include cataracts (common) and glaucoma.
 
Laboratory Tests

Laboratory tests serve (1) to establish or rule out the diagnosis; (2) to follow the course of disease, particularly to suggest that a flare is occurring or organ damage is developing; and (3) to identify adverse effects of therapies.

Tests for Autoantibodies (Tables 319-1 and 319-3)

Diagnostically, the most important autoantibodies to detect are ANA as the test is positive in >95% of patients, usually at the onset of symptoms. A few patients develop ANA within 1 year of symptom onset; repeated testing may thus be useful. ANA-negative lupus exists but is rare in adults and is usually associated with other autoantibodies (anti-Ro or anti-DNA). High-titer IgG antibodies to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (but not to single-stranded DNA) are specific for SLE. There is no international standardized test for ANA; variability between different service laboratories is high. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and immunofluorescent reactions of sera with the dsDNA in the flagellate Crithidia luciliae have 60% sensitivity for SLE; identification of high-avidity anti-dsDNA in the Farr assay is not as sensitive but may correlate better with risk for nephritis. Titers of anti-dsDNA vary over time. In some patients, increases in quantities of anti-dsDNA herald a flare, particularly of nephritis or vasculitis, especially when associated with declining levels of C3 or C4 complement. Antibodies to Sm are also specific for SLE and assist in diagnosis; anti-Sm antibodies do not usually correlate with disease activity or clinical manifestations. aPL are not specific for SLE, but their presence fulfills one classification criterion, and they identify patients at increased risk for venous or arterial clotting, thrombocytopenia, and fetal loss. There are two widely accepted tests that measure different antibodies (anticardiolipin and the lupus anticoagulant): (1) ELISA for anticardiolipin (internationally standardized with good reproducibility) and (2) a sensitive phospholipid-based activated prothrombin time such as the dilute Russell venom viper test. Some centers also recommend measurement of antibodies to 2 glycoprotein 1, a serum protein cofactor that is the target of most antibodies to cardiolipin and some lupus anticoagulants. The higher the titers of IgG anticardiolipin (>40 IU is considered high), and the greater the number of different aPL that are detected, the greater is the risk for a clinical episode of clotting. Quantities of aPL may vary markedly over time; repeated testing is justified if clinical manifestations of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) appear (Chap. 320). To classify a patient as having APS, with or without SLE, by international criteria requires the presence of 1 clotting episode and/or repeated fetal losses plus at least two positive tests for aPL, at least 12 weeks apart; however, many patients with anti-phospholipid syndrome do not meet these stringent criteria, which are intended for inclusion of patients into studies.

An additional autoantibody test with predictive value (not used for diagnosis) detects anti-Ro, which indicates increased risk for neonatal lupus, sicca syndrome, and SCLE. Women with child-bearing potential and SLE should be screened for aPL and anti-Ro.

Standard Tests for Diagnosis

Screening tests for complete blood count, platelet count, and urinalysis may detect abnormalities that contribute to the diagnosis and influence management decisions.

Tests for Following Disease Course

It is useful to follow tests that indicate the status of organ involvement known to be present during SLE flares. These might include urinalysis for hematuria and proteinuria, hemoglobin levels, platelet counts, and serum levels of creatinine or albumin. There is great interest in identification of additional markers of disease activity. Candidates include levels of anti-DNA antibodies, several components of complement (C3 is most widely available), activated complement products (including those that bind to the C4d receptor on erythrocytes), IFN-inducible gene expression in peripheral blood cells, soluble IL-2 levels, and urinary levels of TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), or monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1). None is uniformly agreed upon as a reliable indicator of flare or of response to therapeutic interventions. The physician should determine for each patient whether certain laboratory test changes predict flare. If so, altering therapy in response to these changes may be advisable (30 mg of prednisone daily for 2 weeks has been shown to prevent flares in patients with rising anti-DNA plus falling complement). In addition, given the increased prevalence of atherosclerosis in SLE, it is advisable to follow the recommendations of the National Cholesterol Education Program for testing and treatment, including scoring of SLE as an independent risk factor, similar to diabetes mellitus.

Treatment: Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

There is no cure for SLE, and complete sustained remissions are rare. Therefore, the physician should plan to induce improvement of acute flares and then maintain improvements with strategies that suppress symptoms to an acceptable level and prevent organ damage. Usually patients will endure some adverse effects of medications. Therapeutic choices depend on (1) whether disease manifestations are life-threatening or likely to cause organ damage, justifying aggressive therapies; (2) whether manifestations are potentially reversible; and (3) the best approaches to preventing complications of disease and its treatments. Therapies, doses, and adverse effects are listed in Table 319-5.

Conservative Therapies for Management of Non-Life-Threatening Disease

Among patients with fatigue, pain, and autoantibodies of SLE, but without major organ involvement, management can be directed to suppression of symptoms. Analgesics and antimalarials are mainstays. NSAIDs are useful analgesics/anti-inflammatories, particularly for arthritis/arthralgias. However, two major issues currently indicate caution in using NSAIDs. First, SLE patients compared with the general population are at increased risk for NSAID-induced aseptic meningitis, elevated serum transaminases, hypertension, and renal dysfunction. Second, all NSAIDs, particularly those that inhibit cyclooxygenase-2 specifically, may increase risk for myocardial infarction. Acetaminophen to control pain may be a good strategy, but NSAIDs are more effective in some patients. The relative hazards of NSAIDs compared with low-dose glucocorticoid therapy have not been established. Antimalarials (hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and quinacrine) often reduce dermatitis, arthritis, and fatigue. A randomized, placebo-controlled, prospective trial has shown that withdrawal of hydroxychloroquine results in increased numbers of disease flares. Hydroxychloroquine reduces accrual of tissue damage over time. Because of potential retinal toxicity, patients receiving antimalarials should undergo ophthalmologic examinations annually. A placebo-controlled prospective trial suggests that administration of dehydroepiandrosterone may reduce disease activity. If quality of life is inadequate in spite of these conservative measures, treatment with low doses of systemic glucocorticoids may be necessary. Dermatitis should be managed with topical sunscreens, antimalarials, and topical glucocorticoids and/or tacrolimus. Since recent data show that mycophenolate mofetil, and belimumab (added to background therapies of glucocorticoids-plus-antimalarial-plus immunosuppressive) reduce disease activity in nonrenal manifestations of SLE, it is reasonable to consider these interventions in patients with persistent disease activity despite standard therapies. Azathioprine or methotrexate may also be considered for such patients (Table 319-5).

Life-Threatening SLE: Proliferative Forms of Lupus Nephritis

The mainstay of treatment for any inflammatory life-threatening or organ-threatening manifestations of SLE is systemic glucocorticoids (0.5每1 mg/kg per day PO or 1000 mg of methylprednisolone sodium succinate IV daily for 3 days followed by 0.5每1 mg/kg of daily prednisone or equivalent). Evidence that glucocorticoid therapy is lifesaving comes from retrospective studies from the predialysis era; survival is significantly better in people with DPGN treated with high-dose daily glucocorticoids (40每60 mg of prednisone daily for 4每6 months) versus lower doses. Currently, high doses are recommended for much shorter periods; recent trials of interventions for severe SLE employ 4每6 weeks of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day of prednisone or equivalent. Thereafter, doses are tapered as rapidly as the clinical situation permits, usually to a maintenance dose varying from 5每10 mg of prednisone or equivalent per day or from 10每20 mg every other day. Most patients with an episode of severe lupus require many years of maintenance therapy with low-dose glucocorticoids, which can be increased to prevent or treat disease flares. Frequent attempts to gradually reduce the glucocorticoid requirement are recommended since virtually everyone develops important adverse effects (Table 319-5). Prospective controlled trials in active lupus nephritis show that induction of improvement by administration of high doses of glucocorticoids (1000 mg of ethylprednisolone daily for 3 days) by IV routes compared with daily oral routes shortens the time to maximal improvement by a few weeks but ultimately improvements are similar. It has become standard practice to initiate therapy for active, potentially life-threatening SLE with high-dose IV glucocorticoid pulses, based on studies in lupus nephritis. This approach must be tempered by safety considerations, such as the presence of conditions adversely affected by glucocorticoids (infection, hyperglycemia, hypertension, osteoporosis, etc.).

Cytotoxic/immunosuppressive agents added to glucocorticoids are recommended to treat serious SLE. Almost all prospective controlled trials in SLE involving cytotoxic agents have been conducted in combination with glucocorticoids in patients with lupus nephritis. Therefore, the following recommendations apply to treatment of nephritis. Either cyclophosphamide (an alkylating agent) or mycophenolate mofetil (a relatively lymphocyte-specific inhibitor of inosine monophosphatase and therefore of purine synthesis) is an acceptable choice for induction of improvement in severely ill patients; azathioprine (a purine analogue and cycle-specific antimetabolite) is probably less effective but may be used if the other immunosuppressives are not tolerated or not available. In patients whose renal biopsies show ISN grade III or IV disease, early treatment with combinations of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide reduces progression to ESRD and improves survival; this difference can be seen after approximately 5 years of therapy. Shorter-term studies with glucocorticoids plus mycophenolate mofetil (prospective randomized trials of 6 months) show that this regimen is similar to cyclophosphamide in inducing improvement. Comparisons are complicated by effects of race, since higher proportions of blacks (and other non-Asian, non-white races) respond to mycophenolate than to cyclophosphamide, whereas similar proportions of whites and Asians respond to each drug. Regarding toxicity, diarrhea is more common with mycophenolate while herpetic infections, amenorrhea, and leukopenia are more common with cyclophosphamide; rates of severe infections and death are similar in some studies, although mycophenolate is less toxic than cyclophosphamide in others. Therapeutic responses to cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate begin 3每16 weeks after treatment is initiated, whereas glucocorticoid responses may begin within 24 h. For maintenance therapy, mycophenolate may be better than azathioprine in preventing flares and progression of lupus nephritis; either drug is acceptable and both are safer than cyclophosphamide. If cyclophosphamide is used for induction therapy, the recommended "National Institutes of Health (NIH)" dose (based on clinical trials at that institution) is 500每750 mg/m2 intravenously, monthly for 6 months, followed by maintenance with daily oral mycophenolate or azathioprine. The incidence of ovarian failure, a common effect of cyclophosphamide therapy, can be reduced by treatment with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (e.g., Lupron 3.75 mg IM) prior to each monthly cyclophosphamide dose. Since cyclophosphamide has many adverse effects and is generally disliked by patients, alternative approaches using lower doses have been tested. European studies have shown that IV cyclophosphamide at doses of 500 mg every 2 weeks for six doses ("low dose") is as effective as the recommended higher dose given for a longer duration in the NIH regimen ("high dose"). All patients were maintained on azathioprine after the course of cyclophosphamide was completed. Ten-year follow-up has shown no differences in the high-dose and low-dose groups (death or ESRD in 9每20% in each group). The majority of the European patients were white; it is not clear that the data apply to U.S. populations. Patients with high serum creatinine levels [e.g., 265 mol/L (3 mg/dL)] many months in duration and high chronicity scores on renal biopsy are not likely to respond to immunosuppression. In general, it may be better to induce improvement in a black or Hispanic patient with proliferative glomerulonephritis with mycophenolate (2每3 g daily) rather than with cyclophosphamide, with the option to switch if no evidence of response is detectable after 3每6 months of treatment. For whites and Asians, induction with either mycophenolate or cyclophosphamide is acceptable. Cyclophosphamide may be discontinued when it is clear that a patient is improving; the number of SLE flares is reduced by maintenance therapy with mycophenolate (1.5每2 g daily) or azathioprine (2 mg/kg/d). Both cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate are potentially teratogenic; patients should be off either medication for at least 3 months before attempting to conceive. If azathioprine is used either for induction or maintenance therapy, patients may be prescreened for homozygous deficiency of the TMPT enzyme (which is required to metabolize the 6-mercaptopurine product of azathioprine) since they are at higher risk for bone marrow suppression.

Good improvement occurs in 80% of lupus nephritis patients receiving either cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate at 1每2 years of follow-up. However, at least 50% of these individuals have flares of nephritis over the next 5 years, and retreatment is required; such individuals are more likely to progress to ESRD. Long-term outcome of lupus nephritis to most interventions is better in whites than in blacks. Chlorambucil is an alkylating agent that can be substituted for cyclophosphamide; the risk of irreversible bone marrow suppression may be greater with this agent. Methotrexate (a folinic acid antagonist) may have a role in the treatment of arthritis and dermatitis, but probably not in nephritis or other life-threatening disease. Small controlled trials (in Asia) of leflunomide, a relatively lymphocyte-specific pyrimidine antagonist licensed for use in rheumatoid arthritis, have suggested it can suppress disease activity in some SLE patients. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus, which inhibit production of IL-2 and T lymphocyte functions, are used by some clinicians particularly for membranous lupus nephritis. Since they have potential nephrotoxicity, but little bone marrow toxicity, the author uses them for periods of only a few months in patients with steroid-resistant cytopenias of SLE, or in steroid-resistant patients who have developed bone marrow suppression from standard cytotoxic agents.

Use of biologicals directed against B cells for active SLE is under intense study. Use of anti-CD20 (Rituximab), particularly in those patients with SLE who are resistant to the more standard combination therapies discussed above, is controversial. Several open trials have shown efficacy in a majority of such patients〞both for nephritis and for extrarenal lupus. However, recent prospective placebo-controlled randomized trials did not show a difference between anti-CD20 and placebo when added to standard combination therapies. In contrast, recent trials of anti-BLyS (belimumab, directed against the ligand of the BLyS/BAFF receptor on B cells that promotes B cell survival and differentiation to plasmablasts) showed a small, but statistically significant, better suppression of disease activity in comparison to placebo, when added to standard combhnation therapies. The US FDA has approved belimumab for treatment of SLE: it has not been studied in active nephritis or central nervous system lupus.

It is important to note that there are few if any randomized, controlled, prospective studies of any agents in life-threatening SLE that do not include nephritis. Therefore, use of glucocorticoids plus byclophosphamide or mycophenolate in other life-threatening conditions is based on studies in nephritis.

Special Conditions in SLE that May Require Additional or Different Therapies

Crescentic Lupus Nephritis

The presence of cellular or fibrotic crescents in glomeruli with proliferative glomerulonephritis (INS-IVG)] indicates a worse prognosis than in patients without this feature. There are few large prospective controlled trials showing efficacy of cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate, or cyclosporine in such cases. Most authorities currently recommend that cyclophosphamide in the NIH-recommended high dose or high doses of mycophenolate are the induction therapies of choice, in addition to glucocorticoids.

Membranous Lupus Nephritis

Most SLE patients with membranous (INS-V) nephritis also have proliferative changes and should be treated for proliferative disease; however, some have pure membranous changes. Treatment for this group is less well defined; recent prospective controlled trials suggest that alternate-day glucocorticoids plus cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate or cyclosporine are all effective in the majority of patients in reducing proteinuria; whether they preserve renal function over the lonf term is more controversial.

Pregnancy and Lupus

Fertility rates for men and women with SLE are probably normal. However, rate of fetal loss is increased (approximately two- to threefold) in women with SLE. Fetal demise is higher in mothers with high disease activity, antiphospholipid antibodies, and/or active nephritis. Suppression of disease activity can be achieved by administration of systemic glucocorticoids. A placental enzyme, 11--dehydrogenase 2, deactivates glucocorticoids; it is more effective in deactivating prednisone and prednisolone than the fluorinated glucocorticoids dexamethasone and betamethasone. Glucocorticoids are listed by the FDA as pregnancy category A (no evidence of teratogenicity in human studies); cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and rituximab are listed as category C (may be teratogenic in animals but no good evidence in humans); azathioprine, hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclophosphamide are category D (there is evidence of teratogenicity in humans. but benefits might outweigh risks in certain situations); and methotrexate is category X (risks outweigh benefits). Therefore, active SLE in pregnant women should be controlled with prednisone/prednisolone at the lowest effective doses for the shortest time required. Adverse effects of prenatal glucocorticoid exposure (primarily betamethasone) on offspring may include low birth weight, developmental abnormalities in the CNS, and predilection toward adult metabolic syndrome. It is likely that each of these glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive medications get into breast milk, at least in low levels; patients should consider not breast-feeding if they need therapy for SLE. In SLE patients with aPL (on at least two occasions) and prior fetal losses, treatment with heparin (usually low-molecular-weight) plus low-dose aspirin has been shown in prospective controlled trials to increase significantly the proportion of live births; however, a recent prospective trial showed no differences in fetal outcomes in women taking aspirin compared to those on aspirin plus low-molecular-weight heparin. An additional potential problem for the fetus is the presence of antibodies to Ro, sometimes associated with neonatal lupus consisting of rash and congenital heart block. The latter can be life-threatening; therefore, the presence of anti-Ro requires vigilant monitoring of fetal heart rates with prompt intervention (delivery if possible) if distress occurs. To date, treatments of mother to reverse established heart block in the fetus, newborn, or infant (other than insertion of a pacemaker) have not been successful. Women with SLE usually tolerate pregnancy without disease flares. However, a small proportion develops severe flares requiring aggressive glucocorticoid therapy or early delivery. Poor maternal outcomes are highest in women with active nephritis or irreversible organ damage in kidneys, brain, or heart.

Lupus and Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome (Chap. 20)

Patients with SLE who have venous or arterial clotting, and/or repeated fetal losses, and at least two positive tests for aPL have APS and should be managed with long-term anticoagulation. A target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2每2.5 is recommended for patients with one episode of venous clotting; an INR of 3每3.5 is recommended for patients with recurring clots or arterial clotting, particularly in the central nervous system. Recommendations are based on both retrospective and prospective studies of posttreatment clotting events and adverse effects from anticoagulation.

Microvascular Thrombotic Crisis (Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura, Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome)

This syndrome of hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and microvascular thrombosis in kidneys, brain, and other tissues carries a high mortality rate and occurs most commonly in young individuals with lupus nephritis. The most useful laboratory tests are identification of schistocytes on peripheral blood smears, elevated serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase, and antibodies to ADAMS13. Plasma exchange or extensive plasmapheresis is usually life-saving; most authorities recommend concomitant glucocorticoid therapy; there is no evidence that cytotoxic drugs are effective.

Lupus Dermatitis

Patients with any form of lupus dermatitis should minimize exposure to ultraviolet light, employing appropriate clothing and sunscreens with a sun protection factor of at least 15. Topical glucocorticoids and antimalarials (such as hydroxychloroquine) are effective in reducing lesion severity in most patients and are relatively safe. Systemic treatment with retinoic acid is a useful strategy in patients with inadequate improvement on topical glucocorticoids and antimalarials; adverse effects are potentially severe (particularly fetal abnormalities), and there are stringent reporting requirements for its use in the United States. Extensive, pruritic, bullous, or ulcerating dermatitides usually improve promptly after institution of systemic glucocorticoids; tapering may be accompanied by flare of lesions, thus necessitating use of a second medication such as hydroxychloroquine, retinoids, or cytotoxic medications such as methotrexate or azathioprine. In therapy-resistant lupus dermatitis there are reports of success with topical tacrolimus (caution must be exerted because of the possible increased risk for malignancies) or with systemic dapsone or thalidomide (the extreme danger of fetal deformities from thalidomide requires permission from and supervision by the supplier).

Preventive Therapies

Prevention of complications of SLE and its therapy include providing appropriate vaccinations (the administration of influenza and pneumococcal vaccines has been studied in patients with SLE; flare rates are similar to those receiving placebo) and suppressing recurrent urinary tract infections. In addition, strategies to prevent osteoporosis should be initiated in most patients likely to require long-term glucocorticoid therapy and/or with other predisposing factors. Control of hypertension and appropriate prevention strategies for atherosclerosis, including monitoring and treatment of dyslipidemias, management of hyperglycemia, and obesity, are recommended.

Experimental Therapies

Studies of highly targeted experimental therapies for SLE are in progress. They include targeting (1) activated B lymphocytes with anti-BLyS, or TACI-Ig; (2) inhibition of IFN; (3) inhibition of B/T cell second signal co-activation with CTLA-Ig; and (4) inhibition of innate immune activation via TLR7 or TLR7 and 9, and induction of regulatory T cells with peptides from immunoglobulins or autoantigens. A few studies have employed vigorous untargeted immunosuppression with high-dose cyclophosphamide plus anti每T cell strategies, with rescue by transplantation of autologous hematopoietic stem cells for the treatment of severe and refractory SLE. One U.S. report showed an estimated mortality rate over 5 years of 15% and sustained remission in 50%. It is hoped that the next edition of this text will recommend more effective and less toxic approaches to treatment of SLE based on some of these strategies.
 
Patient Outcomes, Prognosis, and Survival

Survival in patients with SLE in the United States, Canada, Europe, and China is approximately 95% at 5 years, 90% at 10 years, and 78% at 20 years. In the United States, African Americans and Hispanic Americans with a mestizo heritage have a worse prognosis than whites, whereas Africans in Africa and Hispanic Americans with a Puerto Rican origin do not. The relative importance of gene mixtures and environmental differences accounting for ethnic differences is not known. Poor prognosis (50% mortality in 10 years) in most series is associated with (at the time of diagnosis) high serum creatinine levels [>124 mol/L (>1.4 mg/dL)], hypertension, nephrotic syndrome (24-h urine protein excretion >2.6 g), anemia [hemoglobin <124 g/L (<12.4 g/dL)], hypoalbuminemia, hypocomplementemia, aPL, male sex, and ethnicity (African American, Hispanic with mestizo heritage). Data regarding outcomes in SLE patients with renal transplants show mixed results: some series have a twofold increase in graft rejection compared to patients with other causes of ESRD, whereas others show no differences. Overall patient survival is comparable (85% at 2 years). Lupus nephritis occurs in approximately 10% of transplanted kidneys. Disability in patients with SLE is common due primarily to chronic fatigue, arthritis, and pain, as well as renal disease. As many as 25% of patients may experience remissions, sometimes for a few years, but these are rarely permanent. The leading causes of death in the first decade of disease are systemic disease activity, renal failure, and infections; subsequently, thromboembolic events become increasingly frequent causes of mortality.
 
Drug-Induced Lupus

This is a syndrome of positive ANA associated with symptoms such as fever, malaise, arthritis or intense arthralgias/myalgias, serositis, and/or rash. The syndrome appears during therapy with certain medications and biologic agents, occurs predominantly in whites, has less female predilection than SLE, rarely involves kidneys or brain, is rarely associated with anti-dsDNA, is commonly associated with antibodies to histones, and usually resolves over several weeks after discontinuation of the offending medication. The list of substances that can induce lupus-like disease is long. Among the most frequent are the antiarrhythmics procainamide, disopyramide, and propafenone; the antihypertensive hydralazine; several angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and beta blockers; the antithyroid propylthiouracil; the antipsychotics chlorpromazine and lithium; the anticonvulsants carbamazepine and phenytoin; the antibiotics isoniazid, minocycline, and macrodantin; the antirheumatic sulfasalazine; the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide; the antihyperlipidemics lovastatin and simvastatin; and interferons and TNF inhibitors. ANA usually appears before symptoms; however, many of the medications mentioned above induce ANA in patients who never develop symptoms of drug-induced lupus. It is appropriate to test for ANA at the first hint of relevant symptoms and to use test results to help decide whether to withdraw the suspect agent.
 
Further Readings

Falk RJ et al: Therapy of diffuse and proliferative lupus nephritis. UpToDate, October 2010 

 
Helmick CG et al: Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in the United States. Part 1. Arthritis Rheum 58:15, 2008[PMID: 18163481]  [Full Text]

 
Kasitanon N et al: Predictors of survival in systemic lupus erythematosus. Medicine (Baltimore) 85:147, 2006[PMID: 16721257]  [Full Text]

 
Rahman A, Isenberg D: Systemic lupus erythematosus. New Engl J Med 358:929, 2008[PMID: 18305268]  [Full Text]

 
Schur PH, Wallace DJ: Overview of the therapy and prognosis of systemic lupus erythematosus in adults. UpToDate, October 2010 

 
Wallace DJ, Hahn BH (eds): Dubois' Lupus Erythematosus, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 2008 
 
 

^^
Chapter 320. Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome >
 

Definition

Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) is an autoantibody-mediated acquired thrombophilia characterized by recurrent arterial or venous thrombosis and/or pregnancy morbidity in the presence of autoantibodies against phospholipid (PL)-binding plasma proteins, mainly a plasma apolipoprotein known as 2 glycoprotein I (2GPI) and prothrombin (Table 320-1). Another group of antibodies termed lupus anticoagulant (LA) prolong clotting times in vitro; this prolongation is not corrected by adding normal plasma to the detection system. APS may occur alone (primary), or in association with any other autoimmune disease (secondary). Catastrophic APS (CAPS) is defined as a rapidly progressive thromboembolic disease involving simultaneously three or more organs, organ systems, or tissues leading to corresponding functional defects.

Table 320-1 Classification and Nomenclature of Antiphospholipid Antibodies

 
 
 Antibodies against cardiolipin (aCL), a negatively charged phospholipid, detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
 Antibodies against 2GPI, (anti-2GPI) detected by ELISA in the absence of PL. 
 LA detected by clotting assays. LA constitutes a heterogeneous group of antibodies directed also against PL binding proteins, mainly 2GPI and prothrombin. LA antibodies induce elongation in vitro of the following clotting times: 
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), kaolin clotting time (KCT), dilute Russel viper venom test (dRVVT) 
 Antibodies against phospholipids/cholesterol complexes detected as biologic false-positive serologic test for syphilis (BFP-STS) and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory Test (VDRL) 
 

 
 
Epidemiology

Anti-PL (aPL)-binding plasma protein antibodies occur in 1每5% of general population. Their prevalence increases with age; however, it is questionable whether they induce thrombotic events in elderly individuals. One-third of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (Chap. 319) possess these antibodies while their prevalence in other autoimmune connective tissue disorders such as systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), Sj?gren's syndrome, dermatomyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, and early undifferentiated connective tissue disease, ranges from 6% to 15%. One-third of aPL positive individuals experience thrombotic events or pregnancy morbidity.
 
Pathogenesis

The trigger for the induction of antibodies to PL-binding proteins is not known. Preceding infections, however, have been proposed as the initiating event. These antibodies are pathogenic since anti-2GPI/2GPI complexes inactivate natural anticoagulants such as protein C, activate cells involved in the coagulation cascade to a prothrombotic phenotype, activate complement, and inhibit syncytium-trophoblast differentiation. Activated protein C (APC) binds the pro-coagulant factors Va and VIIIa and inactivates them. Anti-2GPI/2GPI complexes inhibit the APC activity in vivo by competing with the components of the APC/Va/VIIIa complexes for binding to a number of PL-binding sites, or by disrupting these complexes. Domain V of 2GPI can interact with apolipoprotein E receptor 2' (apoER2') and/or with the GPIb subunit of the GPIb/IX/V receptor of platelets. Furthermore platelet factor 4 (PF4) tetramers dimerize 2GPI and the resulting complexes are recognized by anti-2GPI antibodies, eventually activating the p38 mitogen-activated protein (p38 MAP) kinase phosphorylation, and leading to thromboxane B2 (TXB2) production in vitro. In fact, increased levels of 11-dehydro-TXB2, have been found in the urine of patients with APS. Anti-2GPI antibodies activate nuclear factor kappa B (NF-B) in monocytes and endothelial cells by interacting with surface receptors not yet identified, leading to the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukins -1, -6, and -8; the expression of adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), and E-selectin; inhibition of cell-surface plasminogen activation; and the expressions of tissue factor, changing the phenotype of these cells to a prothrombotic form. As shown in mouse models, anti-2GPI antibodies induce fetal injury through complement activation, since C4-deficient mice were protected from fetal injury.
 
Clinical Manifestations and Laboratory Findings

Clinical manifestations represent mainly a direct or indirect expression of venous or arterial thrombosis and/or pregnancy morbidity (Table 320-2). Clinical features associated with venous thrombosis are superficial and deep vein thrombosis, cerebral venous thrombosis, signs and symptoms of intracranial hypertension, retinal vein thrombosis, pulmonary emboli, pulmonary arterial hypertension, and Budd-Chiari syndrome. Livedo reticularis consists of a mottled reticular vascular pattern that appears as a lace-like, purplish discoloration of the skin. It is probably caused by swelling of the venules owing to obstruction of capillaries by thrombi. This clinical manifestation correlates with vascular lesions such as those in the central nervous system as well as aseptic bone necrosis. Arterial thrombosis is manifested as migraines, cognitive dysfunction, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, myocardial infarction, arterial thrombosis of upper and lower extremities, ischemic leg ulcers, digital gangrene, avascular necrosis of bone, retinal artery occlusion leading to painless monocular loss of vision (amaurosis fugax), renal artery stenosis, and glomerular lesions, as well as infarcts of spleen, pancreas, and adrenals. Libman-Sacks endocarditis consists of very small vegetations, histologically characterized by organized platelet-fibrin microthrombi surrounded by growing fibroblasts and macrophages. Glomerular lesions are manifested with hypertension, mildly elevated serum creatinine levels, proteinuria, and mild hematuria. Histologically, these lesions are characterized in an acute phase by thrombotic microangiopathy involving glomerular capillaries, and in a chronic phase with fibrous intima hyperplasia, fibrous and/or fibrocellular occlusions of arterioles and focal cortical atrophy (Table 320-2). Premature atherosclerosis has been recognized as a rare feature of APS. Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are laboratory findings associated with APS. Discontinuation of therapy, major surgery, infection, and trauma may trigger CAPS.

Table 320-2 Clinical Features of Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome

 
 
Manifestation
 %
 
Venous Thrombosis and Related Consequences
 
Deep vein thrombosis
 39
 
Livedo reticularis
 24
 
Pulmonary embolism
 14
 
Superficial thrombophlebitis
 12
 
Thrombosis in various other sites
 11
 
Arterial Thrombosis and Related Consequences
 
Stroke
 20
 
Cardiac valve thickening/dysfunction and/or Libman-Sacks vegetations
 14
 
Transient ischemic attack
 11
 
Myocardial ischemia (infarction or angina) and coronary bypass thrombosis
 10
 
Leg ulcers and/or digital gangrene
 9
 
Arterial thrombosis in the extremities
 7
 
Retinal artery thrombosis/amaurosis fugax
 7
 
Ischemia of visceral organs or avascular necrosis of bone
 6
 
Multi-infarct dementia
 3
 
Neurologic Manifestations of Uncertain Etiology
 
Migraine
 20
 
Epilepsy
 7
 
Chorea
 1
 
Cerebellar ataxia
 1
 
Transverse myelopathy
 0.5
 
Renal Manifestations Due to Various Reasons (Renal Artery/Renal Vein/Glomerular Thrombosis, Fibrous Intima Hyperplasia)
 3
 
Osteoarticular Manifestations
 
Arthralgia
 39
 
Arthritis
 27
 
Obstetric Manifestations (Referred to the Number of Pregnancies)
 
Preeclampsia
 10
 
Eclampsia
 4
 
Fetal Manifestations (Referred to the Number of Pregnancies)
 
Early fetal loss (<10 weeks)
 35
 
Late fetal loss (10 weeks)
 17
 
Premature birth among the live births
 11
 
Hematologic Manifestations
 
Thrombocytopenia
 30
 
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
 10
 
 


Source: Adapted from R Cervera et al.
 
 
Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of APS should be seriously considered in cases of thrombosis, cerebral vascular accidents in individuals younger than 55 years of age, or pregnancy morbidity in the presence of livedo reticularis or thrombocytopenia. In these cases aPL antibodies should be measured. The presence of at least one clinical and one laboratory criterion ensures the diagnosis even in the presence of other causes of thrombophilia. Clinical criteria include: (1) vascular thrombosis defined as one or more clinical episodes of arterial, venous, or small vessel thrombosis in any tissue or organ; and (2) pregnancy morbidity, defined as (a) one or more unexplained deaths of a morphologically normal fetus at or beyond the tenth week of gestation, or (b) one or more premature births of a morphologically normal neonate before the thirty-fourth week of gestation because of eclampsia, severe preeclampsia, or placental insufficiency; or (c) three or more unexplained consecutive spontaneous abortions before the 10th week of gestation. Laboratory criteria include (1) LA, (2) anticardiolipin (aCL) and/or (3) anti-2GPI antibodies, at intermediate or high titers on two occasions, 12 weeks apart.

Differential diagnosis is based on the exclusion of other inherited or acquired causes of thrombophilia (Chap. 116), Coombs positive hemolytic anemia (Chap. 106), and thrombocytopenia (Chap. 115). Livedo reticularis with or without a painful ulceration on the lower extremities also may be a manifestation of disorders affecting (1) the vascular wall such as polyarteritis nodosa, SLE, cryoglobulinemia, and lymphomas; or (2) the vascular lumen, such as myeloproliferative disorders, atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, or other causes of thrombophilia.

Treatment: Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome

After the first thrombotic event, APS patients should be placed on warfarin for life aiming to achieve an international normalized ratio (INR) ranging from 2.5 to 3.5, alone or in combination with 80 mg of aspirin daily. Pregnancy morbidity is prevented by a combination of heparin with aspirin 80 mg daily. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 400 mg/kg qd for 5 days may also prevent abortions, while glucocorticoids are ineffective. Evidence-based treatment of patients with aPL in the absence of any clinical event is not available; however, aspirin 80 mg daily protects patients with SLE positive for aPL antibodies from developing thrombotic events.

Some patients with APS and patients with CAPS have recurrent thrombotic events despite appropriate anticoagulation. In these cases IVIg 400 mg/kg qd for 5 days or anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody 375 mg/m2 per week for 4 weeks may be of benefit. Patients with CAPS, who are treated in the intensive care unit, are unable to receive warfarin; in this situation therapeutic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin should be administered. In cases of heparin- induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis syndrome, inhibitors of phospholipid-bound activated factor X (FXa), such as fondaparinux 7.5 mg SC daily or rivaroxaban 10 mg PO daily are effective. The above drugs are administered by fixed doses and do not require close monitoring; their safety during the first trimester of pregnancy has not been clearly established.
 
Further Readings

Cervera R et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome: Clinical and immunologic manifestations and patterns of disease expression in a cohort of 1,000 patients. Arthritis Rheum 46:1019, 2002[PMID: 11953980]  [Full Text]

 
Crowther MA et al: A comparison of two intensities of warfarin for the prevention of recurrent thrombosis in patients with the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. N Engl J Med 349:1133, 2003[PMID: 13679527]  [Full Text]

 
George D, Erkan D: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 52:115, 2009[PMID: 19732604]  [Full Text]

 
Miyakis S et al: International consensus statement on an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). J Thromb Haemost 295:4, 2006 

 
Ruiz-Irastorza G et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Lancet 376:1498, 2010[PMID: 20822807]  [Full Text]

 
Sikara MP et al: 2 glycoprotein I (2GPI) binds platelet factor 4 (PF4): Implications for the pathogenesis of Antiphospholipid syndrome. Blood 115:713, 2010[PMID: 19805618]  [Full Text]

 
Tektonidou M et al: Risk factors for thrombosis and primary thrombosis prevention in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus with or without antiphospholipid antibodies. Arthritis Rheum 61:29, 2009[PMID: 19116963]  [Full Text]

 
Vlachoyiannopoulos PG et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies: Laboratory and pathogenetic aspects. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 271:44, 2007 
 
 

^^
Chapter 321. Rheumatoid Arthritis >
 

Introduction

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease of unknown etiology marked by a symmetric, peripheral polyarthritis. It is the most common form of chronic inflammatory arthritis and often results in joint damage and physical disability. Because it is a systemic disease, RA may result in a variety of extraarticular manifestations, including fatigue, subcutaneous nodules, lung involvement, pericarditis, peripheral neuropathy, vasculitis, and hematologic abnormalities.

Insights gained by a wealth of basic and clinical research over the past two decades have revolutionized the contemporary paradigms for the diagnosis and management of RA. Serum antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCPs) are now recognized to be a valuable biomarker of diagnostic and prognostic significance. Advances in ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging have improved our ability to detect joint inflammation and destruction in RA. The science of RA has taken a major leap forward with the identification of new disease-related genes and further deciphering of the molecular pathways of disease pathogenesis. The relative importance of these different mechanisms has been highlighted by the observed benefits of the new class of highly targeted biologic therapies. Despite these gains, incomplete understanding of the initiating pathogenic pathways of RA remains a sizable barrier to its cure and prevention.

The last two decades have witnessed a remarkable improvement in the outcomes of RA. The historic descriptions of crippling arthritis are currently encountered much less frequently. Much of this progress can be traced to the expanded therapeutic armamentarium and the adoption of early treatment intervention. The shift in treatment strategy dictates a new mind-set for primary care practitioners〞namely, one that demands early referral of patients with inflammatory arthritis to a rheumatologist for prompt diagnosis and initiation of therapy. Only then will patients achieve their best outcomes.
 
Clinical Features

The incidence of RA increases between 25 and 55 years of age, after which it plateaus until the age of 75 and then decreases. The presenting symptoms of RA typically result from inflammation of the joints, tendons, and bursae. Patients often complain of early morning joint stiffness lasting more than 1 hour and easing with physical activity. The earliest involved joints are typically the small joints of the hands and feet. The initial pattern of joint involvement may be monoarticular, oligoarticular (4 joints), or polyarticular (>5 joints), usually in a symmetric distribution. Some patients with an inflammatory arthritis will present with too few affected joints and other characteristic features to be classified as having RA〞so-called undifferentiated inflammatory arthritis. Those with an undifferentiated arthritis, who are most likely to be diagnosed later with RA, have a higher number of tender and swollen joints, test positive for serum rheumatoid factor (RF) or anti-CCP antibodies, and have higher scores for physical disability.

Once the disease process of RA is established, the wrists, metacarpophalangeal (MCP), and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints stand out as the most frequently involved joints (Fig. 321-1). Distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint involvement may occur in RA, but it usually is a manifestation of coexistent osteoarthritis. Flexor tendon tenosynovitis is a frequent hallmark of RA and leads to decreased range of motion, reduced grip strength, and "trigger" fingers. Progressive destruction of the joints and soft tissues may lead to chronic, irreversible deformities. Ulnar deviation results from subluxation of the MCP joints, with subluxation of the proximal phalanx to the volar side of the hand. Hyperextension of the PIP joint with flexion of the DIP joint ("swan-neck deformity"), flexion of the PIP joint with hyperextension of the DIP joint ("boutonni豕re deformity"), and subluxation of the first MCP joint with hyperextension of the first interphalangeal (IP) joint ("Z-line deformity") also may result from damage to the tendons, joint capsule, and other soft tissues in these small joints. Inflammation about the ulnar styloid and tenosynovitis of the extensor carpi ulnaris may cause subluxation of the distal ulna, resulting in a "piano-key movement" of the ulnar styloid. While metatarsophalangeal joint (MTP) involvement is a feature of early disease in the feet, the ankle and midtarsal regions are usually affected later in the course of disease and often predispose to pes planovalgus ("flat feet"). Large joints, including the knees and shoulders, are often affected in established disease, although these joints may remain asymptomatic for many years after onset.

Figure 321-1

 
 
 
Metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joint swelling in rheumatoid arthritis. (Courtesy of the American College of Rheumatology Image Bank.)
 
 


Atlantoaxial involvement of the cervical spine is clinically noteworthy because of its potential to cause compressive myelopathy and neurologic dysfunction. Neurologic manifestations are rarely a presenting sign or symptom of atlantoaxial disease, but they may evolve over time with progressive instability of C1 on C2. The prevalence of atlantoaxial subluxation has been declining in recent years, and occurs now in less than 10% of patients. Unlike the spondyloarthritides (Chap. 325), RA does not affect the thoracic and lumbar spine except in very unusual circumstances. Radiographic abnormalities of the temporomandibular joint occur commonly in patients with RA, but they are rarely associated with significant symptoms or functional impairment.

Extraarticular manifestations may develop during the clinical course of RA, even prior to the onset of arthritis (Fig. 321-2). Patients most likely to develop extraarticular disease have a history of smoking, early onset of significant physical disability, and test positive for serum RF. Subcutaneous nodules, secondary Sj?gren's syndrome, pulmonary nodules, and anemia are among the most frequently observed extraarticular manifestations. Recent studies have shown a decrease in the incidence and severity of at least some extraarticular manifestations, particularly Felty's syndrome and vasculitis.

Figure 321-2

 
 
 
Extraarticular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis.
 
 

The most common systemic and extraarticular features of RA are described in more detail in the sections below.

Constitutional

These signs and symptoms include weight loss, fever, fatigue, malaise, depression, and in the most severe cases, cachexia; they generally reflect a high degree of inflammation and may even precede the onset of joint symptoms. In general, the presence of a fever of >38.3∼C (101∼F) at any time during the clinical course should raise suspicion of systemic vasculitis (see below) or infection.

Nodules

Subcutaneous nodules occur in 30每40% of patients and more commonly in those with the highest levels of disease activity, the disease-related shared epitope (see below), a positive test for serum RF, and radiographic evidence of joint erosions. When palpated, the nodules are generally firm; nontender; and adherent to periosteum, tendons, or bursae; developing in areas of the skeleton subject to repeated trauma or irritation such as the forearm, sacral prominences, and the Achilles tendon. They may also occur in the lungs, pleura, pericardium, and peritoneum. Nodules are typically benign, although they can be associated with infection, ulceration, and gangrene.

Sj?gren's Syndrome

Secondary Sj?gren's syndrome (Chap. 324) is defined by the presence of either keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes) or xerostomia (dry mouth) in association with another connective tissue disease, such as RA. Approximately 10% of patients with RA have secondary Sj?gren's syndrome.

Pulmonary

Pleural disease, the most common pulmonary manifestation of RA, may produce pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea, as well as a pleural friction rub and effusion. Pleural effusions tend to be exudative with increased numbers of monocytes and neutrophils. Interstitial lung disease (ILD) may also occur in patients with RA and is heralded by symptoms of dry cough and progressive shortness of breath. Diagnosis is readily made by high-resolution chest CT scan. Pulmonary function testing shows a restrictive pattern (e.g., reduced total lung capacity) with a reduced diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO). The presence of ILD confers a poor prognosis. The prognosis is not quite as poor as that of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (e.g., usual interstitial pneumonitis) because ILD secondary to RA responds more favorably than idiopathic ILD to immunosuppressive therapy (Chap. 261). Pulmonary nodules may be solitary or multiple. Caplan's syndrome is a rare subset of pulmonary nodulosis characterized by the development of nodules and pneumoconiosis following silica exposure. Other less common pulmonary findings include respiratory bronchiolitis and bronchiectasis.

Cardiac

The most frequent site of cardiac involvement in RA is the pericardium. However, clinical manifestations of pericarditis occur in less than 10% of patients with RA despite the fact that pericardial involvement may be detected in nearly one-half of the these patients by echocardiogram or autopsy studies. Cardiomyopathy, another clinically important manifestation of RA, may result from necrotizing or granulomatous myocarditis, coronary artery disease, or diastolic dysfunction. This involvement too may be subclinical and only identified by echocardiography or cardiac MRI. Rarely, the heart muscle may contain rheumatoid nodules or be infiltrated with amyloid. Mitral regurgitation is the most common valvular abnormality in RA, occurring at a higher frequency than the general population.

Vasculitis

Rheumatoid vasculitis (Chap. 326) is seen most commonly in patients with long-standing disease, a positive test for serum RF, and hypocomplementemia; the overall incidence is quite rare, occurring in no more than 1% of cases. The cutaneous signs vary and include petechiae, purpura, digital infarcts, gangrene, livedo reticularis, and in severe cases large, painful lower extremity ulcerations. Vasculitic ulcers, which may be difficult to distinguish from those caused by venous insufficiency, may be treated successfully with immunosuppressive agents (requiring cytotoxic treatment in severe cases) as well as skin grafting. Sensorimotor polyneuropathies, such as mononeuritis multiplex, may occur in association with systemic rheumatoid vasculitis.

Hematologic

A normochromic, normocytic anemia often develops in patients with RA and is the most common hematologic abnormality. The degree of anemia parallels the degree of inflammation, correlating with the levels of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Platelet counts may also be elevated in RA as an acute-phase reactant. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is rare in this disease.

Felty's syndrome is defined by the clinical triad of neutropenia, splenomegaly, and nodular RA and is seen in less than 1% of patients, although its incidence appears to be declining in the face of more aggressive treatment of the joint disease. It typically occurs in white patients in the late stages of severe RA. T cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia (T-LGL) may have a similar clinical presentation and often occurs in association with RA. T-LGL is characterized by a chronic, indolent clonal growth of LGL cells, leading to neutropenia and splenomegaly. As opposed to Felty's syndrome, T-LGL may develop early in the course of RA. Leukopenia apart from these disorders is uncommon and most often due to drug therapy.

Lymphoma

Large cohort studies have shown a two- to fourfold increased risk of lymphoma in RA patients compared with the general population. The most common histopathologic type of lymphoma is a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The risk of developing lymphoma increases if the patient has high levels of disease activity or Felty's syndrome.

Associated Conditions

In addition to extraarticular manifestations, several conditions associated with RA contribute to disease morbidity and mortality rates. They are worthy of mention because they affect chronic disease management.

Cardiovascular Disease

The most common cause of death in patients with RA is cardiovascular disease. The incidence of coronary artery disease and carotid atherosclerosis is higher in RA patients than in the general population even when controlling for traditional cardiac risk factors, such as hypertension, obesity, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, and cigarette smoking. Furthermore, congestive heart failure (including both systolic and diastolic dysfunction) occurs at an approximately twofold higher rate in RA than in the general population. The presence of elevated serum inflammatory markers appears to confer an increased risk of cardiovascular disease in this population.

Osteoporosis

Osteoporosis is more common in patients with RA than an age- and sex-matched population, with prevalence rates of 20每30%. The inflammatory milieu of the joint probably spills over into the rest of the body and promotes generalized bone loss by activating osteoclasts. Chronic use of glucocorticoids and disability-related immobility also contributes to osteoporosis. Hip fractures are more likely to occur in patients with RA and are significant predictors of increased disability and mortality rate in this disease.

Hypoandrogenism

Men and postmenopausal women with RA have lower mean serum testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH) and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) levels than control populations. It has thus been hypothesized that hypoandrogenism may play a role in the pathogenesis of RA or arise as a consequence of the chronic inflammatory response. In fact, some studies suggest that higher testosterone levels offer some protection from RA in younger males. The idea that the low serum testosterone levels associated with RA arise from the chronic inflammatory state comes from observations that clinical improvement following successful treatment correlates with an increase in serum testosterone levels. From a clinical perspective, it is important to realize that patients receiving chronic glucocorticoid therapy may develop hypoandrogenism owing to inhibition of LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion from the pituitary gland. Since low testosterone levels may lead to osteoporosis, men with serum testosterone levels below the physiologic range should be considered for androgen replacement therapy.
 
Epidemiology

RA affects approximately 0.5每1% of the adult population worldwide. There is evidence that the overall incidence of RA has been decreasing in recent decades, whereas the prevalence has remained the same because individuals with RA are living longer. The incidence and prevalence of RA varies based on geographic location, both globally and among certain ethnic groups within a country (Fig. 321-3). For example, the Native American Yakima, Pima, and Chippewa tribes of North America have reported prevalence rates in some studies of nearly 7%. In contrast, many population studies from Africa and Asia show lower prevalence rates for RA in the range of 0.2每0.4%.

Figure 321-3

 
 
 
Global prevalence rates of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with genetic associations. Listed are the major genetic alleles associated with RA. While human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1 mutations are found globally, some alleles have been associated with RA in only certain ethnic groups.
 
 

Like many other autoimmune diseases, RA occurs more commonly in females than in males, with a 2每3:1 ratio. Interestingly, studies of RA from some of the Latin American and African countries show an even greater predominance of disease in females compared to males, with ratios of 6每8:1. Given this preponderance of females, various theories have been proposed to explain the possible role of estrogen in disease pathogenesis. Most of the theories center on the role of estrogens in enhancing the immune response. For example, some experimental studies have shown that estrogen can stimulate production of tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-), a major cytokine in the pathogenesis of RA.
 
Genetic Considerations

It has been recognized for over 30 years that genetic factors contribute to the occurrence of RA as well as to its severity. The likelihood that a first-degree relative of a patient will share the diagnosis of RA is 2每10 times greater than in the general population. There remains, however, some uncertainty in the extent to which genetics plays a role in the causative mechanisms of RA. While twin studies imply that genetic factors may explain up to 60% of the occurrence of RA, the more commonly stated estimate falls in the range of 10每25%. The estimate of genetic influence may vary across studies due to gene每environment interactions.

The alleles known to confer the greatest risk of RA are located within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). It has been estimated that one-third of the genetic risk for RA resides within this locus. Most, but probably not all, of this risk is associated with allelic variation in the HLA-DRB1 gene, which encodes the MHC II -chain molecule. The disease-associated HLA-DRB1 alleles share an amino acid sequence at positions 70每74 in the third hypervariable regions of the HLA-DR -chain, termed the shared epitope (SE). Carriership of the SE alleles is associated with production of anti-CCP antibodies and worse disease outcomes. Some of these HLA-DRB1 alleles bestow a high risk of disease (*0401), whereas others confer a more moderate risk (*0101, *0404, *1001, and *0901). In Greece, for example, where RA tends to be milder than in western European countries, RA susceptibility has been associated with the *0101 SE allele. By comparison, the *0401 or *0404 alleles are found in approximately 50每70% of Northern Europeans and are the predominant risk alleles in this group. The most common disease susceptibility SE alleles in Asians, namely the Japanese, Koreans, and Chinese, are *0405 and *0901. Lastly, disease susceptibility of Native American populations such as the Pima and Tlingit Indians, where the prevalence of RA can be as high as 7%, is associated with the SE allele *1042. The risk of RA conferred by these SE alleles is less in African and Hispanic Americans than in individuals of European ancestry.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have made possible the identification of several non-MHC-related genes that contribute to RA susceptibility. GWAS are based on the detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which allow for examination of the genetic architecture of complex diseases such as RA. There are approximately 10 million common SNPs within a human genome consisting of 3 billion base pairs. As a rule, GWAS identify only common variants, namely, those with a frequency of more than 5% in the general population.

Overall, several themes have emerged from GWAS in RA. First, several of the non-MHC loci identified as risk alleles for RA have only a modest effect on risk; they also contribute to the risk for developing other autoimmune diseases, such as Type 1 diabetes mellitus, systemic lupus erythematosus, and multiple sclerosis. Second, most of the associations are described in patients with anti-CCP antibody-positive disease. Third, risk alleles vary among ethnic groups. Fourth, the risk loci mostly reside in genes encoding proteins involved in the regulation of the immune response, such as the signaling pathway for the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-B). However, the risk alleles identified by GWAS only account at present for approximately 5% of the genetic risk, suggesting that rare variants or other classes of DNA variants, such as variants in copy number, may be yet found that significantly contribute to the overall risk model.

Among the best examples of the non-MHCgenes contributing to the risk of RA is the gene encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 22 (PTPN22). This gene varies in frequency among patients from different parts of Europe (e.g., 3每10%), but is absent in patients of East Asian ancestry. PTPN22 encodes lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase, a protein that regulates T and B cell function. Inheritance of the risk allele for PTPN22 produces a gain-of-function in the protein that is hypothesized to result in the abnormal selection of autoreactive T and B cells. In RA, carriage of the variant PTPN22 appears to be associated exclusively with anti-CCP-positive disease. The peptidyl arginine deiminase type IV (PADI4) gene is another risk allele that encodes an enzyme involved in the conversion of arginine to citrulline and is postulated to play a role in the development of antibodies to citrullinated antigens. A polymorphism in PADI4 has been only associated with RA in Asian populations. Other SNPs associated with RA have been found in the genes for signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4), CD244 (natural killer cell receptor 2B4), Fc receptor-like 3 (FCLR3), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha-induced protein 3 (TNF-AIP3), and TNF receptor-associated factor 1 (TRAF1). These genes encode proteins with various roles in B and T cell signaling.
 
Environmental Factors

In addition to genetic predisposition, a host of environmental factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of RA. The most reproducible of these environmental links is cigarette smoking. Numerous cohort and case control studies have demonstrated that smoking confers a relative risk for developing RA of 1.5每3.5. A twin who smokes will have a significantly higher risk for RA than his or her monozygotic co-twin, theoretically with the same genetic risk, who does not smoke. Interestingly, the risk from smoking is almost exclusively related to RF- and anti-CCP antibody-positive disease.

Researchers began to aggressively seek an infectious etiology for RA after the discovery in 1931 that sera from patients with this disease could agglutinate strains of streptococci. Certain viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have garnered the most interest over the past 30 years given their ubiquity, ability to persist for many years in the host, and frequent association with arthritic complaints. For example, titers of IgG antibodies against EBV antigens in the peripheral blood and saliva are significantly higher in patients with RA than the general population. EBV DNA has also been found in synovial fluid and synovial cells of RA patients. Blood and synovial fluid analyses have also suggested a possible link with mycoplasma and parvovirus B19 infection. Since the evidence for these links is largely circumstantial, it has not been possible to directly implicate infection as a causative factor in RA.
 
Pathology

RA affects the synovial tissue and underlying cartilage and bone. The synovial membrane, which covers most articular surfaces, tendon sheaths, and bursae, normally is a thin layer of connective tissue. In joints, it faces the bone and cartilage, bridging the opposing bony surfaces and inserting at periosteal regions close to the articular cartilage. It consists primarily of two cell types〞type A synoviocytes (macrophage-derived) and type B synoviocytes (fibroblast-derived). The synovial fibroblasts are the most abundant and produce the structural components of joints, including collagen, fibronectin, and laminin, as well as other extracellular constituents of the synovial matrix. The sublining layer consists of blood vessels and a sparse population of mononuclear cells within a loose network of connective tissue. Synovial fluid, an ultrafiltrate of blood, diffuses through the subsynovial lining tissue across the synovial membrane and into the joint cavity. Its main constituents are hyaluronan and lubricin. Hyaluronan is a glycosaminoglycan that contributes to the viscous nature of synovial fluid, which along with lubricin, lubricates the surface of the articular cartilage.

The pathologic hallmarks of RA are synovial inflammation and proliferation, focal bone erosions, and thinning of articular cartilage. Chronic inflammation leads to synovial lining hyperplasia and the formation of pannus, a thickened cellular membrane of granulation每reactive fibrovascular tissue that invades the underlying cartilage and bone. Cadherin-11, the chief organizing molecule of the synovial membrane, confers the invasive nature of the fibroblast-like synoviocytes, the prevailing cell type of the pannus. The inflammatory infiltrate is made up of no less than 6 cell types: T cells, B cells, plasma cells, dendritic cells, mast cells, and a few granulocytes. The T cells comprise 30每50% of the infiltrate, with the other cells accounting for the remainder. The topographical organization of these cells is complex and may vary among individuals with RA. Most often, the lymphocytes are diffusely organized among the tissue resident cells; however, in some cases, the B cells, T cells, and dendritic cells may form higher levels of organization, such as lymphoid follicles and germinal center每like structures. Growth factors secreted by synovial fibroblasts and macrophages promote the formation of new blood vessels in the synovial sublining that supply the increasing demands for oxygenation and nutrition required by the infiltrating leukocytes and expanding synovial tissue.

The structural damage to the mineralized cartilage and subchondral bone is mediated by the osteoclast. Osteoclasts are multinucleated giant cells that can be identified by their expression of CD68, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, cathepsin K, and the calcitonin receptor. They appear at the pannus-bone interface where they eventually form resorption lacunae. These lesions typically localize where the synovial membrane inserts into the periosteal surface at the edges of bones close to the rim of articular cartilage and at the attachment sites of ligaments and tendon sheaths. This process most likely explains why bone erosions usually develop at the radial sites of the MCP joints juxtaposed to the insertion sites of the tendons, collateral ligaments, and synovial membrane. Another form of bone loss is periarticular osteopenia that occurs in joints with active inflammation. It is associated with substantial thinning of the bony trabeculae along the metaphyses of bones, and likely results from inflammation of the bone marrow cavity. These lesions can be visualized on MRI scans, where they appear as signal alterations in the bone marrow adjacent to inflamed joints. Their signal characteristics show they are water-rich with a low fat content, and consistent with highly vascularized inflammatory tissue. These bone marrow lesions are often the forerunner of bone erosions.

The cortical bone layer that separates the bone marrow from the invading pannus is relatively thin and susceptible to penetration by the inflamed synovium. The bone marrow lesions seen on MRI scans are associated with an endosteal bone response characterized by the accumulation of osteoblasts and deposition of osteoid. Thus, in recent years, the concept of joint pathology in RA has been extended to include the bone marrow cavity. Finally, a third form of bone loss is generalized osteoporosis, which results in the thinning of trabecular bone throughout the body.

Articular cartilage is an avascular tissue comprised of a specialized matrix of collagens, proteoglycans, and other proteins. It is organized in four distinct regions (superficial, middle, deep, and calcified cartilage zones)〞chondrocytes constitute the unique cellular component in these layers. Originally, cartilage was considered to be an inert tissue, but it is now known to be a highly responsive tissue that reacts to inflammatory mediators and mechanical factors, which in turn, alter the balance between cartilage anabolism and catabolism. In RA, the initial areas of cartilage degradation are juxtaposed to the synovial pannus. The cartilage matrix is characterized by a generalized loss of proteoglycan, most evident in the superficial zones adjacent to the synovial fluid. Degradation of cartilage may also take place in the perichondrocytic zone and in regions adjacent to the subchondral bone.
 
Pathogenesis

The pathogenic mechanisms of synovial inflammation are likely to result from a complex interplay of genetic, environmental, and immunologic factors that produces dysregulation of the immune system and a breakdown in self-tolerance (Fig. 321-4). Precisely what triggers these initiating events and what genetic and environmental factors disrupt the immune system remain a mystery. However, a detailed molecular picture is emerging of the mechanisms underlying the chronic inflammatory response and the destruction of the articular cartilage and bone.

Figure 321-4

 
 
 
Pathophysiologic mechanisms of inflammation and joint destruction. Genetic predisposition along with environmental factors may trigger the development of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), with subsequent synovial T cell activation. CD4+ T cells become activated by antigenpresenting cells (APCs) through interactions between the T cell receptor and class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-peptide antigen (signal 1) with co-stimulation through the CD28-CD80/86 pathway, as well as other pathways (signal 2). In theory, ligands binding Toll-like receptors (TLRs) may further stimulate activation of APCs inside the joint. Synovial CD4+ T cells differentiate into TH1 and TH17 cells, each with their distinctive cytokine profile. CD4+ TH cells in turn activate B cells, some of which are destined to differentiate into autoantibody-producing plasma cells. Immune complexes, possibly comprised of rheumatoid factors (RFs) and anti每cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCP) antibodies, may form inside the joint, activating the complement pathway and amplifying inflammation. T effector cells stimulate synovial macrophages (M) and fibroblasts (SF) to secrete proinflammatory mediators, among which is tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-). TNF- upregulates adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, promoting leukocyte influx into the joint. It also stimulates the production of other inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-6, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). TNF- has a critically important function in regulating the balance between bone destruction and formation. It upregulates the expression of dickkopf-1 (DKK-1), which can then internalize Wnt receptors on osteoblast precursors. Wnt is a soluble mediator that promotes osteoblastogenesis and bone formation. In RA, bone formation is inhibited through the Wnt pathway, presumably due to the action of elevated levels of DKK-1. In addition to inhibiting bone formation, TNF- stimulates osteoclastogenesis. However, it is not sufficient by itself to induce the differentiation of osteoclast precursors (Pre-OC) into activated osteoclasts capable of eroding bone. Osteoclast differentiation requires the presence of macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and receptor activator of nuclear factor B (RANK) ligand, which binds to RANK on the surface of Pre-OC. Inside the joint, RANKL is mainly derived from stromal cells, synovial fibroblasts, and T cells. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) acts as a decoy receptor for RANKL, thereby inhibiting osteoclastogenesis and bone loss. FGF, fibroblast growth factor; IFN, interferon; TGF, transforming growth factor.
 
 

In RA, the earliest detectable preclinical stage is a breakdown in self-tolerance. This idea is supported by the finding that autoantibodies, such as RF and anti-CCP antibodies, may be found in sera from patients long before clinical disease. However, the antigenic targets of anti-CCP antibodies and RF are not restricted to the joint, and their role in disease pathogenesis remains speculative. Anti-CCP antibodies are directed against deiminated peptides, which result from posttranslational modification by the enzyme PADI4. They recognize citrulline-containing regions of several different matrix proteins, including filaggrin, keratin, fibrinogen, and vimentin. Other autoantibodies have been found in a minority of patients with RA, but they also occur in the setting of other types of arthritis. They bind to a diverse array of autoantigens, including type II collagen, human cartilage gp-39, aggrecan, calpastatin, BiP (immunoglobulin binding protein), and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase.

In theory, environmental stimulants may synergize with other factors to bring about inflammation in RA. People who smoke display higher citrullination of proteins in bronchoalveolar fluid than those who do not smoke. Thus, it has been speculated that long-term exposure to tobacco smoke might induce citrullination of cellular proteins in the lungs and enhance the expression of a neoepitope capable of inducing self-reactivity. Exposure to silicone dust and mineral oil, which has adjuvant effects, has also been linked to an increased risk for anti-CCP antibody-positive RA.

How might microbes or their products be involved in the initiating events of RA? The immune system is alerted to the presence of microbial infections through Toll-like receptors (TLRs). There are 10 TLRs in humans that recognize a variety of microbial products, including bacterial cell-surface lipopolysaccharides and heat- shock proteins (TLR4), lipoproteins (TLR2), double-strand RNA viruses (TLR3), and unmethylated CpG DNA from bacteria (TLR9). TLR2, -3, and -4 are abundantly expressed by synovial fibroblasts in early RA, and when bound by their ligands upregulate production of proinflammatory cytokines. Although such events could amplify inflammatory pathways in RA, a specific role for TLRs in disease pathogenesis has not been elucidated.

The pathogenesis of RA is built upon the concept that self-reactive T cells drive the chronic inflammatory response. In theory, self-reactive T cells might arise in RA from abnormal central (thymic) selection due to defects in DNA repair leading to an imbalance of T cell death and life, or defects in the cell signaling apparatus lowering the threshold for T cell activation. Similarly, abnormal selection of the T cell repertoire in the periphery might lead to a breakdown in T cell tolerance. The support for these theories comes mainly from studies of arthritis in mouse models. It has not been shown that patients with RA have abnormal thymic selection of T cells or defective apoptotic pathways regulating cell death. At least some antigen stimulation inside the joint seems likely, owing to the fact that T cells in the synovium express a cell-surface phenotype indicating prior antigen exposure and show evidence of clonal expansion. Of interest, peripheral blood T cells from patients with RA have been shown to display a fingerprint of premature aging that mostly affects inexperienced na?ve T cells. In these studies, the most glaring findings have been the loss of telomeric sequences and a decrease in the thymic output of new T cells. While intriguing, it is not clear how generalized T cell abnormalities might provoke a systemic disease dominated by synovitis.

There is substantial evidence supporting a role for CD4+ T cells in the pathogenesis of RA. First, the co-receptor CD4 on the surface of T cells binds to invariant sites on MHC class II molecules, stabilizing the MHC-peptide每T cell receptor complex during T cell activation. Since the SE on MHC class II molecules is a risk factor for RA, it may be speculated that CD4+ T cell activation plays a role in the pathogenesis of this disease. Second, CD4+ memory T cells are enriched in the synovial tissue from patients with RA, and can be implicated through "guilt by association." Third, CD4+ T cells have been shown to be important in the initiation of arthritis in animal models. Fourth, T cell每directed therapies, such as cyclosporine and abatacept (CTLA4-Ig), have shown clinical efficacy in this disease. Taken together, these lines of evidence suggest that CD4+ T cells play an important role in orchestrating the chronic inflammatory response in RA. However, other cell types, such as CD8+ T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and B cells are present in synovial tissue and may also influence pathogenic responses.

In the rheumatoid joint, by mechanisms of cell-cell contact and release of soluble mediators, activated T cells stimulate macrophages and fibroblast-like synoviocytes to generate proinflammatory mediators and proteases that drive the synovial inflammatory response and destroy the cartilage and bone. CD4+ T cells also provide help to B cells, which in turn, produce antibodies that may promote further inflammation in the joint. The previous T cell每centric model for the pathogenesis of RA was based on a TH 1-driven paradigm, which came from studies indicating that CD4+ T helper (TH) cells differentiated into TH1 and TH2 subsets, each with their distinctive cytokine profiles. TH1 cells were found to mainly produce interferon  (IFN-), lymphotoxin , and TNF-, while TH2 cells predominately secreted interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13. The recent discovery of another subset of TH cells, namely the TH17 lineage, has revolutionized our concepts concerning the pathogenesis of RA. In humans, na?ve T cells are induced to differentiate into TH17 cells by exposure to transforming growth factor  (TGF-), IL-1, IL-6, and IL-23. Upon activation, TH17 cells secrete a variety of proinflammatory mediators such as IL-17, IL-21, IL-22, TNF-, IL-26, IL-6, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Substantial evidence now exists from both animal models and humans that IL-17 plays an important role not only in promoting joint inflammation but also in destroying cartilage and subchondral bone.

Activated B cells are also important players in the chronic inflammatory response. B cells give rise to plasma cells, which in turn, produce antibodies, including RF and anti-CCP antibodies. RFs may form large immune complexes inside the joint that contribute to the pathogenic process by fixing complement and promoting the release of proinflammatory chemokines and chemoattractants. In mouse models of arthritis, RF-containing immune complexes as well as anti-CCP-containing immune complexes synergize with other mechanisms to exacerbate the synovial inflammatory response.

RA is often considered to be a macrophage-driven disease because this cell type is the predominant source of proinflammatory cytokines inside the joint. Key proinflammatory cytokines released by synovial macrophages include TNF-, IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IL-15, IL-18, and IL-23. Synovial fibroblasts, the other major cell type in this microenvironment, produce the cytokines IL-1 and IL-6 as well as TNF-. TNF- is a pivotal cytokine in the pathobiology of synovial inflammation. It upregulates adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, promoting the influx of leukocytes into the synovial microenvironment. It also activates synovial fibroblasts, stimulates angiogenesis, promotes pain receptor sensitizing pathways, and drives osteoclastogenesis. Fibroblasts secrete matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) as well as other proteases that are chiefly responsible for the breakdown of articular cartilage.

Osteoclast activation at the site of the pannus is closely tied to the presence of focal bone erosion. Receptor activator of nuclear factor B ligand (RANKL) is expressed by stromal cells, synovial fibroblasts, and T cells. Upon binding to its receptor RANK on osteoclast progenitors, RANKL stimulates osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption. RANKL activity is regulated by osteoprotegerin (OPG), a decoy receptor of RANKL that blocks osteoclast formation. Monocytic cells in the synovium serve as the precursors of osteoclasts and, when exposed to macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and RANKL, fuse to form polykaryons termed preosteoclasts. These precursor cells undergo further differentiation into osteoclasts with the characteristic ruffled membrane. Cytokines such as TNF-, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-17 increase the expression of RANKL in the joint and thus promote osteoclastogenesis. Osteoclasts also secrete cathepsin K, which is a cysteineprotease that degrades the bone matrix by cleaving collagen.

Increased bone loss is only part of the story in RA, as decreased bone formation plays a crucial role in bone remodeling at sites of inflammation. Recent evidence shows that inflammation suppresses bone formation. The proinflammatory cytokineTNF- plays a key role in actively suppressing bone formation by enhancing the expression of dickkopf-1 (DKK-1). DKK-1 is an important inhibitor of the Wnt pathway, which acts to promote osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. The Wnt system is a family of soluble glycoproteins that bind to cell-surface receptors known as frizzled (fz) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor每related proteins (LRPs) and promote cell growth. In animal models, increased levels of DKK-1 are associated with decreased bone formation, while inhibition of DKK-1 protects against structural damage in the joint. Wnt proteins also induce the formation of OPG and thereby shut down bone resorption, emphasizing their key role in tightly regulating the balance between bone resorption and formation.
 
Diagnosis

The clinical diagnosis of RA is largely based on signs and symptoms of a chronic inflammatory arthritis, with laboratory and radiographic results providing important supplemental information. In 2010, a collaborative effort between the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) revised the 1987 ACR classification criteria for RA in an effort to improve early diagnosis with the goal of identifying patients who would benefit from early introduction of disease-modifying therapy (Table 321-1). Application of the newly revised criteria yields a score of 0每10, with a score of 6 fulfilling the requirements for definite RA. The new classification criteria differ in several ways from the older criteria set. The new criteria include a positive test for serum anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies as an item, which carries greater specificity for the diagnosis of RA than a positive test for rheumatoid factor. The newer classification criteria also do not take into account if the patient has rheumatoid nodules or radiographic joint damage because these findings occur rarely in early RA. It is important to emphasize that the new 2010 ACR-EULAR criteria are "classification criteria" as opposed to "diagnostic criteria" and serve to distinguish patients at the onset of disease with a high likelihood of evolving into a chronic disease with persistent synovitis and joint damage. The presence of radiographic joint erosions or subcutaneous nodules may inform the diagnosis in the later stages of the disease.

Table 321-1 Classification Criteria for Rheumatoid Arthritis

 
 
  Score
 
Joint involvement
 1 large joint (shoulder, elbow, hip, knee, ankle)
 0
 
  2每10 large joints
 1
 
  1每3 small joints (MCP, PIP, Thumb IP, MTP, wrists)
 2
 
  4每10 small joints
 3
 
  >10 joints (at least 1 small joint)
 5
 
Serology
 Negative RF and negative ACPA
 0
 
  Low-positive RF or low-positive anti-CCP antibodies (3 times ULN)
 2
 
  High-positive RF or high-positive anti-CCP antibodies (>3 times ULN)
 3
 
Acute-phase reactants
 Normal CRP and normal ESR
 0
 
  Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR
 1
 
Duration of symptoms
 <6 weeks
 0
 
  6 weeks
 1
 
 


Note: These criteria are aimed at classification of newly presenting patients who have at least 1 joint with definite clinical synovitis that is not better explained by another disease.

Abbreviations: CCP, cyclic citrullinated peptides; CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IP, interphalangeal joint; MCP, metacarpophalangeal joint; MTP, metatarsophalangeal joint; PIP, proximal interphalangeal joint; RF, rheumatoid factor; ULN, upper limit of normal.

Source: Neogi et al: Arthritis Rheum 62:2569, 2010.
 

Laboratory Features

IgM, IgG, and IgA isotypes of RF occur in sera from patients with RA, although the IgM isotype is the one most frequently measured by commercial laboratories. Serum IgM RF has been found in 75每80% of patients with RA; therefore, a negative result does not exclude the presence of this disease. It is also found in other connective tissue diseases, such as primary Sj?gren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and type II mixed essential cryoglobulinemia, as well as chronic infections such as subacute bacterial endocarditis and hepatitis B and C. Serum RF may also be detected in 1每5% of the healthy population.

The presence of serum anti-CCP antibodies has about the same sensitivity as serum RF for the diagnosis of RA. However, its diagnostic specificity approaches 95%, so a positive test for anti-CCP antibodies in the setting of an early inflammatory arthritis is useful for distinguishing RA from other forms of arthritis. There is some incremental value in testing for the presence of both RF and anti-CCP, as some patients with RA are positive for RF but negative for anti-CCP and visa versa. The presence of RF or anti-CCP antibodies also has prognostic significance, with anti-CCP antibodies showing the most value for predicting worse outcomes.
 
Synovial Fluid Analysis

Typically, synovial fluid from patients with RA reflects an inflammatory state. Synovial fluid white blood cell (WBC) counts can vary widely, but generally range between 5000 and 50,000 WBC/3 compared to <2000 WBC/ for a non-inflammatory condition such as osteoarthritis. In contrast to the synovial tissue, the overwhelming cell type in the synovial fluid is the neutrophil. Synovial fluid also contains RF and anti-CCP antibodies and immune complexes, as well as by-products of complement activation. Clinically, the analysis of synovial fluid is most useful for confirming an inflammatory arthritis (as opposed to osteoarthritis), while at the same time excluding infection or a crystal-induced arthritis such as gout or pseudogout (Chap. 333).

Joint Imaging

Joint imaging is a valuable tool not only for diagnosing RA, but also for tracking progression of any joint damage. Plain x-ray is the most common imaging modality, but it is limited to visualization of the bony structures and inferences about the state of the articular cartilage based on the amount of narrowing of the joint space. MRI and ultrasound techniques offer the added value of detecting changes in the soft tissues such as synovitis, tenosynovitis, and effusions as well as greater sensitivity for identifying bony abnormalities. Plain radiographs are usually relied upon in clinical practice for the purpose of diagnosis and monitoring of affected joints. However, in selected cases, MRI and ultrasound can provide additional diagnostic information that may guide clinical decision-making.

Plain Radiography

Classically in RA, the initial radiographic finding is juxtaarticular osteopenia. Practically speaking, however, this finding is difficult to appreciate on plain films, and in particular, on the newer digitalized x-rays. Other findings on plain radiographs include soft tissue swelling, symmetric joint space loss, and subchondral erosions, most frequently in the wrists and hands (MCPs and PIPs) and the feet (MTPs). In the feet, the lateral aspect of the fifth MTP is often targeted first, but other MTP joints may be involved at the same time. X-ray imaging of advanced RA may reveal signs of severe destruction, including joint subluxation and collapse (Fig. 321-5).

Figure 321-5

 
 
 
X-ray demonstrating progression of erosions on the proximal interphalangeal joint. (Courtesy of the American College of Rheumatology.)
 
 

MRI

MRI offers the greatest sensitivity for detecting synovitis and joint effusions, as well as early bone and bone marrow changes. These soft tissue abnormalities often occur before osseous changes are noted on x-ray. Presence of bone marrow edema has been recognized to be an early sign of inflammatory joint disease, and can predict the subsequent development of erosions on plain radiographs as well as MRI scans. Cost and availability of MRI are the main factors limiting its routine clinical use.

Ultrasound

Ultrasound, including power color Doppler, has the ability to detect more erosions than plain radiography, especially in easily accessible joints. Less clear, however, is the ability of ultrasound to reliably detect synovitis, including increased joint vascularity indicative of inflammation. The usefulness of ultrasound is dependent on the experience of the sonographer; however, it does offer the advantages of portability, lack of radiation, and low expense relative to MRI, factors that make it attractive as a clinical tool.
 
Clinical Course

The natural history of RA is complex and affected by a number of factors including age of onset, gender, genotype, phenotype (i.e., extraarticular manifestations or variants of RA), and comorbid conditions, which make for a truly heterogeneous disease. There is no simple way to predict the clinical course. It is important to realize that as many as 10% of patients with inflammatory arthritis fulfilling ACR classification criteria for RA will undergo a spontaneous remission within 6 months (particularly seronegative patients). However, the vast majority of patients will exhibit a pattern of persistent and progressive disease activity that waxes and wanes in intensity over time. A minority of patients will show intermittent and recurrent explosive attacks of inflammatory arthritis interspersed with periods of disease quiescence. Finally, an aggressive form of RA may occur in an unfortunate few with inexorable progression of severe erosive joint disease, although this highly destructive course is less common in the modern treatment era of biologics.

Disability, as measured by the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), shows gradual worsening of disability over time in the face of poorly controlled disease activity and disease progression. Disability may result from both a disease activity每related component that is potentially reversible with therapy and a joint damage每related component owing to the cumulative and largely irreversible effects of cartilage and bone breakdown. Early in the course of disease, the extent of joint inflammation is the primary determinant of disability, while in the later stages of disease, the amount of joint damage is the dominant contributing factor. Previous studies have shown that more than one-half of patients with RA are unable to work 10 years after the onset of their disease; however, increased employability and less work absenteeism has been reported recently with the use of newer therapies and earlier treatment intervention.

The overall mortality rate in RA is two times greater than the general population, with ischemic heart disease being the most common cause of death followed by infection. Median life expectancy is shortened by an average of 7 years for men and 3 years for women compared to control populations. Patients at higher risk for shortened survival are those with systemic extraarticular involvement, low functional capacity, low socioeconomic status, low education, and chronic prednisone use.

Treatment: Rheumatoid Arthritis

The amount of clinical disease activity in patients with RA reflects the overall burden of inflammation and is the variable most influencing treatment decisions. Joint inflammation is the main driver of joint damage and is the most important cause of functional disability in the early stages of disease. Several composite indices have been developed to assess clinical disease activity. The ACR 20, 50, and 70 improvement criteria [which corresponds to a 20%, 50%, and 70% improvement in joint counts, physician/patient assessment of disease severity, pain scale, serum levels of acute-phase reactants (ESR or CRP), and a functional assessment of disability using a self-administered patient questionnaire] are a composite index with a dichotomous response variable. The ACR improvement criteria are commonly used in clinical trials as an endpoint for comparing the proportion of responders between treatment groups. In contrast, the Disease Activity Score (DAS), Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI), and the Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI) are continuous measures of disease activity. These scales are increasingly used in clinical practice for tracking disease status, and in particular, for documenting treatment response.

Several developments during the past two decades have changed the therapeutic landscape in RA. They include: (1) the emergence of methotrexate as the disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) of first choice for the treatment of early RA; (2) the development of novel highly efficacious biologicals that can be used alone or in combination with methotrexate; and (3) the proven superiority of combination DMARD regimens over methotrexate alone. The medications used for the treatment of RA may be divided into broad categories: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); glucocorticoids, such as prednisone and methylprednisolone; conventional disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs); and biologic DMARDs (Table 321-2). While disease for some patients with RA is managed adequately with a single DMARD, such as methotrexate, the situation entails in most cases the use of a combination DMARD regimen that may vary in its components over the treatment course depending on fluctuations in disease activity and emergence of drug-related toxicities and comorbidities.

Table 321-2 DMARDs Used for the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis

 
 
Drug
 Dosage
 Serious Toxicities
 Other Common Side Effects
 Initial Evaluation
 Monitoring
 
Hydroxychloroquine
 200每400 mg/d orally (6.5 mg/kg)
 Irreversible retinal damage

Cardiotoxicity

Blood dyscrasia
 Nausea

Diarrhea

Headache

Rash
 Eye examination if > 40 years old or prior ocular disease
 Funduscopic and visual field testing every 12 months
 
Sulfasalazine
 Initial: 500 mg orally twice daily

Maintenance: 1000每1500 mg twice daily
 Granulocytopenia

Hemolytic anemia (with G6PD deficiency)
 Nausea

Diarrhea

Headache
 CBC, LFTs

G6PD level
 CBC every 2每4 weeks for first 3 months, then every 3 months
 
Methotrexate
 10每25 mg/week orally or SQ

Folic acid 1 mg/d to reduce toxicities
 Hepatotoxicity

Myelosuppression

Infection

Interstitial pneumonitis

Pregnancy category X
 Nausea

Diarrhea

Stomatitis/mouth ulcers

Alopecia

Fatigue
 CBC, LFTs

Viral hepatitis panel*

Chest x-ray
 CBC, creatinine, LFTs every 2每3 months
 
Leflunomide
 10每20 mg/d
 Hepatotoxicity

Myelosuppression

Infection

Pregnancy category X
 Alopecia

Diarrhea
 CBC, LFTs

Viral hepatitis panel*
 CBC, creatinine, LFTs every 2每3 months
 
TNF- Inhibitors
 Infliximab: 3 mg/kg IV at weeks 0, 2, 6, then every 8 weeks. May increase dose up to 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks
  Risk bacterial, fungal infections

Reactivation of latent TB

 Lymphoma risk (controversial)

Drug-induced lupus

Neurologic deficits
 Infusion reaction

 LFTs
 PPD skin test
 LFTs periodically
 
  Etanercept: 50 mg

SQ weekly, or 25 mg

SQ biweekly
 As above
 Injection site reaction
 PPD skin test
 Monitor for injection site reactions
 
  Adalimumab: 40 mg SQ every other week
 As above
 Injection site reaction
 PPD skin test
 Monitor for injection site reactions
 
  Golimumab: 50 mg SQ monthly
 As above
 Injection site reaction
 PPD skin test
 Monitor for injection site reactions
 
  Certolizumab: 400 mg SQ weeks 0, 2, 4 then 200 mg every other week
 As above
 Injection site reaction
 PPD skin test
 Monitor for injection site reactions
 
Abatacept
 Weight based: <60 kg: 500 mg 60每100 kg: 750 mg >100 kg: 1000 mg

IV dose at week 0, 2 and 4, and then every 4 weeks
  Risk bacterial, viral infections
 Headache

Nausea
 PPD skin test
 Monitor for infusion reactions
 
Anakinra
 100 mg SQ daily
  Risk bacterial, viral infections

Reactivation of latent TB

Neutropenia
 Injection site reaction

Headache
 PPD skin test CBC with differential
 CBC every month for 3 months, then every 4 months for 1 year

Monitor for injection site reactions
 
Rituximab
 1000 mg IV x 2, day 0 and 14
  Risk bacterial, viral infections

Infusion reaction
 Rash

Fever
 CBC Viral hepatitis panel*
 CBC at regular intervals
 
  May repeat course every 24 weeks or more
 Cytopenia

Hepatitis B reactivation
       
  Premedicate with methylprednisolone 100 mg to decrease infusion reaction
         
Tocilizumab
 4每8 mg/kg

8 mg/kg IV monthly
 Risk of infection

Infusion reaction

LFT elevation

Dyslipidemia

Cytopenias
   PPD skin test
 CBC and LFTs at regular intervals
 
 


*Viral hepatitis panel: hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C viral antibody.

Abbreviations: CBC, complete blood count; DMARDs, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; IV, intravenous; LFTs, liver function tests; PPD, purified peptide derivative; SQ, subcutaneous; TB, tuberculosis.
 

NSAIDs

NSAIDs were formally viewed as the core of all other RA therapy, but they are now considered to be adjunctive therapy for management of symptoms uncontrolled by other measures. NSAIDs exhibit both analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties.

The anti-inflammatory effects of NSAIDs derive from their ability to nonselectively inhibit cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2. Although the results of clinical trials suggest NSAIDs are roughly equivalent in their efficacy, experience suggests that some individuals may preferentially respond to a particular NSAID. Chronic use should be minimized due to the possibility of side effects, including gastritis and peptic ulcer disease as well as impairment of renal function.

Glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoids may serve in several ways to control disease activity in RA. First, they may be administered in low-to-moderate doses to achieve rapid disease control before the onset of fully effective DMARD therapy, which often takes several weeks or even months. Second, a 1每2 week burst of glucocorticoids may be prescribed for the management of acute disease flares, with dose and duration guided by the severity of the exacerbation. Chronic administration of low doses (5每10 mg/d) of prednisone (or its equivalent) may also be warranted to control disease activity in patients with an inadequate response to DMARD therapy. Low-dose prednisone therapy has been shown in prospective studies to retard radiographic progression of joint disease; however, the benefits of this approach must be carefully weighed against the risks. Best practices minimize chronic use of low-dose prednisone therapy owing to the risk of osteoporosis and other long-term complications; however, the use of chronic prednisone therapy is unavoidable in many cases. Finally, if a patient exhibits one or a few actively inflamed joints, the clinician may consider intraarticular injection of an intermediate-acting glucocorticoid such as triamcinolone acetonide. This approach may allow for rapid control of inflammation in the setting of a limited number of affected joints. Caution must be exercised to appropriately exclude joint infection, as it often mimics an RA flare.

Osteoporosis ranks as an important long-term complication of chronic prednisone use. The ACR recommends primary prevention of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis with a bisphosphonate in any patient receiving 5 mg/d or more of prednisone for greater than 3 months. While prednisone use is known to increase the risk of peptic ulcer disease, especially with concomitant NSAID use, no evidence-based guidelines have been published regarding the use of gastrointestinal ulcer prophylaxis in this situation.

DMARDs

DMARDs are so named because of their ability to slow or prevent structural progression of RA. The conventional DMARDs include hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine, methotrexate, and leflunomide; they exhibit a delayed onset of action of approximately 6每12 weeks. Methotrexate is the DMARD of choice for the treatment of RA and is the anchor drug for most combination therapies. It was approved for the treatment of RA in 1986 and remains the benchmark for the efficacy and safety of new disease-modifying therapies. At the dosages used for the treatment of RA, methotrexate has been shown to stimulate adenosine release from cells, producing an anti-inflammatory effect. The clinical efficacy of leflunomide, an inhibitor of pyrimidine synthesis, appears similar to that of methotrexate; it has been shown in well-designed trials to be effective for the treatment of RA as monotherapy or in combination with methotrexate and other DMARDs.

Although similar to the other DMARDs in its slow onset of action, hydroxychloroquine has not been shown to delay radiographic progression of disease and thus is not considered to be a true DMARD. In clinical practice, hydroxychloroquine is generally used for treatment of early, mild disease or as adjunctive therapy in combination with other DMARDs. Sulfasalazine is utilized in a similar manner and has been shown in randomized, controlled trials to reduce radiographic progression of disease. Minocycline, gold salts, penicillamine, azathioprine, and cyclosporine have all been used for the treatment of RA with varying degrees of success; however, they are used sparingly now due to their inconsistent clinical efficacy or unfavorable toxicity profile.

Biologicals

Biologic DMARDs have revolutionized the treatment of RA over the past decade (Table 321-2). They are protein therapeutics designed mostly to target cytokines and cell-surface molecules. The TNF inhibitors were the first biologicals approved for the treatment of RA. Anakinra, an IL-1 receptor antagonist, was approved shortly thereafter; however, its benefits have proved to be relatively modest compared with the other biologicals. Abatacept, rituximab, and tocilizumab are the newest members of this class.

Anti-TNF Agents

The development of TNF inhibitors was originally spurred by the experimental finding that TNF is a critical upstream mediator of joint inflammation. Currently, five agents that inhibit TNF- are approved for the treatment of RA. There are three different anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies. Infliximab is a chimeric (part mouse and human) monoclonal antibody, while adalimumab and golimumab are humanized monoclonal antibodies. Certolizumab pegol is a pegylated Fc-free fragment of a humanized monoclonal antibody with binding specificity for TNF-. Lastly, etanercept is a soluble fusion protein comprising the TNF receptor 2 in covalent linkage with the Fc portion of IgG1. All of the TNF inhibitors have been shown in randomized controlled clinical trials to reduce the signs and symptoms of RA, slow radiographic progression of joint damage, and improve physical function and quality of life. Anti-TNF drugs are typically used in combination with background methotrexate therapy. This combination regimen, which affords maximal benefit in many cases, is often the next step for treatment of patients with an inadequate response to methotrexate therapy. Etanercept, adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, and golimumab have also been approved for use as monotherapy.

Anti-TNF agents should be avoided in patients with active infection or a history of hypersensitivity to these agents. A major concern is the increased risk for infection, especially opportunistic fungal infection and reactivation of latent tuberculosis. For this reason, all patients are screened for latent tuberculosis according to national guidelines prior to starting anti-TNF therapy (Chap. 165). In the United States, patients are skin tested using an intradermal injection of purified peptide derivative (PPD); individuals with skin reactions of more than 5 mm are presumed to have had previous exposure to TB and are evaluated for active disease and treated accordingly.

Anakinra

Anakinra, the recombinant form of the naturally occurring IL-1 receptor antagonist, has seen limited use for the treatment of RA owing to its modest clinical efficacy. However, anakinra has enjoyed a resurgence of late for the treatment of some rare syndromes dependent on IL-1 production, including neonatal-onset inflammatory disease, Muckle-Wells syndrome, and familial cold urticaria, systemic juvenile-onset inflammatory arthritis, and adult-onset Still's disease. Anakinra should not be combined with an anti-TNF drug due to the high rate of serious infections as observed with this regimen in a clinical trial.

Abatacept

Abatacept is a soluble fusion protein consisting of the extracellular domain of human cytotoxic T lymphocyte每associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) linked to the modified portion of human IgG. It inhibits the co-stimulation of T cells by blocking CD28-CD80/86 interactions and may also inhibit the function of antigen-presenting cells by reverse signaling through CD80 and CD86. Abatacept has been shown in clinical trials to reduce disease activity, slow radiographic progression of damage, and improve functional disability. Most patients receive abatacept in combination with methotrexate or another DMARD such as leflunomide. Its onset of action is usually slower than that of the anti-TNF agents. Abatacept therapy has been associated with an increased risk of infection but is usually well tolerated otherwise.

Rituximab

Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against CD20, a cell-surface molecule expressed by most mature B-lymphocytes. It works by depleting B cells, which in turn, leads to a reduction in the inflammatory response by unknown mechanisms. Rituximab has been approved for the treatment of refractory RA in combination with methotrexate and has been shown to be more effective for patients with seropositive than seronegative disease. Rituximab therapy has been associated with mild-to-moderate infusion reactions as well as an increased risk of infection. Notably, there have been isolated reports of a potentially lethal brain disorder, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), in association with rituximab therapy, although the absolute risk of this complication appears to be very low in patients with RA. Most of these cases have occurred on a background of previous or current exposure to other potent immunosuppressive drugs.

Tocilizumab

Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the membrane and soluble forms of the IL-6 receptor. IL-6 is a proinflammatory cytokine implicated in the pathogenesis of RA, with detrimental effects on both joint inflammation and damage. IL-6 binding to its receptor activates intracellular signaling pathways that affect the acute-phase response, cytokine production, and osteoclast activation. Clinical trials have attested to the clinical efficacy of tocilizumab therapy for RA, both as monotherapy and in combination with methotrexate and other DMARDs. Tocilizumab has been associated with an increased risk of infection, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia; however, the hematologic abnormalities appear to be reversible upon stopping the drug. In addition, this agent has been shown to increase LDL cholesterol; however, it is not known as yet if this effect on lipid levels increases the risk for development of atherosclerotic disease.

Approach to the Patient: Rheumatoid Arthritis

The original treatment pyramid for RA is now considered to be obsolete and has evolved into a new strategy that focuses on several goals: (1) early, aggressive therapy to prevent joint damage and disability; (2) frequent modification of therapy with utilization of combination therapy where appropriate; (3) individualization of therapy in an attempt to maximize response and minimize side effects; and (4) achieving, whenever possible, remission of clinical disease activity. A considerable amount of evidence supports this intensive treatment approach.

As mentioned earlier, methotrexate is the DMARD of first choice for initial treatment of moderate-to-severe RA. Failure to achieve adequate improvement with methotrexate therapy calls for consideration of an effective combination regimen. Effective combinations include: methotrexate, sulfasalazine, and hydroxychloroquine (triple therapy); methotrexate and leflunomide; and methotrexate plus a biological. The combination of methotrexate and an anti-TNF agent, for example, has been shown in randomized, controlled trials to be superior to methotrexate alone not only for reducing signs and symptoms of disease, but also for retarding the progression of structural joint damage. The caveat of these studies, however, is that the protection against structural damage afforded by combining an anti-TNF drug with methotrexate appears to be restricted to a subset of patients with a high risk for disease progression. This subset corresponds to approximately 25% of patients enrolled in clinical trials. The remaining patients do not show significant progression in joint damage over 12 months while receiving methotrexate alone. Predicting which patients will ultimately show radiologic joint damage is imprecise at best, although some factors such as an elevated serum level of acute-phase reactants, high burden of joint inflammation, and the presence of erosive disease are associated with increased likelihood of developing structural injury.

Some patients may not respond to an anti-TNF drug or be intolerant of its side effects. Initial responders to an anti-TNF agent that later worsen may benefit from switching to another anti-TNF agent. Other biologicals, such as abatacept and rituximab, may also be considered for the treatment of patients whose disease is refractory to anti-TNF therapy. The addition of abatacept or rituximab to background methotrexate therapy has been shown in well-designed clinical trials to be effective for reducing the signs and symptoms of joint inflammation and slowing radiographic progression of disease. Early in the treatment course, abatacept may also be considered in lieu of an anti-TNF drug depending on the clinical circumstances (e.g., relative contraindication for the use of an anti-TNF agent).

A clinical state defined as low disease activity or remission is the optimal goal of therapy, although most patients never achieve remission despite every effort to achieve it. Composite indices, such as the Disease Activity Score -28 or DAS28, are useful for classifying states of low disease activity and remission; however, they are imperfect tools due to the limitations of the clinical joint examination in which low-grade synovitis may escape detection. Complete remission has been stringently defined as the total absence of all articular and extraarticular inflammation and immunologic activity related to RA. However, evidence for this state can be difficult to demonstrate in clinical practice. In an effort to standardize and simplify the definition of remission for clinical trials, the ACR and EULAR developed two provisional operational definitions of remission in RA (Table 321-3). A patient may be considered in remission if he or she 1) meets all of the clinical and laboratory criteria listed in Table 321-3 or 2) has a composite Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI) score of <3.3. The SDAI is calculated by taking the sum of a tender joint and swollen joint count (using 28 joints), patient global assessment (0每10 scale), physician global assessment (0每10 scale), and C-reactive protein (in mg/dL). This definition of remission does not take into account the possibility of subclinical synovitis or that damage alone may produce a tender or swollen joint. Ignoring the semantics of these definitions, the aforementioned remission criteria are nonetheless useful for setting a level of disease control that will likely result in minimal or no progression of structural damage and disability.

Table 321-3 Acr/Eular Provisional Definition of Remission in Rheumatoid Arthritis

 
 
At any time point, patient must satisfy all of the following:

    Tender joint count  1

    Swollen joint count  1

    C-reactive protein  1 mg/dL

    Patient global assessment  1 (on a 0每10 scale)

OR

At any time point, patient must have a Simplified Disease Activity Index score of  3.3
 
 


Source: Adapted from Felson et al.
 

Physical Therapy and Assistive Devices

All patients should receive a prescription for exercise and physical activity. Dynamic strength training, community-based comprehensive physical therapy, and physical-activity coaching (emphasizing 30 minutes of moderately intensive activity most days a week) have all been shown to improve muscle strength and perceived health status. Foot orthotics for painful valgus deformity decreases foot pain and resulting disability and functional limitations. Judicious use of wrist splints can also decrease pain; however, their benefits may be offset by decreased dexterity and a variable effect on grip strength.

Surgery

Surgical procedures may improve pain and disability in RA〞most notably the hands, wrists, and feet, typically after the failure of medical therapy with varying degrees of reported long-term success. For large joints, such as the knee, hip, shoulder, or elbow, total joint arthroplasty is an option for advanced joint disease. A few surgical options exist for dealing with the smaller hand joints. Silicone implants are the most common prosthetic for MCP arthroplasty, and are generally implanted in patients with severe decreased arc of motion, marked flexion contractures, MCP joint pain with radiographic abnormalities and severe ulnar drift. Synovectomy and limited fusion are offered for the early rheumatoid wrist, but they are used much less frequently now compared to the past because of the availability of improved DMARD therapies. Arthrodesis and total wrist arthroplasty are reserved for patients with severe disease that have substantial pain and functional impairment. These two procedures appear to have equal efficacy in terms of pain control and patient satisfaction. Numerous surgical options exist for correction of hallux valgus in the forefoot, including arthrodesis and arthroplasty, as well as primarily arthrodesis for refractory hindfoot pain.

Other Management Considerations

Pregnancy

Up to 75% of female RA patients will note overall improvement in symptoms during pregnancy, but often will flare post-delivery. Flares during pregnancy are generally treated with low doses of prednisone; hydroxychloroquine and sulfasalazine are probably the safest DMARDs to use during pregnancy. Methotrexate and leflunomide therapy are contraindicated during pregnancy due to their teratogenicity in animals and humans. The experience with biologic agents has been insufficient to make specific recommendations for their use during pregnancy. Most rheumatologists avoid their use in this setting; however, exceptions are considered depending on the circumstances.

Elderly Patients

RA presents in up to one-third of patients after the age of 60; however, it has been recognized that older individuals receive less aggressive treatment due to concerns about increased risks of drug toxicity. Studies suggest that conventional DMARDs as well as biologic agents are equally effective and safe in younger and older patients. Due to comorbidities, many elderly patients have an increased risk of infection. Aging also leads to a gradual decline in renal function that may raise the risk for side effects from NSAIDs and some DMARDS, such as methotrexate. Renal function must be taken into consideration before prescribing methotrexate, which is mostly cleared by the kidneys. To reduce the risks of side effects, methotrexate doses may need to be adjusted downward for the drop in renal function that usually comes with the seventh and eighth decades of life. Methotrexate is usually not prescribed for patients with a serum creatinine greater than 2 mg/dl.
 
Global Challenges

Developing countries are finding an increase in the incidence of noncommunicable, chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and RA in the face of ongoing poverty, rampant infectious disease, and poor access to modern health care facilities. In these areas, patients tend to have a greater delay in diagnosis and limited access to specialists, and thus greater disease activity and disability at presentation. In addition, infection risk remains a significant issue for the treatment of RA in developing countries because of the immunosuppression associated with the use of glucocorticoids and most DMARDs. For example, in some developing countries, patients undergoing treatment for RA have a substantial increase in the incidence of tuberculosis, which demands the implementation of far more comprehensive screening practices and liberal use of isoniazid prophylaxis than in developed countries. The increased prevalence of hepatitis B and C, as well as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), in these developing countries also poses challenges. Reactivation of viral hepatitis has been observed in association with some of the DMARDs, such as rituximab. Also, reduced access to antiretroviral therapy may limit the control of HIV infection and therefore the choice of DMARD therapies.

Despite these challenges, one should attempt to implement early treatment of RA in the developing countries with the resources at hand. Sulfasalazine and methotrexate are all reasonably accessible throughout the world where they can be utilized as both monotherapy and in combination with other drugs. The use of biologic agents is increasing in the developed countries as well as in other areas around the world, although their use is limited by high cost; national protocols restrict their use, and concerns remain about the risk for opportunistic infections.
 
Summary

Improved understanding of the pathogenesis of RA and its treatment has dramatically revolutionized the management of this disease. The outcomes of patients with RA are vastly superior to those of the prebiologic modifier era; more patients than in years past are able to avoid significant disability and continue working, albeit with some job modifications in many cases. The need for early and aggressive treatment of RA as well as frequent follow-up visits for monitoring of drug therapy has implications for our health care system. Primary care physicians and rheumatologists must be prepared to work together as a team to reach the ambitious goals of best practice. In many settings, rheumatologists have reengineered their practice in a way that places high priority on consultations for any new patient with early inflammatory arthritis.

The therapeutic regimens for RA are becoming increasingly complex with the rapidly expanding therapeutic armamentarium. Patients receiving these therapies must be carefully monitored by both the primary care physician and the rheumatologist to minimize the risk of side effects and identify quickly any complications of chronic immunosuppression. Also, prevention and treatment of RA-associated conditions such as ischemic heart disease and osteoporosis will likely benefit from a team approach owing to the value of multidisciplinary care.

Research will continue to search for new therapies with superior efficacy and safety profiles and investigate treatment strategies that can bring the disease under control more rapidly and nearer to remission. However, prevention and cure of RA will likely require new breakthroughs in our understanding of disease pathogenesis. These insights may come from genetic studies illuminating critical pathways in the mechanisms of joint inflammation. Equally ambitious is the lofty goal of biomarker discovery that will open the door to personalized medicine for the care of patients with RA.
 
Further Readings

Felson DT et al: American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism provisional definition of remission in rheumatoid arthritis for clinical trials. Arthritis Rheum 63:573, 2011[PMID: 21294106]  [Full Text]

 
Goldring MB, Marcu KB: Cartilage homeostasis in health and rheumatic diseases. Arthritis Res Ther 11:224, 2009[PMID: 19519926]  [Full Text]

 
Goldring SR, Goldring MB: Eating bone or adding it: The Wnt pathway decides. Nat Med 13:133, 2007[PMID: 17290270]  [Full Text]

 
Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM: Developments in the scientific understanding of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 11:249, 2009[PMID: 19835638]  [Full Text]

 
Gravallese EM et al: Identification of cell types responsible for bone resorption in rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Am J Pathol 152:943, 1998[PMID: 9546355]  [Full Text]

 
Holers VM: Antibodies to citrullinated proteins: pathogenic and diagnostic significance. Curr Rheumatol Rep 9:396, 2007[PMID: 17915095]  [Full Text]

 
Mcinnes IB, Schett G: Cytokines in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev Immunol 7: 429, 2007[PMID: 17525752]  [Full Text]

 
Michou L et al: Associations between genetic factors, tobacco smoking and autoantibodies in familial and sporadic rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 67:466, 2008[PMID: 17660221]  [Full Text]

 
Mody GM, Cardiel MH: Challenges in the management of rheumatoid arthritis in developing countries. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 22:621, 2008[PMID: 18783741]  [Full Text]

 
Myasoedova E et al: Epidemiology of rheumatiod arthritis: Rheumatoid arthritis and mortality. Curr Rheumatol Rep 12:379, 2010[PMID: 20645137]  [Full Text]

 
Neogi T et al: 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria: An American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheum 62:2569, 2010[PMID: 20872595]  [Full Text]

 
Plenge RM: Rheumatoid arthritis genetics: 2009 update. Curr Rheumatol Rep 11:351, 2009[PMID: 19772830]  [Full Text]

 
Scott DL, Kingsley GH: Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors for rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 355:704, 2006[PMID: 16914706]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞, Steer S. The course of established rheumatoid arthritis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 21:943, 2007 

 
Smolen JS, et al: New therapies for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 370:1861, 2007[PMID: 17570481]  [Full Text]

 
Turesson C et al: Extra-articular disease manifestations in rheumatoid arthritis: incidence trends and risk factors over 46 years. Ann Rheum Dis 62:722, 2003[PMID: 12860726]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 322. Acute Rheumatic Fever >
 

Acute Rheumatic Fever: Introduction

Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is a multisystem disease resulting from an autoimmune reaction to infection with group A streptococcus. Although many parts of the body may be affected, almost all of the manifestations resolve completely. The exception is cardiac valvular damage [rheumatic heart disease (RHD)], which may persist after the other features have disappeared.
 
Global Considerations

ARF and RHD are diseases of poverty. They were common in all countries until the early twentieth century, when their incidence began to decline in industrialized nations. This decline was largely attributable to improved living conditions〞particularly less crowded housing and better hygiene〞which resulted in reduced transmission of group A streptococci. The introduction of antibiotics and improved systems of medical care had a supplemental effect. Recurrent outbreaks of ARF began in the 1980s in the Rocky Mountain states of the United States, where elevated rates persist.

The virtual disappearance of ARF and reduction in the incidence of RHD in industrialized countries during the twentieth century unfortunately was not replicated in developing countries, where these diseases continue unabated. RHD is the most common cause of heart disease in children in developing countries and is a major cause of mortality and morbidity in adults as well. It has been estimated that between 15 and 19 million people worldwide are affected by RHD, with approximately one-quarter of a million deaths occurring each year. Some 95% of ARF cases and RHD deaths now occur in developing countries.

Although ARF and RHD are relatively common in all developing countries, they occur at particularly elevated rates in certain regions. These "hot spots" are sub-Saharan Africa, Pacific nations, Australasia, and the Indian subcontinent (Fig. 322-1). Unfortunately, most developing countries do not currently have coordinated, register-based RHD control programs, which are proven to be cost-effective in reducing the burden of RHD. Enhancing awareness of RHD and mobilizing resources for its control in developing countries is an issue requiring international attention.

Figure 322-1

 
 
 
Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease in children aged 5每14 years. Circles within Australia and New Zealand represent indigenous populations, and also Pacific Islanders in New Zealand. (From JR Carapetis et al: Lancet Infect Dis. Copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier.)
 
 
 
Epidemiology

ARF is mainly a disease of children aged 5每14 years. Initial episodes become less common in older adolescents and young adults and are rare in persons aged >30 years. By contrast, recurrent episodes of ARF remain relatively common in adolescents and young adults. This pattern contrasts with the prevalence of RHD, which peaks between 25 and 40 years. There is no clear gender association for ARF, but RHD more commonly affects females, sometimes up to twice as frequently as males.
 
Pathogenesis

Organism Factors

Based on currently available evidence, ARF is exclusively caused by infection of the upper respiratory tract with group A streptococci (see Chap. 136). Although classically, certain M-serotypes (particularly types 1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 18, 19, 24, 27, and 29) were associated with ARF, in high-incidence regions, it is now thought that any strain of group A streptococcus has the potential to cause ARF. Potential role of skin infection and of groups C and G streptococci are currently being investigated.

Host Factors

Approximately 3每6% of any population may be susceptible to ARF, and this proportion does not vary dramatically between populations. Findings of familial clustering of cases and concordance in monozygotic twins〞particularly for chorea〞confirm that susceptibility to ARF is an inherited characteristic. Particular human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles appear to be strongly associated with susceptibility. Associations have also been described with high levels of circulating mannose-binding lectin and polymorphisms of transforming growth factor 1 gene and immunoglobulin genes. High-level expression of a particular alloantigen present on B cells, D8-17, has been found in patients with a history of ARF in many populations, with intermediate-level expression in first-degree family members, suggesting that this may be a marker of inherited susceptibility.

The Immune Response

When a susceptible host encounters a group A streptococcus, an autoimmune reaction results, which leads to damage to human tissues as a result of cross-reactivity between epitopes on the organism and the host (Fig. 322-2). Cross-reactive epitopes are present in the streptococcal M protein and the N-acetylglucosamine of group A streptococcal carbohydrate and are immunologically similar to molecules in human myosin, tropomyosin, keratin, actin, laminin, vimentin, and N-acetylglucosamine. It is currently thought that the initial damage is due to cross-reactive antibodies attaching at the cardiac valve endothelium, allowing the entry of primed CD4+ T cells, leading to subsequent T cell-mediated inflammation.

Figure 322-2

 
 
 
Pathogenetic pathway for acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.(From JR Carapetis et al: Lancet 366:155, 2005. Copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier.)
 
 
 
Clinical Features

There is a latent period of 3 weeks (1每5 weeks) between the precipitating group A streptococcal infection and the appearance of the clinical features of ARF. The exceptions are chorea and indolent carditis, which may follow prolonged latent periods lasting up to 6 months. Although many patients report a prior sore throat, the preceding group A streptococcal infection is commonly subclinical; in these cases it can only be confirmed using streptococcal antibody testing. The most common clinical presentation of ARF is polyarthritis and fever. Polyarthritis is present in 60每75% of cases and carditis in 50每60%. The prevalence of chorea in ARF varies substantially between populations, ranging from <2% to 30%. Erythema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules are now rare, being found in <5% of cases.

Heart Involvement

Up to 60% of patients with ARF progress to RHD. The endocardium, pericardium, or myocardium may be affected. Valvular damage is the hallmark of rheumatic carditis. The mitral valve is almost always affected, sometimes together with the aortic valve; isolated aortic valve involvement is rare. Early valvular damage leads to regurgitation. Over ensuing years, usually as a result of recurrent episodes, leaflet thickening, scarring, calcification, and valvular stenosis may develop (Fig. 322-3). See Videos 322-1A-D and 322-2A-B. Therefore the characteristic manifestation of carditis in previously unaffected individuals is mitral regurgitation, sometimes accompanied by aortic regurgitation. Myocardial inflammation may affect electrical conduction pathways, leading to P-R interval prolongation (first-degree AV block or rarely higher-level block) and softening of the first heart sound.

Figure 322-3

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic image from a 5-yearold boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease. This diastolic image demonstrates leaflet thickening, restriction of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip, and doming of the body of the leaflet toward the interventricular septum. This appearance (marked by the arrowhead) is commonly described as a "hockey stick" or an "elbow" deformity. AV, aortic valve; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congential Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-1A

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images of a 9-year-old girl with first episode of acute rheumatic fever. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings of acute rheumatic carditis. The valve leaflets are relatively thin and highly mobile. The failure of coaptation of the mitral valve leaflets is the result of chordal elongation and annular dilatation. The mitral valve regurgitation is moderate with a typical postero-laterally directed regurgitant jet of rheumatic carditis. A. Acute rheumatic carditis (apical 4-chamber view echocardiogram). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-1B

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images of a 9-year-old girl with first episode of acute rheumatic fever. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings of acute rheumatic carditis. The valve leaflets are relatively thin and highly mobile. The failure of coaptation of the mitral valve leaflets is the result of chordal elongation and annular dilatation. The mitral valve regurgitation is moderate with a typical postero-laterally directed regurgitant jet of rheumatic carditis. B. Acute rheumatic carditis (apical 4-chamber view colour-Doppler echocardiogram). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-1C

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images of a 9-year-old girl with first episode of acute rheumatic fever. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings of acute rheumatic carditis. The valve leaflets are relatively thin and highly mobile. The failure of coaptation of the mitral valve leaflets is the result of chordal elongation and annular dilatation. The mitral valve regurgitation is moderate with a typical postero-laterally directed regurgitant jet of rheumatic carditis. C. Acute rheumatic carditis (parasternal long-axis view echocardiogram). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-1D

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images of a 9-year-old girl with first episode of acute rheumatic fever. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings of acute rheumatic carditis. The valve leaflets are relatively thin and highly mobile. The failure of coaptation of the mitral valve leaflets is the result of chordal elongation and annular dilatation. The mitral valve regurgitation is moderate with a typical postero-laterally directed regurgitant jet of rheumatic carditis. D. Acute rheumatic carditis (parasternal long-axis view colour-Doppler echocardiogram). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-2A

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images are from a 5-year-old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral valve regurgitation and moderate mitral valve stenosis. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings in advanced chronic rheumatic heart disease. Both the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets are markedly thickened. During diastole, the motion of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip is restricted with doming of the body of the leaflet towards the interventricular septum. This appearance is commonly described as a "hockey stick" or an "elbow" deformity. A. Chronic rheumatic heart disease (parasternal long-axis view). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 
Video 322-2B

 
 
 
Transthoracic echocardiographic images are from a 5-year-old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral valve regurgitation and moderate mitral valve stenosis. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings in advanced chronic rheumatic heart disease. Both the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets are markedly thickened. During diastole, the motion of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip is restricted with doming of the body of the leaflet towards the interventricular septum. This appearance is commonly described as a "hockey stick" or an "elbow" deformity. B. Chronic rheumatic heart disease (apical 2-chamber view echocardiogram). (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
 
 

Joint Involvement

To qualify as a major manifestation, joint involvement in ARF must be arthritic, i.e., objective evidence of inflammation, with hot, swollen, red and/or tender joints, and involvement of more than one joint (i.e., polyarthritis). The typical arthritis is migratory, moving from one joint to another over a period of hours. ARF almost always affects the large joints〞most commonly the knees, ankles, hips, and elbows〞and is asymmetric. The pain is severe and usually disabling until anti-inflammatory medication is commenced.

Less severe joint involvement is also relatively common but qualifies only as a minor manifestation. Arthralgia without objective joint inflammation usually affects large joints in the same migratory pattern as polyarthritis. In some populations, aseptic monoarthritis may be a presenting feature of ARF. This may occur because of early commencement of anti-inflammatory medication before the typical migratory pattern is established.

The joint manifestations of ARF are highly responsive to salicylates and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Indeed, joint involvement that persists more than 1 or 2 days after starting salicylates is unlikely to be due to ARF. Conversely, if salicylates are commenced early in the illness, before fever and migratory polyarthritis have become manifest, it may be difficult to make a diagnosis of ARF. For this reason, salicylates and other NSAIDs should be withheld〞and pain managed with acetaminophen or codeine〞until the diagnosis is confirmed.

Chorea

Sydenham's chorea commonly occurs in the absence of other manifestations, follows a prolonged latent period after group A streptococcal infection, and is found mainly in females. The choreiform movements affect particularly the head (causing characteristic darting movements of the tongue) and the upper limbs (Chap. 371). They may be generalized or restricted to one side of the body (hemi-chorea). The chorea varies in severity. In mild cases it may be evident only on careful examination, while in the most severe cases the affected individuals are unable to perform activities of daily living and are at risk of injuring themselves. Chorea eventually resolves completely, usually within 6 weeks.

Skin Manifestations

The classic rash of ARF is erythema marginatum(Chap. 17), which begins as pink macules that clear centrally, leaving a serpiginous, spreading edge. The rash is evanescent, appearing and disappearing before the examiner's eyes. It occurs usually on the trunk, sometimes on the limbs, but almost never on the face.

Subcutaneous nodules occur as painless, small (0.5每2 cm), mobile lumps beneath the skin overlying bony prominences, particularly of the hands, feet, elbows, occiput, and occasionally the vertebrae. They are a delayed manifestation, appearing 2每3 weeks after the onset of disease, last for just a few days up to 3 weeks, and are commonly associated with carditis.

Other Features

Fever occurs in most cases of ARF, although rarely in cases of pure chorea. Although high-grade fever (39∼C) is the rule, lower grade temperature elevations are not uncommon. Elevated acute-phase reactants are also present in most cases. C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are often dramatically elevated. Occasionally the peripheral leukocyte count is mildly elevated.

Evidence of a Preceding Group a Streptococcal Infection

With the exception of chorea and low-grade carditis, both of which may become manifest many months later, evidence of a preceding group A streptococcal infection is essential in making the diagnosis of ARF. As most cases do not have a positive throat swab culture or rapid antigen test, serologic evidence is usually needed. The most common serologic tests are the anti-streptolysin O (ASO) and anti-DNase B (ADB) titers. Where possible, age-specific reference ranges should be determined in a local population of healthy people without a recent group A streptococcal infection.

Other Post-Streptococcal Syndromes that May Be Confused with Rheumatic Fever

Post-streptococcal reactive arthritis (PSRA) is differentiated from ARF on the basis of: (1) small-joint involvement that is often symmetric; (2) a short latent period following streptococcal infection (usually <1 week); (3) occasional causation by nongroup A -hemolytic streptococcal infection; (4) slower responsiveness to salicylates; and (5) the absence of other features of ARF, particularly carditis.

Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS) is a term that links a range of tic disorders and obsessive-compulsive symptoms with group A streptococcal infections. People with PANDAS are said not to be at risk of carditis, unlike patients with Sydenham's chorea. The diagnoses of PANDAS and PSRA should rarely be made in populations with a high incidence of ARF.

Confirming the Diagnosis

Because there is no definitive test, the diagnosis of ARF relies on the presence of a combination of typical clinical features together with evidence of the precipitating group A streptococcal infection, and the exclusion of other diagnoses. This uncertainty led Dr. T. Duckett Jones in 1944 to develop a set of criteria (subsequently known as the Jones criteria) to aid in the diagnosis. An expert panel convened by the World Health Organization (WHO) clarified the use of the Jones criteria in ARF recurrences (Table 322-1). Because each revision of the Jones criteria since 1944 has reduced sensitivity and increased specificity, in response to the decline in incidence of ARF in high-income countries, there is now concern that they may be too insensitive for countries where ARF incidence remains high. As a result, some countries (e.g., Australia and New Zealand) have developed their own, more sensitive, diagnostic criteria for ARF in their populations (links available at the RHDnet websitewww.worldheart.org/rhd).

Table 322-1 2002每2003 World Health Organization Criteria for the Diagnosis of Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease (Based on the 1992 Revised Jones Criteria)

 
 
Diagnostic Categories Criteria 
Primary episode of rheumatic fevera
 Two major or one major and two minor manifestations plus evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection
 
Recurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient without established rheumatic heart disease
 Two major or one major and two minor manifestations plus evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection
 
Recurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient with established rheumatic heart diseaseb
 Two minor manifestations plus evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infectionc
 
Rheumatic chorea Insidious onset rheumatic carditisb
 Other major manifestations or evidence of group A streptococcal infection not required
 
Chronic valve lesions of rheumatic heart disease (patients presenting for the first time with pure mitral stenosis or mixed mitral valve disease and/or aortic valve disease)d
 Do not require any other criteria to be diagnosed as having rheumatic heart disease
 
Major manifestations
 Carditis

Polyarthritis

Chorea

Erythema marginatum

Subcutaneous nodules
 
Minor manifestations
 Clinical: fever, polyarthralgia

Laboratory: elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or leukocyte counte

Electrocardiogram: prolonged P-R interval
 
Supporting evidence of a preceding streptococcal infection within the last 45 days
 Elevated or rising anti-streptolysin O or other streptococcal antibody, or

A positive throat culture, or

Rapid antigen test for group A streptococcus, or

Recent scarlet fevere
 
 


aPatients may present with polyarthritis (or with only polyarthralgia or monoarthritis) and with several (three or more) other minor manifestations, together with evidence of recent group A streptococcal infection. Some of these cases may later turn out to be rheumatic fever. It is prudent to consider them as cases of "probable rheumatic fever" (once other diagnoses are excluded) and advise regular secondary prophylaxis. Such patients require close follow-up and regular examination of the heart. This cautious approach is particularly suitable for patients in vulnerable age groups in high incidence settings.

bInfective endocarditis should be excluded.

cSome patients with recurrent attacks may not fulfill these criteria.

dCongenital heart disease should be excluded.

e1992 Revised Jones criteria do not include elevated leukocyte count as a laboratory minor manifestation (but do include elevated C-reactive protein), and do not include recent scarlet fever as supporting evidence of a recent streptococcal infection.

Source: Reprinted with permission from WHO Expert Consultation on Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease (2001: Geneva, Switzerland): Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease: Report of a WHO Expert Consultation (WHO Tech Rep Ser, 923). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
 

Treatment: Acute Rheumatic Fever

Patients with possible ARF should be followed closely to ensure that the diagnosis is confirmed, treatment of heart failure and other symptoms is undertaken, and preventive measures including commencement of secondary prophylaxis, inclusion on an ARF registry, and health education are commenced. Echocardiography should be performed on all possible cases to aid in making the diagnosis and to determine the severity at baseline of any carditis. Other tests that should be performed are listed in Table 322-2.

Table 322-2 Recommended Tests in Cases of Possible Acute Rheumatic Fever

 
 
Recommended for all cases

    White blood cell count

    Erythrocyte sedimentation rate

    C-reactive protein

    Blood cultures if febrile

    Electrocardiogram (repeat in 2 weeks and 2 months if prolonged P-R interval or other rhythm abnormality)

    Chest x-ray if clinical or echocardiographic evidence of carditis

    Echocardiogram (consider repeating after 1 month if negative)

    Throat swab (preferably before giving antibiotics)每culture for group A streptococcus

    Anti-streptococcal serology: both anti-streptolysin O and anti-DNase B titres, if available (repeat 10每14 days later if 1st test not confirmatory)

Tests for alternative diagnoses, depending on clinical features

    Repeated blood cultures if possible endocarditis

    Joint aspirate (microscopy and culture) for possible septic arthritis

    Copper, ceruloplasmin, anti-nuclear antibody, drug screen for choreiform movements

    Serology and auto-immune markers for arboviral, auto-immune or reactive arthritis
 
 


Source: Reprinted with permission from National Heart Foundation of Australia.
 

There is no treatment for ARF that has been proven to alter the likelihood of developing, or the severity of, RHD. With the exception of treatment of heart failure, which may be life-saving in cases of severe carditis, the treatment of ARF is symptomatic.

Antibiotics

All patients with ARF should receive antibiotics sufficient to treat the precipitating group A streptococcal infection (Chap. 136). Penicillin is the drug of choice and can be given orally [as phenoxymethyl penicillin, 500 mg (250 mg for children 27 kg) PO twice daily, or amoxicillin 50 mg/kg (max 1 g) daily, for 10 days] or as a single dose of 1.2 million units (600,000 units for children 27 kg) IM benzathine penicillin G.

Salicylates and NSAIDs

These may be used for the treatment of arthritis, arthralgia, and fever, once the diagnosis is confirmed. They are of no proven value in the treatment of carditis or chorea. Aspirin is the drug of choice. An initial dose of 80每100 mg/kg per day in children (4每8 g/d in adults) in 4每5 divided doses is often needed for the first few days up to 2 weeks. A lower dose should be used if symptoms of salicylate toxicity emerge, such as nausea, vomiting, or tinnitus. When the acute symptoms are substantially resolved, the dose can be reduced to 60每70 mg/kg per day for a further 2每4 weeks. Fever, joint manifestations, and elevated acute-phase reactants sometimes recur up to 3 weeks after the medication is discontinued. This does not indicate a recurrence and can be managed by recommencing salicylates for a brief period. Although less well studied, naproxen at a dose of 10每20 mg/kg per day has been reported to lead to good symptomatic response.

Congestive Heart Failure

Glucocorticoids

The use of glucocorticoids in ARF remains controversial. Two meta-analyses have failed to demonstrate a benefit of glucocorticoids compared to placebo or salicylates in improving the short- or longer term outcome of carditis. However, the studies included in these meta-analyses all took place >40 years ago and did not use medications in common usage today. Many clinicians treat cases of severe carditis (causing heart failure) with glucocorticoids in the belief that they may reduce the acute inflammation and result in more rapid resolution of failure. However, the potential benefits of this treatment should be balanced against the possible adverse effects, including gastrointestinal bleeding and fluid retention. If used, prednisone or prednisolone are recommended at doses of 1每2 mg/kg per day (maximum, 80 mg). Glucocorticoids are often only required for a few days or up to a maximum of 3 weeks.

Management of Heart Failure

See Chap. 234.

Bed Rest

Traditional recommendations for long-term bed rest, once the cornerstone of management, are no longer widely practiced. Instead, bed rest should be prescribed as needed while arthritis and arthralgia are present, and for patients with heart failure. Once symptoms are well controlled, gradual mobilization can commence as tolerated.

Chorea

Medications to control the abnormal movements do not alter the duration or outcome of chorea. Milder cases can usually be managed by providing a calm environment. In patients with severe chorea, carbamazepine or sodium valproate are preferred to haloperidol. A response may not be seen for 1每2 weeks, and a successful response may only be to reduce rather than resolve the abnormal movements. Medication should be continued for 1每2 weeks after symptoms subside.

Intravenous Immunoglobulin (Ivig)

Small studies have suggested that IVIg may lead to more rapid resolution of chorea but has shown no benefit on the short- or long-term outcome of carditis in ARF without chorea. In the absence of better data, IVIg is not recommended except in cases of severe chorea refractory to other treatments.
 
Prognosis

Untreated, ARF lasts on average 12 weeks. With treatment, patients are usually discharged from hospital within 1每2 weeks. Inflammatory markers should be monitored every 1每2 weeks until they have normalized (usually within 4每6 weeks), and an echocardiogram should be performed after 1 month to determine if there has been progression of carditis. Cases with more severe carditis need close clinical and echocardiographic monitoring in the longer term.

Once the acute episode has resolved, the priority in management is to ensure long-term clinical follow-up and adherence to a regimen of secondary prophylaxis. Patients should be entered onto the local ARF registry (if present) and contact made with primary care practitioners to ensure a plan for follow-up and administration of secondary prophylaxis before the patient is discharged. Patients and their families should also be educated about their disease, emphasizing the importance of adherence to secondary prophylaxis. If carditis is present, they should also be informed of the need for antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis for dental and surgical procedures.
 
Prevention

Primary Prevention

Ideally, primary prevention would entail elimination of the major risk factors for streptococcal infection, particularly overcrowded housing. This is difficult to achieve in most places where ARF is common.

Therefore, the mainstay of primary prevention for ARF remains primary prophylaxis (i.e., the timely and complete treatment of group A streptococcal sore throat with antibiotics). If commenced within 9 days of sore throat onset, a course of penicillin (as outlined above for treatment of ARF) will prevent almost all cases of ARF that would otherwise have developed. This important strategy relies on individuals presenting for medical care when they have a sore throat, the availability of trained health and microbiology staff along with the materials and infrastructure to take throat swabs, and a reliable supply of penicillin. Unfortunately, many of these elements are not available in developing countries.

Secondary Prevention

The mainstay of controlling ARF and RHD is secondary prevention. Because patients with ARF are at dramatically higher risk than the general population of developing a further episode of ARF after a group A streptococcal infection, they should receive long-term penicillin prophylaxis to prevent recurrences. The best antibiotic for secondary prophylaxis is benzathine penicillin G (1.2 million units, or 600,000 units if 27 kg) delivered every 4 weeks. It can be given every 3 weeks, or even every 2 weeks, to persons considered to be at particularly high risk, although in settings where good compliance with 4-weekly dosing can be achieved, more frequent dosing is rarely needed. Oral penicillin V (250 mg) can be given twice-daily instead but is somewhat less effective than benzathine penicillin G. Penicillin allergic patients can receive erythromycin (250 mg) twice daily.

The duration of secondary prophylaxis is determined by many factors, in particular the duration since the last episode of ARF (recurrences become less likely with increasing time), age (recurrences are less likely with increasing age), and the severity of RHD (if severe, it may be prudent to avoid even a very small risk of recurrence because of the potentially serious consequences) (Table 322-3). Secondary prophylaxis is best delivered as part of a coordinated RHD control program, based around a registry of patients. Registries improve the ability to follow patients and identify those who default from prophylaxis and institute strategies to improve adherence.

Table 322-3 American Heart Association Recommendations for Duration of Secondary Prophylaxis* 

 
 
Category of Patient
 Duration of Prophylaxis
 
Rheumatic fever without carditis
 For 5 years after the last attack or 21 years of age (whichever is longer)
 
Rheumatic fever with carditis but no residual valvular disease
 For 10 years after the last attack, or 21 years of age (whichever is longer)
 
Rheumatic fever with persistent valvular disease, evident clinically or on echocardiography
 For 10 years after the last attack, or 40 years of age (whichever is longer). Sometimes lifelong prophylaxis.
 
 


*These are only recommendations and must be modified by individual circumstances as warranted. Note that other organizations have slightly different recommendations (see www.worldheart.org/rhd for links).

Source: Adapted from AHA Scientific Statement Prevention of Rheumatic Fever and Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Streptococcal Pharyngitis. Circulation 119:1541, 2009.
 
 
Further Readings

Carapetis JR et al: Acute rheumatic fever. Lancet 366:155, 2005 [PMID: 16005340]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞 et al: The global burden of group A streptococcal diseases. Lancet Infect Dis 5:685, 2005 

 
Gerber MA et al: Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute Streptococcal pharyngitis: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, the Interdisciplinary Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology, and the Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: Endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation 119:1541, 2009 [PMID: 19246689]  [Full Text]

 
Lennon D et al: School-based prevention of acute rheumatic fever: A group randomized trial in New Zealand. Pediatr Infect Dis J 28:787, 2009 [PMID: 19710585]  [Full Text]

 
National Heart Foundation of Australia: Diagnosis and Management of Acute Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease in Australia: Complete Evidence-Based Review and Guideline. Melbourne, National Heart Foundation of Australia, 2006 

 
Paar JA et al: Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease in children and young adults in Nicaragua. Am J Cardiol 105:1809, 2010 [PMID: 20538135]  [Full Text]

 
Special Writing Group of the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease of the American Heart Association: Guidelines for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever: Jones criteria, 1992 update. JAMA 268:2069, 1992 

 
Steer A et al: Group A streptococcal vaccines: facts versus fantasy. Curr Opin Infect Dis 22:544, 2009 [PMID: 19797947]  [Full Text]

 
Steer AC, Carapetis JR: Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease in indigenous populations. Pediatr Clin North Am 56:1401, 2009 [PMID: 19962028]  [Full Text]

 
 

^^
Chapter 323. Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma) and Related Disorders >
 

Definition

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a connective tissue disorder of unknown etiology, heterogeneous clinical manifestations, and chronic and often progressive course. The diffuse cutaneous form of SSc (dcSSc) is characterized by thickening of the skin (scleroderma) and distinctive involvement of multiple internal organs, most notably the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, heart, and kidneys. The early stage of the disease is associated with prominent inflammatory features. Over time, patients develop functional and structural alterations in multiple vascular beds and progressive visceral organ dysfunction due to fibrosis. Although the presence of thickened skin (scleroderma) distinguishes SSc from other connective tissue diseases, scleroderma-like skin induration can occur in localized forms of scleroderma and other disorders (Table 323-1). Patients can be classified into two principal subsets defined largely by the pattern of skin involvement, as well as clinical and laboratory manifestations (Table 323-2). Diffuse cutaneous SSc is associated with progressive skin induration, starting in the fingers and ascending from distal to proximal extremities, the face, and the trunk. These patients are at risk for early pulmonary fibrosis and acute renal involvement. Patients with limited cutaneous SSc (lcSSc) generally have long-standing Raynaud's phenomenon before other manifestations of SSc appear. Skin involvement in lcSSc is slowly progressive and remains limited to the fingers (sclerodactyly), distal extremities, and face, but the trunk is not affected. A subset of patients with lcSSc have prominent calcinosis cutis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia, a constellation termed CRESTsyndrome. However, these features may also be seen in patients with dcSSc. Visceral organ involvement in lcSSc tends to show insidious progression. Although the long-term prognosis of lcSSc is better than that of dcSSc, pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), interstitial lung disease, hypothyroidism, and primary biliary cirrhosis may develop in the late stage of lcSSc. In some patients, Raynaud's phenomenon and other typical features of SSc occur in the absence of detectable skin thickening. This syndrome has been termed SSc sine scleroderma.

Table 323-1 Conditions Associated with Scleroderma-Like Induration

 
 
Systemic sclerosis (SSc)
 
    Limited cutaneous SSc

     Diffuse cutaneous SSc
 
Localized scleroderma
 
     Guttate morphea, diffuse morphea

     Linear scleroderma, coup de sabre, hemifacial atrophy
 
Pansclerotic morphea
 
Overlap syndromes
 
     Mixed connective tissue disease

     SSc/polymyositis
 
Stiff Skin Syndrome
 
Undifferentiated connective tissue disease
 
Scleredema and diabetic scleredema
 
Scleromyxedema (papular mucinosis)
 
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (nephrogenic fibrosing dermatopathy)
 
Chronic graft-versus-host disease
 
Diffuse fasciitis with eosinophilia (Shulman disease, eosinophilic fasciitis)
 
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome
 
Chemically induced scleroderma-like conditions
 
     Vinyl chloride每induced disease

     Pentazocine-induced skin fibrosis
 
Paraneoplastic
 
 

 
Table 323-2 Subsets of Systemic Sclerosis (Ssc): Limited Cutaneous Ssc versus Diffuse Cutaneous Ssc

 
 
Features
 Limited Cutaneous SSc
 Diffuse Cutaneous SSc
 
Skin involvement
 Indolent onset.

Limited to fingers, distal to elbows, face; slow progression
 Rapid onset. Diffuse: fingers, extremities, face, trunk; rapid progression
 
Raynaud's phenomenon
 Precedes skin involvement; associated with critical ischemia
 Onset coincident with skin involvement, may be mild
 
Musculoskeletal
 Early arthralgia, fatigue
 Severe arthralgia, carpal tunnel syndrome, tendon friction rubs
 
Pulmonary fibrosis
 Occasional, moderate
 Frequent, early and severe
 
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
 Frequent, late, may be isolated
 May occur, often in association with pulmonary fibrosis
 
Scleroderma renal crisis
 Very rare
 Occurs in 15%; early
 
Calcinosis cutis
 Frequent, prominent
 May occur, mild
 
Characteristic autoantibodies
 Anticentromere
 Antitopoisomerase I (Scl-70), anti-RNA polymerase III
 
 

 
 
Epidemiology

SSc is an acquired sporadic disease with a worldwide distribution and affecting all races. In the United States, the incidence is estimated at 9每19 cases per million per year. The only community-based survey of SSc yielded a prevalence of 286 cases per million population. There are an estimated 100,000 cases in the United States, although this number may be significantly higher if patients who do not meet strict classification criteria are also included. Studies from England, Australia, and Japan showed rates of SSc that were lower than in the United States. Age, gender, and ethnicity are important factors determining disease susceptibility. Like other connective tissue diseases, SSc shows a female predominance that is most pronounced in the childbearing years and declines after menopause. While SSc can present at any age, the most common age of onset for both limited and diffuse cutaneous forms is in the range of 30每50 years. The incidence is higher in blacks than whites, and disease onset occurs at an earlier age. Furthermore, blacks are more likely to have the diffuse cutaneous form of SSc associated with interstitial lung involvement and a worse prognosis.
 
Genetic Considerations

SSc shows a non-Mendelian pattern of inheritance. Monozygotic twins have a relatively low concordance rate for SSc (4.7%), although concordance for antinuclear antibodies is significantly greater. A genetic contribution to disease susceptibility is indicated by the fact that 1.6% of SSc patients have a first-degree relative with SSc, a prevalence rate substantially higher than in the general population. The risk of other autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (Chap. 319) and rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 321), is also increased. Among Choctaw Indians from Oklahoma, SSc prevalence as high as 4690 per million has been reported. Genetic investigations in SSc have focused on candidate gene polymorphisms. Small studies have shown associations with the genes encoding angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE); endothelin-1 and nitric oxide synthase; B cell markers (CD19); chemokines (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and chemokine receptors; interferon signaling mediators STAT4 and IRF5; migration inhibitory factor; cytokines [interleukin 1 (IL-1, IL-4, and tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-)]; growth factors and their receptors [connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and transforming growth factor  (TGF-)]; and extracellular matrix proteins [fibronectin, fibrillin, and secreted protein acidic-rich in cysteine (SPARC)]. To date, these genetic studies indicate that as in other complex diseases, multiple genetic loci are involved in SSc, and their individual contributions to disease susceptibility are modest. Genome-wise association studies to identify additional genetic susceptibility loci in SSc are currently underway.
 
Environmental and Occupational Risk Factors

Patients with SSc have increased serum antibodies to human cytomegalovirus (hCMV), and antitopoisomerase-I (Scl-70) autoantibodies recognize antigenic epitopes present on the hCMV-derived proteins, suggesting molecular mimicry as a possible mechanistic link between hCMV infection and SSc. Evidence of human parvovirus B19 infection in SSc patients has also been presented; however, the etiologic role of viruses remains unproven. Reports of geographic clustering of SSc cases suggesting shared environmental exposures have not been substantiated by careful investigation. An epidemic of a novel syndrome with features suggestive of SSc occurred in Spain in the 1980s. The outbreak, termed toxic oil syndrome and affecting over 20,000 individuals, was linked to contaminated rapeseed oils used for cooking. A similar epidemic outbreak, termed eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS), occurred a decade later in the United States. Affected individuals presented with marked eosinophilia and severe myalgia, followed by the development of scleroderma-like chronic skin lesions. The EMS epidemic was linked to the consumption of imported batches of L-tryptophan used as dietary supplements. While both of these apparently novel toxic-epidemic syndromes were characterized by scleroderma-like chronic skin changes and variable visceral organ involvement they were associated with clinical, pathologic, and laboratory features that clearly distinguished them from SSc. The incidence of SSc is increased among miners exposed to silica. Other occupational exposures tentatively linked with SSc include polyvinyl chloride, epoxy resins, and aromatic hydrocarbons including toluene and trichloroethylene. Drugs implicated in SSc-like illnesses include bleomycin, pentazocine and cocaine, and appetite suppressants linked with pulmonary hypertension. As yet unknown inhaled factors may play a role in the development of SSc-associated interstitial lung disease. Case reports and series describing SSc in women with silicone breast implants had raised concern regarding a possible causal role of silicone in SSc. However, large-scale epidemiologic investigations found no evidence of increased risk of SSc.
 
Pathogenesis

A comprehensive view of the pathogenesis of SSc must incorporate the three cardinal features of the disease: (1) vasculopathy, (2) cellular and humoral auto immunity, and (3) progressive visceral and vascular fibrosis in multiple organs (Fig. 323-1). Autoimmunity and altered vascular reactivity may be the earliest manifestations of SSc. Complex interplay between these processes is thought to initiate and then amplify the fibrotic process.

Figure 323-1

 
 
 
Initial vascular injury in a genetically susceptible individual leads to functional and structural vascular alterations, inflammation, and autoimmunity. The inflammatory and immune responses initiate and sustain fibroblast activation and differentiation, resulting in pathologic fibrogenesis and irreversible tissue damage. Vascular damage results in tissue ischemia that further contributes to progressive fibrosis and atrophy. CTGF, connective tissue growth factor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-, transforming growth factor-.
 
 

Animal Models of Disease

There is no single animal model of SSc that reproduces the three cardinal processes that underlie the pathogenesis, but some models recapitulate selected disease characteristics. The tight-skin mouse (Tsk1) is a naturally occurring fibrosis model characterized by spontaneous skin thickening. The mutation responsible for the phenotype, a duplication in the fibrillin-1 gene, gives rise to an abnormally large fibrillin-1 protein that contributes to defective extracellular matrix assembly and aberrant activation of TGF-. Mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene are associated with Marfan's disease and the stiff skin syndrome but have not been described in patients with SSc. Fibrosis in the skin and lungs can be induced in mice by bleomycin injections or by transplantation of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-mismatched bone marrow or spleen cells. Increasingly, manipulation of mice via mutagenesis or targeted genetic modification such as knock-out or transgenesis are utilized to create new disease models and for dissecting the roles of individual molecules in the underlying processes. For example, genetic targeting of Smad3, an intracellular TGF- signal transducer, or of the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma, yielded mice that were resistant or hypersensitive to bleomycin-induced scleroderma. These mouse models become increasingly useful for preclinical testing of novel treatments.

Microangiopathy

Vascular involvement in SSc is extensive, involves multiple vascular beds, and has important clinical consequences. Raynaud's phenomenon, an early manifestation, is characterized by an altered blood-flow response to cold challenge. This initially reversible functional vascular abnormality is associated with alterations in the autonomic and peripheral nervous systems, with impaired production of neuropeptides such as calcitoningene-related peptide from sensory afferent nerves and heightened sensitivity of 2-adrenergic receptors on vascular smooth-muscle cells. While isolated Raynaud's phenomenon is common, relatively benign, and nonprogressive, SSc-associated Raynaud's phenomenon is frequently complicated by irreversible structural and functional changes. Viruses, superoxide radicals, vascular cytotoxic factors, and immune responses such as complement and circulating autoantibodies to endothelial cells may each contribute to endothelial cell injury in early SSc. Endothelial injury results in dysregulated production of endothelium-derived vasodilatory (nitric oxide and prostacyclin) and vasoconstricting (endothelin-1) substances, as well as increased expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and other surface adhesion molecules. Microvessels show enhanced permeability and transendothelial leukocyte diapedesis, activation of coagulation and fibrinolytic cascades, and platelet aggregation. Smooth muscle cell每like myointimal cells proliferate, the basement membrane is thickened and reduplicated, and fibrosis of the adventitial layers develops. The vasculopathic process affects capillaries, as well as arterioles, and even large vessels in many organs, resulting in reduced blood flow, tissue ischemia, and generation of profibrotic factors. Progressive luminal occlusion due to intimal and medial hypertrophy, combined with persistent endothelial cell damage and adventitial fibrosis, establish a vicious cycle culminating in the striking absence of blood vessels seen on angiograms of the hands and kidneys in late-stage disease. Damaged endothelium promotes platelet aggregation with release of serotonin and platelet alpha granules including thromboxane, a potent vasoconstrictor, and of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Vascular compromise is aggravated by defective fibrinolysis. Oxidative stress due to ischemia-reperfusion is associated with generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that further damage the endothelium through peroxidation of membrane lipids. Paradoxically, the process of revascularization that normally reestablishes blood flow to ischemic tissue is defective in SSc despite elevated levels of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and other angiogenic factors. The number of bone marrow每derived CD34+ CD133+ endothelial progenitor cells is markedly reduced in the circulation, and their differentiation in vitro into mature endothelial cells is impaired. Thus, widespread capillary malformation and loss, obliterative vasculopathy of small and medium-sized arteries, and failure to repair damaged vessels are hallmarks of SSc.

Inflammation and Cellular Immunity

In the early stages of SSc, activated T cells and monocytes/macrophages accumulate in lesional skin, lungs, and other affected organs. Infiltrating T cells express CD45 and HLA-DR activation markers and display restricted T cell receptor signatures indicative of oligoclonal expansion in response to (unknown) antigen. Circulating CD4+ T cells have elevated levels of chemokine receptors and 1 integrin adhesion molecules, accounting for their enhanced ability to bind to endothelium and to fibroblasts. Endothelial cells express ICAM-1 and other adhesion molecules that facilitate leukocyte diapedesis. Activated macrophages and T cells show a TH2-polarized immune response and secrete IL-4 and IL-13. TH2 cytokines induce the production of TGF- and promote collagen synthesis and other profibrotic responses, whereas the TH1 cytokineinterferon  (IFN-) inhibits collagen synthesis and blocks cytokine-mediated fibroblast activation. Because TGF- stimulates its own synthesis, as well as that of CTGF (also termed CCN2) and other cytokines, TGF- establishes an autocrine/paracrine stimulatory loop that sustains activation of fibroblasts and other effector cells (Chaps. 314 and 318). Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are essential for maintaining normal immune tolerance. While the frequency of Tregs in the peripheral blood is elevated in SSc, their immunosuppressive function is defective.

Humoral Autoimmunity

Antinuclear antibodies occur in virtually all patients with SSc. In addition, a number of mutually exclusive autoantibodies that are highly specific for SSc have been described. These antibodies show strong association with specific disease phenotypes and genetically determined HLA haplotypes (Table 323-3). Autoantibody levels correlate with disease severity, and titers fluctuate with disease activity. While some SSc-specific autoantibodies are antinuclear and directed against intracellular proteins such as topoisomerase-I, and the RNA polymerases, others are directed against cell-surface antigens or secreted proteins. Functional autoantibodies have well-established clinical utility as diagnostic and prognostic markers in SSc, although their pathogenetic role in the disease manifestations remains uncertain. Autoantibodies to fibroblasts, endothelial cells, PDGF cell-surface receptors, fibrillin-1, and matrix metalloproteinase enzymes have been described in SSc. The direct pathogenetic role of these self antibodies in SSc remains to be firmly established.

Table 323-3 Autoantibodies and Associated Features in Systemic Sclerosis (Ssc)

 
 
Target Antigen
 SSc Subset
 Characteristic Clinical Association
 
Topoisomerase-I
 dcSSc
 Tendon friction rubs, ILD, cardiac involvement, scleroderma renal crisis
 
Centromere proteins
 lcSSc
 Digital ischemia, calcinosis, isolated PAH; renal crisis rare
 
RNA polymerase III
 dcSSc
 Extensive skin, tendon friction rubs, renal crisis
 
U3-RNP
 dcSSc
 PAH, ILD, scleroderma renal crisis, myositis
 
Th/T0
 lcSSc
 ILD, PAH
 
PM/Scl
 lcSSc
 Calcinosis, myositis
 
U1-RNP
 MCTD
 PAH
 
 


Abbreviations: dcSSc, diffuse cutaneous SSc; ILD, interstitial lung disease; lcSSc, limited cutaneous SSc; MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension.
 

A variety of mechanisms have been proposed for the occurrence of autoantibodies in SSc. Proteolytic cleavage, increased expression, or altered subcellular localization of certain cellular proteins in SSc could lead to their recognition as neoepitopes by the immune system. For example, cytotoxic T cells release the protease granzyme B that cleaves peptides, and generates neoepitopes that can break immune tolerance. Recent studies implicate B cells in both the autoimmune and fibrotic responses in SSc. In addition to their well-recognized role in antibody production, B cells can also present antigen, produce IL-6 and TGF-, and modulate T cell and dendritic cell function. In SSc, B cells show elevated CD19 expression, and reduced numbers of memory B cells and early plasma cells. Gene expression profiling of lesional skin has identified mRNA expression signatures characteristic of B cell activation.

Fibrosis

Fibrosis affecting multiple organs distinguishes SSc from other connective tissue diseases. Fibrosis characteristically follows, and is thought to be a consequence of, autoimmunity and vascular damage. The process, characterized by progressive replacement of normal tissue architecture with dense connective tissue, accounts for substantial morbidity and mortality. Fibroblasts are mesenchymal cells responsible for maintaining the functional and structural integrity of connective tissue. When activated by TGF- and related factors, fibroblasts proliferate, migrate, secrete collagens and extracellular matrix, growth factors, and cytokines, and transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts. Under normal conditions, these responses allow fibroblasts to repair tissue damage. The rapid and self-limited physiologic repair program becomes sustained and amplified in pathologic fibrosis, resulting in the irreversible accumulation of scar tissue.

In addition to connective tissue每resident fibroblasts, and transformation of epithelial cells into fibroblasts, circulating mesenchymal progenitor cells of bone marrow origin might also contribute to fibrosis. The factors that regulate the development of mesenchymal progenitor cells in the bone marrow, their trafficking from the circulation into lesional tissue, and in situ into matrix-producing fibroblasts, are unknown. Epithelial and endothelial cells and fibroblasts can differentiate into smooth-muscle每like myofibroblasts characterized by prominent cytoskeleal structures containing alpha smooth muscle actin. While myofibroblasts can be transiently detected during normal wound healing, they persist in tissue during pathologic fibrogenesis, possibly due to resistance to apoptosis. Myofibroblasts contribute to scar formation via production of collagen and TGF-, and contraction of the surrounding extracellular matrix.

Explanted fibroblasts display an abnormally activated phenotype in culture. Compared to normal fibroblasts, SSc fibroblasts have variably increased rates of collagengene transcription and display smooth-muscle actin stress fibers. Furthermore, they show enhanced secretion of extracellular matrix molecules, cytokines, and growth factors; expression of chemokine receptors and cell surface adhesion molecules; resistance to apoptosis; spontaneously generate ROS; and autocrine TGF- signaling. The abnormal "scleroderma phenotype" of these cells persists during their serial passage in vitro. Factors contributing to the autonomously activated phenotype include autocrine TGF- stimulatory loops, hypoxia, deregulated microRNA expressions and other epigenetic modifications, and altered cell-matrix interaction. Global transcriptome analyses show differential expression of many extracellular matrix genes, including collagens, fibronectin, and fibrillins in SSc fibroblasts. A majority of the abnormally expressed genes could be linked to TGF- responses, but other fibrogenic signaling pathways involving CTGF, endothelin-1m hypoxia, PDGF and Wnts are also operative in SSc.
 
Pathology

The distinguishing pathologic hallmark of SSc is the combination of widespread capillary loss and obliterative vasculopathy of small arteries and arterioles, together with fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. In early disease, perivascular cellular infiltrates composed of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, plasma cells, mast cells, and occasionally B cells may be detected in multiple organs prior to the appearance of fibrosis. The vascular lesion is characterized by intimal proliferation in the small and medium-sized arteries, resulting in luminal narrowing. Obliterative vasculopathy as a late finding is prominent in the heart, lungs, kidneys, and intestinal tract. Fibrosis is found in the skin, lungs, gastrointestinal tract, heart, tendon sheath, perifascicular tissue surrounding skeletal muscle, and some endocrine organs. In these tissues, accumulation of connective tissue composed of endothelin-1m collagens, fibronectin, proteoglycans, and other structural macromolecules progressively disrupts normal architecture, resulting in functional impairment of affected organs.

Skin

In the skin, fibrosis causes dermal expansion and obliteration of the hair follicles, sweat glands, and other appendages (Fig. 323-2A). Collagen fiber accumulation is most prominent in the reticular dermis, and the fibrotic process invades the subjacent adipose layer with entrapment of fat cells. The epidermis is atrophic, and the rete pegs are effaced.

Figure 323-2

 
 
 
 
 
Pathologic findings in systemic sclerosis (SSc).A. Dermal sclerosis. The skin is thickened due to marked expansion of the dermis. Thick bundles of densely packed collagen replace skin appendages. B. Early interstitial lung disease. Diffuse fibrosis of the alveolar septae and a chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Trichrome stain.C. Pulmonary arterial obliterative vasculopathy. Striking intimal hyperplasia and narrowing of the lumen of a small pulmonary artery, with minimal interstitial fibrosis, in a patient with limited cutaneous SSc.
 
 

Lungs

Patchy infiltration of the alveolar walls with T lymphocytes, macrophages, and eosinophils occurs in early disease. With progression, interstitial fibrosis and vascular damage dominate the pathologic picture, often coexisting within the same lesions in patients with dcSSc. Pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by expansion of the alveolar interstitium, with accumulation of collagen and other connective tissue proteins. The most common histologic pattern in SSc is fibrotic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (Fig. 323-2B). Progressive thickening of the alveolar septae results in obliteration of the airspaces and honeycombing, as well as loss of pulmonary blood vessels. This process impairs gas exchange and contributes to worsening of pulmonary hypertension. Intimal thickening of the pulmonary arteries, best seen with elastin stain, underlies pulmonary hypertension (Fig. 323-2C) and, at autopsy, is often associated with multiple pulmonary emboli and evidence of myocardial fibrosis.

Gastrointestinal Tract

Pathologic changes can be found at any level from the mouth to the rectum. The lower esophagus is frequently involved, with prominent atrophy of the muscular layers; striated muscle in the upper third of the esophagus is generally spared. Characteristic vascular lesions are often present. Replacement of the normal intestinal tract architecture results in diminished peristaltic activity, with gastroesophageal reflux, dysmotility, and small-bowel obstruction. Chronic reflux is associated with esophageal inflammation, ulcerations, and stricture formation and may lead to Barrett's metaplasia.

Kidneys

In the kidneys, lesions in the interlobular and arcuate arteries predominate, whereas glomerulonephritis is rare. Chronic renal ischemia is associated with shrunken glomeruli. Patients with scleroderma renal crisis show dramatic changes in small renal arteries with reduplication of elastic lamina, marked intimal proliferation, and narrowing of the lumen, often accompanied by thrombosis and microangiopathic hemolysis.

Heart

The heart is frequently affected, with prominent involvement of the myocardium and pericardium. The characteristic arteriolar lesions are concentric intimal hypertrophy and luminal narrowing, accompanied by contraction band necrosis reflecting ischemia-reperfusion injury, and patchy myocardial fibrosis that may also affect the conduction system. Despite the prominent role of ischemia in SSc, the frequency of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease is comparable to the general population.

Other Organs

Synovitis may be found in early SSc; however, with progression of the disease, the synovium becomes fibrotic. Fibrosis of tendon sheaths and fascia produces palpable and sometimes audible tendon friction rubs. Inflammation, and, in later stages, atrophy and fibrosis of the muscles are common findings. Fibrosis of the thyroid gland and of the minor salivary glands may be seen.
 
Clinical Features

Overview

Virtually every organ is affected in SSc (Table 323-4). While there is a great deal of variability in the clinical manifestations from one patient to the next, patients can be classified into one of two major subsets based on the pattern of skin involvement (Table 323-2). Moreover, while dcSSc is associated with prominent and early internal organ involvement, lcSSc presents with long-standing Raynaud's phenomenon, indolent skin, limited internal organ involvement, and a better prognosis. While patient stratification into diffuse and limited cutaneous subsets is useful, disease expression is far more complex, and several distinct phenotypes exist within each subset. For example, 10每15% of patients with lcSSc develop severe pulmonary arterial hypertension without significant interstitial lung disease (ILD). Other patients have systemic features of SSc without appreciable skin involvement (SSc sine scleroderma). Unique clinical phenotypes of SSc associate with specific autoantibodies (Table 323-3). Patients with "overlap" have typical SSc features coexisting with clinical and laboratory evidence of another autoimmune disease such as polymyositis, Sj?gren's syndrome, polyarthritis, autoimmune liver disease, or SLE.

Table 323-4 Internal Organ Involvement: Limited Cutaneous and Diffuse Cutaneous Forms of Systemic Sclerosis

 
 
Features
 Limited Cutaneous SSc (%)
 Diffuse Cutaneous SSc (%)
 
Skin involvement
 90*
 100
 
Raynaud's phenomenon
 99
 98
 
Esophageal involvement
 90
 80
 
Pulmonary fibrosis
 35
 65
 
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
 15
 15
 
Myopathy
 11
 23
 
Cardiac involvement
 9
 12
 
Scleroderma renal crisis
 2
 15
 
 


*10% of lcSSc patients have SSc sine scleroderma.
 

The term scleroderma refers to localized scleroderma and is used to describe a group of localized skin disorders that primarily affect children (Table 323-1). In contrast to SSc, localized scleroderma is rarely associated with Raynaud's phenomenon or internal organ involvement. Morphea presents as solitary or multiple circular patches of thickened skin and, less commonly, widespread induration (generalized or pansclerotic morphea); the fingers are spared. Linear scleroderma〞streaks of thickened skin, typically in one or both lower extremities〞may affect the subcutaneous tissues with fibrosis and atrophy of supporting structures, muscle, and bone. In children, the growth of affected long bones can be retarded. When linear scleroderma lesions cross joints, significant contractures can develop.

Initial Clinical Presentation

The initial presentation is quite different in the diffuse and the limited cutaneous forms of the disease. In patients with dcSSc, the interval between Raynaud's phenomenon and appearance of other manifestations is generally brief (weeks to months). Soft tissue swelling and intense pruritus are signs of the early inflammatory "edematous" phase of dcSSc. The fingers, hands, distal limbs, and face are usually affected first. Diffuse hyperpigmentation and carpal tunnel syndrome can occur. Arthralgias, muscle weakness and decreased joint mobility are common. During the ensuing weeks to months, the inflammatory edematous phase evolves into the "fibrotic" phase, with skin induration that is associated with loss of body hair, reduced production of skin oils, and a decline in sweating capacity. The subcutaneous tissue becomes affected, with fat atrophy and fibrosis of underlying fascia, muscle, and other soft tissue structures. Progressive flexion contractures of the fingers ensue. The wrists, elbows, shoulders, hip girdles, knees, and ankles become stiff due to fibrosis of the supporting joint structures. While advancing skin involvement is the most visible manifestation of early dcSSc, important internal organ involvement develops during this stage. The initial 4 years from disease onset is the period of rapidly evolving systemic involvement and greatest risk for pulmonary and renal damage. If organ failure does not occur during this period, the systemic process may stabilize.

Compared to dcSSc, the course of lcSSc is generally more indolent. The period between the onset of Raynaud's phenomenon and manifestations such as gastroesophageal reflux, telangiectasia, or calcinosis can be several years. Raynaud's phenomenon tends to be more severe than in dcSSc, and can be associated with critical ischemia, ulcerations, and autoamputation of the fingers. On the other hand, significant renal involvement and pulmonary fibrosis are uncommon in lcSSc patients. Cardiac involvement and isolated pulmonary arterial hypertension develop in 10每15%. Overlap of SSc with the sicca complex, polyarthritis, cutaneous vasculitis, and biliary cirrhosis is seen primarily in the lcSSc subset.
 
Organ Involvement

Raynaud's Phenomenon

Raynaud's phenomenon is an episodic vasoconstriction in the fingers and toes that occurs in virtually every patient with SSc. Vasoconstriction may also affect the tip of the nose and earlobes. Attacks are triggered by exposure to cold, a decrease in temperature, emotional stress, and vibration. Typical attacks start with pallor, followed by cyanosis of variable duration. Eventually erythema develops spontaneously or with rewarming of the digit. The progression of the three color phases reflects the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of vasoconstriction, ischemia, and reperfusion.

As much as 3每5% of the general population has Raynaud's phenomenon, and it is more frequent in women. In the absence of associated signs or symptoms of an underlying condition, Raynaud's phenomenon is classified as primary, and represents an exaggerated physiologic response to cold. Secondary Raynaud's phenomenon can occur as a complication of SSc and other connective tissue diseases, hematologic and endocrine conditions, and occupational disorders, and with the use of drugs such as the beta blocker atenolol and anticancer drugs such as cisplatin and bleomycin. Distinguishing primary versus secondary Raynaud's phenomenon can present a diagnostic challenge. The diagnosis of primary Raynaud's phenomenon is supported by the following: absence of an underlying cause on history and physical examination; a family history of Raynaud's phenomenon; absence of digital tissue necrosis, ulceration, or gangrene; and a negative test for antinuclear antibodies. Secondary Raynaud's phenomenon tends to develop at an older age (>30 years), is clinically more severe (episodes more frequent, prolonged, and painful), and is frequently associated with ischemic lesions and infarction in the digits (Fig. 323-3). The cutaneous capillaries at the nail bed can be viewed under a drop of grade B immersion oil using a low-power stereoscopic microscope. Nailfold capillaroscopy can be helpful in the evaluation of Raynaud's phenomenon; patients with primary Raynaud's phenomenon have normal capillaries that appear as regularly spaced parallel vascular loops, whereas in SSc and other connective tissue diseases, nailfold capillaries are distorted with widened and irregular loops, dilated lumen, and areas of vascular "dropout." In SSc, abnormal vascular reactivity may involve multiple vascular beds, and cold-induced Raynaud's-like episodic vasospasm has been documented in the pulmonary, renal, gastrointestinal, and coronary circulations.

Figure 323-3

 
 
 
Digital necrosis. Sharply demarcated necrosis of the fingertip in a patient with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (SSc) associated with severe Raynaud's phenomenon.
 
 

Skin Features

While early-stage SSc is associated with edematous skin changes, skin thickening is the hallmark that distinguishes SSc from other connective tissue diseases. The distribution of skin thickening is invariably symmetric and bilateral. It typically starts in the fingers, and then characteristically advances from distal to proximal extremities in an ascending fashion. The involved skin is firm, coarse, and thickened, and the extremities and trunk may be darkly pigmented. In some patients, diffuse tanning in the absence of sun exposure is a very early manifestation of skin involvement. In dark-skinned patients, vitiligo-like hypopigmentation may occur. Because pigment loss spares the perifollicular areas, the skin may have a "salt-and-pepper" appearance, most prominently on the scalp, upper back, and chest. Dermal sclerosis due to collagen accumulation causes obliteration of hair follicles, sweat glands, and eccrine and sebaceous glands, resulting in hair loss, decreased sweating, and dry skin. Transverse creases on the dorsum of the fingers disappear (Fig. 323-4). Fixed flexion contractures of the fingers cause reduced hand mobility and lead to muscle atrophy. Skin thickening in combination with fibrosis of the subjacent tendons accounts for contractures of the wrists, elbows, and knees. Thick ridges at the neck due to firm adherence of skin to the underlying platysma muscle interfere with neck extension. The face assumes a characteristic "mauskopf" appearance with taut and shiny skin, loss of wrinkles, and occasionally an expressionless facies due to reduced mobility of the eyelids, cheeks, and mouth. Thinning of the lips with accentuation of the central incisor teeth and fine wrinkles (radial furrowing) around the mouth complete the picture. Reduced oral aperture (microstomia) interferes with eating and oral hygiene. The nose assumes a pinched, beak-like appearance.

Figure 323-4

 
 
 
Sclerodactyly. Note skin induration on the fingers, and fixed flexion contractures at the proximal interphalangeal joints in a patient with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (SSc).
 
 


In established SSc, the skin is firmly bound to the subcutaneous fat (tethering) and undergoes thinning and atrophy. Telangiectasia are dilated skin capillaries 2每20 mm in diameter frequently seen in lcSSc. These lesions, reminiscent of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, are prominent on the face, hands, lips, and oral mucosa (Fig. 323-5). Breakdown of atrophic skin leads to chronic ulcerations at the extensor surfaces of the proximal interphalangeal joints, the volar pads of the fingertips, and bony prominences such as the elbows and malleoli. Ulcers are painful and may become secondarily infected, resulting in osteomyelitis. Healing of ischemic fingertip ulcerations leaves characteristic fixed digital "pits." Loss of soft tissue at the fingertips due to ischemia is frequent and may be associated with striking resorption of the terminal phalanges (acro-osteolysis) (Fig. 323-6).

Figure 323-5

 
 
 
 
Cutaneous vascular changes.A. Capillary changes at the nailfold in a patient with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (lcSSc). B. Telangiectasia on the face.
 
 

Figure 323-6

 
 
 
Acro-osteolysis. Note dissolution of terminal phalanges in a patient with long-standing limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (lcSSc) and Raynaud's phenomenon.
 
 


Calcium deposits occur in the skin and soft tissues. Calcinosis cutis is most common in patients with lcSSc who are positive for anticentromere antibodies. The deposits, varying in size from tiny punctate lesions to large conglomerate masses, are composed of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals and can be readily visualized on plain x-rays. Frequent locations include the finger pads, palms, extensor surfaces of the forearms, and the olecranon and prepatellar bursae (Fig. 323-7). Paraspinal calcifications may cause neurologic complications. Calcific deposits appears as persistent firm, nontender subcutaneous lumps. They may occasionally ulcerate through the overlying skin, producing drainage of chalky white material, pain, and local inflammation.

Figure 323-7

 
 
 
Calcinosis cutis. Note large calcific deposit breaking through the skin in a patient with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (lcSSc).
 
 

Pulmonary Features

Pulmonary involvement can be documented in most patients with SSc and is now the leading cause of death. There are two main types of significant pulmonary involvement: ILD and PAH. Many patients with SSc develop some degree of both complications. Less frequent pulmonary manifestations of SSc include aspiration pneumonitis complicating gastroesophageal reflux, pulmonary hemorrhage due to endobronchial telangiectasia, obliterative bronchiolitis, pleural reactions, restrictive ventilatory defect due to chest wall fibrosis, spontaneous pneumothorax, and drug-induced lung toxicity. The incidence of lung cancer, particularly bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, may be increased.

Pulmonary involvement can remain asymptomatic until it is advanced. The most frequent presenting respiratory symptoms〞exertional dyspnea, fatigue, and reduced exercise tolerance〞are often subtle and slowly progressive. A chronic dry cough may be present. Physical examination may reveal "Velcro" crackles at the lung bases. Pulmonary function testing (PFT) is a sensitive method for detecting early pulmonary involvement. The most common abnormalities are reductions in forced vital capacity (FVC) or single breath diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A reduction in DLCO that is significantly out of proportion to the reduction in FVC suggests pulmonary vascular disease, but may also be due to anemia. With exercise, patients show a decrease in PO2.

Interstitial Lung Disease (Ild)

Some evidence of ILD can be found in up to 90% of patients with SSc at autopsy and 85% by thin-section high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT). ILD and pulmonary fibrosis cause restrictive pulmonary function defect with impaired gas exchange, characterized on PFT by decreased FVC and DLCO but unaffected flow rates. Clinically significant ILD develops in 16每43% of patients with SSc; the frequency varies depending on the detection method used. Risk factors include male gender, African American race, diffuse skin involvement, severe gastroesophageal reflux, and the presence of topoisomerase-I autoantibodies, as well as a low FVC or DLCO at initial presentation. In patients who develop significant ILD, the most rapid progression in lung disease occurs early in the course of the disease (within the first 3 years), when the FVC can decline by 30% per year.

Chest radiography is useful for ruling out infection and other causes of pulmonary involvement, but compared to HRCT it is relatively insensitive for detection of early ILD. HRCT may show subpleural reticular linear opacities, predominantly in the lower lobes, even in asymptomatic patients (Fig. 323-8). Additional findings include mediastinal lymphadenopathy, nodules, traction bronchiectasis and in some cases, honeycomb cystic changes. Ground-glass opacification, alone or in combination with a reticular pattern, is seen in 50% of patients. Ground-glass opacification on HRCT is indicative of fine fibrosis, and does not identify alveolitis or predict rapid progression. The extent of lung disease on HRCT is a predictor of mortality in SSc. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) can demonstrate inflammation in the lower respiratory tract and may be useful for ruling out infection., While an elevated proportion of neutrophils (> 2%) and/or eosinophils (> 3%) in the BAL fluid is correlated with more extensive lung disease on HRCT, and is associated with more rapid decline in FVC and reduced survival, BAL is not useful for identifying reversible alveolitis. Lung biopsy is indicated only in patients with atypical findings on chest radiographs and should be thoracoscopically guided. The histologic pattern on lung biopsy may be helpful in predicting the risk of progression of ILD. The most common pattern in SSc, nonspecific interstitial pneumnia, carries a better prognosis than usual interstitial pneumnia. Recent studies suggest that measurement of serum factors such as KL-6, a glycoprotein found in type II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages, may have utility as biomarkers for the detection and serial monitoring of ILD in patients with SSc.

Figure 323-8

 
 
 
High-resolution CT scan of the lungs: interstitial lung disease. Note bilateral reticulonodular opacifications in a peripheral distribution in the lower lobes of the lungs in a patient with diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (dcSSc).
 
 

Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (Pah)

PAH, defined as a mean pulmonary arterial pressure >25mmHg with a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure <15 mmHg, is a major complication of SSc. Approximately 15% of SSc patients have PAH that can occur in association with ILD or as an isolated pulmonary abnormality. The natural history of SSc-associated PAH is variable, but in many patients it follows a downhill course with development of right heart failure and significant mortality. Risk factors for PAH include limited cutaneous disease with anticentromere antibodies, late age at disease onset, severe Raynaud's phenomenon, and the presence of antibodies to U1-RNP, U3-RNP (fibrillarin), and B23.

Patients with early PAH are generally asymptomatic. The initial symptom is typically exertional dyspnea and reduced exercise capacity. With progression, angina, exertional near-syncope, and symptoms and signs of right-sided heart failure appear. Physical examination shows tachypnea, a prominent pulmonic S2 heart sound, palpable right ventricular heave, elevated jugular venous pressure, and dependent edema. Doppler echocardiography provides a noninvasive method for estimating the pulmonary arterial pressure is widely used to screen and for pulmonary hypertension. Echocardiographic estimates of pulmonary arterial systolic pressures exceeding 40 mmHg at rest suggest PAH. Pulmonary function testing may show a reduced DLCO in isolation or combined with a restrictive pattern. Because echocardiography can result in over- or underestimation of pulmonary arterial pressures in SSc, right heart catheterization is always required to confirm the presence of PAH and accurately assess its severity, including the degree of right heart dysfunction. Serum levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-BNP correlate with the presence and severity of PAH in SSc, as well as survival. Therefore, BNP measurements can be useful in screening SSc patients and in monitoring the response to treatment. The prognosis of PAH is determined by the degree of pulmonary arterial pressure elevation.

Gastrointestinal Involvement

The gastrointestinal tract is affected in up to 90% of SSc patients with both limited and diffuse cutaneous forms of the disease. The pathologic features of atrophy of smooth muscle, intact mucosa, and obliterative small-vessel vasculopathy are similar throughout the length of the gastrointestinal tract.

Upper Gastrointestinal Tract Involvement

Oropharyngeal manifestations due to a combination of xerostomia, reduced oral aperture, periodontal disease and resorption of the mandibular condyles are frequent. The frenulum of the tongue may be shortened. Symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) develop early. Most patients have heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. A combination of reduced lower esophageal sphincter pressure resulting in gastroesophageal reflux, impaired esophageal clearance of refluxed gastric contents due to diminished motility in the distal two-thirds of the esophagus, and delayed gastric emptying accounts for GERD. Chest CT scan characteristically shows a dilated esophagus with intraluminal air. Severe erosive esophagitis may be found on endoscopy in patients with minimal symptoms. Endoscopy may be necessary to rule out opportunistic infections with candida, herpes virus, and cytomegalovirus. Esophageal strictures and Barrett's esophagus may complicate chronic GERD. Because Barrett's esophagus is associated with an increased risk of adenocarcinoma, SSc patients with this lesion need to undergo periodic endoscopy and biopsy. Extraesophageal manifestations of GERD such as hoarseness and chronic cough may occur. Aspiration pneumonitis also may occur, aggravating underlying ILD.

Gastroparesis with early satiety, abdominal distention, and aggravated reflux symptoms is common. The presence and severity of gastroparesis can be assessed by radionuclide gastric emptying studies. Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE) in the antrum may occur. These subepithelial lesions, reflecting the diffuse small-vessel vasculopathy of SSc, are described as "watermelon stomach" due to their endoscopic appearance. Patients with GAVE can have recurrent episodes of gastrointestinal bleeding, resulting in chronic unexplained anemia. Manometric testing shows abnormalities in the upper small intestines of most patients with SSc.

Lower Gastrointestinal Tract Involvement

Impaired intestinal motility may result in malabsorption and chronic diarrhea secondary to bacterial overgrowth. Fat and protein malabsorption and B12 and vitamin D deficiency ensue, sometimes culminating in severe malnutrition. Disturbed intestinal motor function can also cause intestinal pseudoobstruction, with symptoms of nausea and abdominal distension that are indistinguishable from those of delayed gastric emptying. Patients present with recurrent episodes of acute abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Radiographic studies show acute intestinal obstruction, and the major diagnostic challenge is to differentiate pseudoobstruction, which responds to supportive care and intravenous nutritional supplementation, from mechanical obstruction. Colonic involvement may cause severe constipation, fecal incontinence, gastrointestinal bleeding from telangiectasia, and rectal prolapse. In late-stage SSc, wide-mouth sacculations or diverticula occur in the colon, occasionally causing perforation and bleeding. An occasional radiologic finding is pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis due to air trapping in the bowel wall that may rarely rupture and cause benign pneumoperitoneum. Although the liver is rarely affected, primary biliary cirrhosis may coexist with SSc.

Renal Involvement: Scleroderma Renal Crisis

Scleroderma renal crisis, the most dreaded complication of SSc, occurs in 10每15% of patients, and almost always within 4 years of the onset of the disease. Prior to the advent of ACE inhibitors, short-term survival in scleroderma renal crisis was <10%. The pathogenesis involves obliterative vasculopathy and luminal narrowing of the renal arcuate and interlobular arteries. Progressive reduction in renal blood flow, aggravated by vasospasm, leads to juxtaglomerular hyperplasia, increased renin secretion, and activation of angiotensin, with further renal vasoconstriction resulting in a vicious cycle that culminates in malignant hypertension. Risk factors for scleroderma renal crisis include African American race, male gender, diffuse cutaneous SSc with extensive and progressive skin involvement, and autoantibodies to RNA polymerases I and III. Palpable tendon friction rubs, pericardial effusion, new unexplained anemia, and thrombocytopenia may be harbingers of impending scleroderma renal crisis. High-risk patients with early SSc should be counseled to check their blood pressure daily. Patients with lcSSc infrequently develop scleroderma renal crisis. Because there is an association between glucocorticoid use and the onset of scleroderma renal crisis, prednisone should be used in high-risk SSc patients only when absolutely required, and at low doses (<10 mg/d).

Patients characteristically present with accelerated hypertension and progressive renal insufficiency. However, in approximately 10% of patients, blood pressure remains normal. Normotensive renal crisis is generally associated with a poor outcome. Headache, blurred vision, and chest pain may accompany elevation of blood pressure. Urinalysis typically shows mild proteinuria, granular casts, and microscopic hematuria; thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic hemolysis with fragmented red blood cells can be seen. Progressive oliguric renal failure over several days generally follows. In some cases, scleroderma renal crisis is misdiagnosed as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. The value of kidney biopsy in this setting is uncertain. Oliguria or a creatinine >3 mg/dL at presentation predicts poor outcome, with permanent hemodialysis and high mortality. Prompt aggressive intervention with short-acting ACE inhibitors to achieve adequate blood pressure control before the onset of renal failure results in improved prognosis. In contrast, there is no evidence to support the practice of "prophylactic" use of ACE inhibitors in normotensive SSc patients. Rarely, crescentic glomerulonephritis occurs in the setting of SSc.

Cardiac Involvement

Although cardiac involvement is often clinically silent, it is frequently detected when sensitive diagnostic tools are used. Cardiac disease occurs more frequently in patients with dcSSc than in those with lcSSc, and generally develops within 3 years of the onset of skin thickening. Clinically evident cardiac involvement in SSc is a poor prognostic factor. The endocardium, myocardium, and pericardium may be affected separately or together. Manifestations include pericardial effusions, atrial and ventricular tachycardias, conduction abnormalities, valvular regurgitation, hypertrophy, and heart failure. Systemic and pulmonary hypertension and lung and renal involvement may also impact on the heart. Despite the presence of widespread obliterative vasculopathy, the frequency of clinical or pathologic epicardial coronary artery disease in SSc is not increased. While conventional echocardiography has low sensitivity for detecting SSc preclinical heart involvement, newer modalities such as tissue Doppler echocardiography (TDE) and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveal a high prevalence of abnormal myocardial function. Thallium perfusion studies document abnormal cardiac perfusion in a majority of patients. The serum level of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP), a ventricular hormone, is a sensitive and specific diagnostic marker for increased pulmonary artery pressure in SSc, but may also have utility as a marker of primary cardiac involvement. Myocarditis can occur in association with inflammatory polymyositis, and can be diagnosed using cardiac MRI. Pericardial effusions occur in over 15% of patients and, rarely, may cause tamponade.

Musculoskeletal Complications

Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs frequently and may be a presenting manifestation of SSc. Generalized arthralgia and stiffness are prominent in early disease. Joint mobility is progressively impaired, especially in patients with dcSSc. Most commonly affected are the hands. Contractures develop at the proximal interphalangeal joints and wrists. In patients with dcSSc, large joint contractures can be accompanied by tendon friction rubs characterized by leathery crepitation that can be heard or palpated upon passive movement. Tendon rubs are due to extensive fibrosis and adhesion of the tendon sheaths and fascial planes at the affected joint. Movement at the elbows, shoulders, and knees is frequently reduced. True joint inflammation is uncommon; however, occasional patients develop erosive polyarthritis in the hands. Muscle weakness is common, and may indicate deconditioning, disuse atrophy, and malnutrition. Less commonly, inflammatory myositis indistinguishable from idiopathic polymyositis may occur. A chronic noninflammatory myopathy characterized by atrophy and fibrosis in the absence of elevated muscle enzyme levels can be seen in late-stage SSc. Bone resorption occurs most commonly in the terminal phalanges, where it causes loss of the distal tufts (acro-osteolysis) (Fig. 323-5). Resorption of the mandibular condyles can lead to bite difficulties. Osteolysis can also affect the ribs and distal clavicles.

Other Disease Manifestations

Many SSc patients develop dry eyes and dry mouth (sicca complex). Biopsy of the minor salivary glands shows fibrosis rather than focal lymphocytic infiltration characteristic of primary Sj?gren's syndrome (Chap. 324). Hypothyroidism is common and generally due to fibrosis of the thyroid gland. Whereas the central nervous system is generally spared in SSc, sensory trigeminal neuropathy due to fibrosis or vasculopathy can occur, presenting with gradual onset of pain and numbness. Pregnancy in women with SSc is associated with an increased rate of adverse fetal outcomes. Furthermore, cardiopulmonary involvement may worsen during pregnancy, and new onset of scleroderma renal crisis has been described. Erectile dysfunction is frequent in men with SSc and may be the initial disease manifestation. Inability to attain or maintain penile erection is due to vascular insufficiency and fibrosis. The risk of certain malignancies is increased in SSc. Some studies have indicated that cancers of the lung, tongue, and breast occur more frequently in patients with SSc. Barrett's metaplasia is associated with increased risk for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus.

Laboratory Features

A mild normocytic or microcytic anemia due to chronic inflammation is frequent in patients with SSc. Iron deficiency anemia may indicate gastrointestinal bleeding caused by GAVE or chronic esophagitis. Macrocytic anemia, indicating a maturation disorder, may be caused by folate and vitamin B12 deficiency due to small bowel bacterial overgrowth and malabsorption, or by drugs such as methotrexate or alkylating agents. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, caused by mechanical trauma and fragmentation of red blood cells during their passage through microvessels coated with fibrin or platelet thrombi, is a hallmark of scleroderma renal crisis. Thrombocytopenia and leukopenia generally indicate drug toxicity. In contrast to other connective tissue diseases, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is generally normal; an elevation may signal coexisting myositis or malignancy.

Antinuclear autoantibodies are present in almost all patients with SSc and can be detected at disease onset. Autoantibodies against topoisomerase-I (Scl-70) and centromere are specific for SSc and are mutually exclusive. Topoisomerase-I antibodies are detected in 31% of patients with dcSSc, but in only 13% of patients with lcSSc; conversely, anticentromere antibodies are detected in 38% of patients with lcSSc, but in only 2% of patients with dcSSc. Anticentromere antibodies are commonly associated with lcSSc and PAH, and only rarely with cardiac or renal involvement or significant ILD. Topoisomerase-I-positive patients have reduced survival compared to those without this antibody; whereas anticentromere antibody-positive patients have improved survival compared to those without this antibody. Nucleolar immunofluorescence pattern on serologic testing reflects antibodies to U3-RNP (fibrillarin), Th/To, or PM/Scl, whereas a speckled immunofluorescence pattern indicates antibodies to RNA polymerase III. Although antibodies to 2GPI occur in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and are not specific for SSc, their presence in SSc is associated with an increased risk of ischemic lesions in the fingers. No direct pathogenic role has been firmly established for any of the SSc-associated autoantibodies; however, antibody titers can correlate with disease severity and fluctuate with disease activity.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of SSc is made primarily on clinical grounds and is generally straightforward in patients with established disease. The presence of skin induration, with a characteristic symmetric distribution pattern associated with typical visceral organ manifestations, establishes the diagnosis with a high degree of certainty. While the conditions listed in Table 323-1 can be associated with skin induration, the distribution pattern of skin lesions, together with the absence of Raynaud's phenomenon or typical visceral organ manifestations or SSc-specific autoantibodies, differentiates these conditions from SSc. Occasionally, full-thickness biopsy of the skin is required for establishing the diagnosis of scleredema, scleromyxedema, or nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. In lcSSc a history of antecedent Raynaud's phenomenon and gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, coupled with the presence of sclerodactyly and capillary changes on nailfold capillaroscopy, often in combinations with telangiectasia and calcinosis cutis, helps to establish the diagnosis. The finding of digital tip pitting scars and radiologic evidence of pulmonary fibrosis in the lower lobes are particularly helpful diagnostically. Primary Raynaud's phenomenon is a common benign condition that must be differentiated from early or limited SSc. Nailfold microscopy is particularly helpful in this situation, because in primary Raynaud's phenomenon the nailfold capillaries are normal, whereas in SSc capillary abnormalities, as well as serum autoantibodies can be detected even before other disease manifestations.

Establishing the diagnosis of SSc in early disease may be a challenge. In dcSSc, initial symptoms are often nonspecific and relate to inflammation. Patients complain of fatigue, swelling, aching, and stiffness, and Raynaud's phenomenon may initially be absent. Physical examination may reveal diffuse upper extremity edema and puffy fingers. Patients at this stage are sometimes diagnosed as early rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, myositis, or, most commonly, undifferentiated connective tissue disease. Within weeks to months, Raynaud's phenomenon and characteristic clinical features appear accompanied by advancing induration of the skin. The presence of antinuclear and SSc-specific autoantibodies provides a high degree of diagnostic specificity. Raynaud's phenomenon with fingertip ulcerations or other evidence of digital ischemia, coupled with telangiectasia, distal esophageal dysmotility, unexplained ILD or PAH, or accelerated hypertension with renal failure in the absence of skin induration, suggests the diagnosis of SSc sine scleroderma. These patients may have anticentromere antibodies.

Treatment: Systemic Sclerosis

Overview

To date, no therapy has been shown to significantly alter the natural history of SSc. In contrast, multiple interventions are highly effective in alleviating the symptoms and in slowing the progression of the cumulative organ damage. A significant reduction in disease-related mortality has been noted during the past 25 years. Because of the marked heterogeneity in clinical presentations, patients need careful investigation at baseline, and evaluation and treatment approaches must be individually tailored according to each patient's unique needs. Optimal management incorporates the following principles: prompt and accurate diagnosis; classification and risk stratification based on clinical and laboratory evaluation; early recognition of organ-based complications and assessment of their extent, severity, and likelihood of deterioration; regular monitoring for progression, disease activity, and response to therapy; and continuing patient education. In order to minimize irreversible organ damage, the management of life-threatening complications must be proactive, with regular screening and initiation of appropriate intervention at the earliest possible opportunity. In light of the complex, multisystemic nature of the disease, an integrated team-based approach is optimal. Most patients are treated with combinations of drugs that act upon different aspects of the disease. Patients should become familiar with the spectrum of potential complications, have an understanding of the therapeutic options and natural history of the disease, and be empowered to partner with their physicians. This typically requires a long-term relationship between patient and physician, with ongoing counseling and encouragement.

Disease-Modifying Therapy: Immunosuppressive Agents

Immunosuppressive agents effective in other connective tissue diseases have generally shown modest or no benefit in the treatment of SSc. Glucocorticoids may be useful for alleviating stiffness and aching in early-stage dcSSc, but do not influence the progression of skin or internal organ involvement. Furthermore, their use in high doses is associated with an increased risk of scleroderma renal crisis. Therefore, glucocorticoids should be avoided if possible; when absolutely necessary, they should be given at the lowest dose possible and for brief periods only. The use of cyclophosphamide has been extensively studied in light of its efficacy in the treatment of vasculitis (Chap. 326), systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 319), and other autoimmune diseases (Chap. 318).

Cyclophosphamide has been evaluated in the treatment of SSc in retrospective and prospective controlled clinical trials. Both oral and intermittent intravenous cyclophosphamide were shown to reduce the progression of ILD in SSc patients with early symptomatic disease, with stabilization, and, rarely, modest improvement of pulmonary function and HRCT after 1 year of treatment. Improvement in respiratory symptoms and the extent of skin induration was also noted. The beneficial effect of cyclophosphamide on lung function wanes upon discontinuation of therapy. The benefits of cyclophosphamide need to be balanced against its potential toxicity, including bone marrow suppression, opportunistic infections, hemorrhagic cystitis and bladder cancer, premature ovarian failure, and late secondary malignancies.

In small clinical trials in SSc, methotrexate treatment was associated with a modest improvement in skin scores. Mycophenolate mofetil treatment was associated with improved skin induration in uncontrolled studies and was generally well tolerated. The use of immunomodulatory agents such as cyclosporine, azathioprine, rituximab, extracorporeal photophoresis, imatinib, thalidomide, or rapamycin for the treatment of SSc is currently not well supported by the literature. Immune ablation using high-dose chemotherapy with or without irradiation, followed by autologous stem cell reconstitution, is undergoing evaluation in randomized clinical trials in SSc. In light of its potential morbidity and mortality, as well as cost, autologous stem cell transplantation in SSc is still considered experimental.

Anti-Fibrotic Therapy

Because widespread tissue fibrosis causes progressive organ damage in dcSSc, drugs that interfere with the fibrotic process represent a rational approach to therapy. D-Penicillamine has been extensively used as an antifibrotic agent. Retrospective studies in SSc indicated that D-penicillamine stabilized and improved skin induration, prevented new internal organ involvement, and improved survival. However, a randomized controlled clinical trial in early active SSc found no difference in the extent of skin involvement between patients treated with standard-dose (750 mg/d) or very low-dose (125 mg every other day) D-penicillamine. Minocycline, recombinant relaxin, interferon (INF)-, and inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor have failed to show meaningful clinical benefit in SSc.

Vascular Therapy

The goal of vascular therapy is to control Raynaud's phenomenon, prevent the development and enhance the healing of ischemic complications, and slow the progression of obliterative vasculopathy. Patients with Raynaud's phenomenon should dress warmly, minimize cold exposure or stress, and avoid drugs that could precipitate or exacerbate vasospastic episodes. Some patients may respond to biofeedback therapy. Calcium channel blockers such as nifedipine or diltiazem are commonly used but show only moderate benefit, and their use is often limited by side effects (palpitations, dependent edema, light-headedness). While ACE inhibitors do not reduce the frequency or severity of episodes, angiotensin II receptor blockers such as losartan are effective and generally well tolerated. Some patients with Raynaud's phenomenon may require 1-adrenergic receptor blockers (e.g., prazosin), 5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors (e.g., sildenafil), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine), topical nitroglycerine, and intravenous prostaglandins. Low-dose aspirin and dipyridamole prevent platelet aggregation and may have a role as adjunctive agents. In patients with ischemic finger ulcerations, the endothelin-1 receptor antagonist bosentan reduces the development of new ulcers. Digital sympathectomy and local injections of botulinum type A (botox) into the digits are options in some patients with severe Raynaud's phenomenon associated with ischemia. Empirical long-term therapy with statins and antioxidants may delay the progression of vascular damage and obliteration. The use of calcium channel blockers has been associated with improved cardiac perfusion and cardiac function in SSc patients with cardiac involvement.

Treatment of Gastrointestinal Complications

Because gastroesophageal reflux is very common, all patients with SSc should be treated for this complication. Significant reflux may occur in the absence of symptoms. Patients should be instructed to elevate the head of the bed and eat frequent small meals. Proton pump inhibitors reduce acid reflux and may need to be given in relatively high doses. Recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding from vascular ectasia in the gastric antrum (watermelon stomach) is amenable to treatment with laser photocoagulation. Bacterial overgrowth due to small-bowel dysmotility causes abdominal bloating and diarrhea and may lead to malabsorption and severe malnutrition. Treatment with short courses of rotating broad-spectrum antibiotics such as metronidazole, erythromycin, and tetracycline can eradicate bacterial overgrowth. Parenteral hyperalimentation is indicated if malnutrition develops. Chronic hypomotility of the small bowel may respond to octreotide.

Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (Pah)

Because PAH is asymptomatic until it is advanced, patients with SSc should be screened for the presence of PAH on a regular basis. When PAH is symptomatic, treatment should be started with an oral endothelin-1 receptor antagonist or a phosphodiesterase inhibitor such as sildenafil. Patients may also require diuretics, oral anticoagulation, and digoxin when appropriate. If hypoxemia is documented, supplemental oxygen should be given by nasal cannula in order to avoid hypoxia-induced secondary pulmonary vasoconstriction. Inhibitors of phosphodiesterase type 5 (e.g., sildenafil) have been shown to have short-term efficacy in PAH and may be used in combination with bosentan. Prostacyclin analogues such as epoprostenol or treprostinil can be administered intravenously or by continuous subcutaneous infusion, or frequent inhalations via nebulizer. Lung transplantation remains an option for patients with SSc-associated PAH who fail medical therapy.

Treatment of Renal Crisis

Scleroderma renal crisis is a medical emergency because the outcome is largely determined by the extent of renal damage present at the time that aggressive therapy is initiated. Prompt recognition of impending or early scleroderma renal crisis is therefore essential, and efforts should be made to avoid its occurrence. High risk patients with early SSc and extensive and progressive skin involvement should be instructed to monitor their blood pressure daily and report significant alterations immediately. Potentially nephrotoxic drugs should be avoided, and glucocorticoids used only when absolutely necessary, and at low doses. When scleroderma renal crisis occurs, treatment should be started promptly with short-acting ACE inhibitors, with the goal of achieving rapid normalization of the blood pressure. Kidney biopsy is rarely useful in this setting. Up to two-thirds of patients require dialysis. However, substantial renal recovery can occur following renal crisis, and up to one-half of the patients may be able to discontinue dialysis. Kidney transplantation is appropriate for patients who are unable to discontinue dialysis after 2 years. Survival of SSc patients with with renal transplantation is comparable to that in other connective tissue diseases, and recurrence of renal crisis is rare.

Skin Care

Because skin involvement in SSc is never life-threatening, and it stabilizes, and may even regress spontaneously over time, the overall management of the disease should not be dictated by its cutaneous manifestations. The inflammatory symptoms of early skin involvement can be effectively controlled with systemic antihistamines and cautious and short-term use of low-dose glucocorticoids (<5 mg/d of prednisone). Retrospective studies have shown that D-penicillamine reduced the extent and progression of skin induration; however, these benefits could not be substantiated in a controlled prospective trial. Cyclophosphamide and methotrexate have also been shown to have modest effects on skin induration. Because induration is associated with dryness, patients should use hydrophilic ointments and bath oils. Regular skin massage is helpful. Telangiectasia may present a cosmetic problem, especially when they occur on the face. Treatment with pulsed dye laser may have short-term benefit. Fingertip ulcerations should be protected by occlusive dressing to promote healing and prevent infection. Infected skin ulcers are treated with topical antibiotics. Surgical debridement may be indicated. No therapy has been shown to be effective in preventing the formation of calcific soft tissue deposits or in promoting their dissolution.
 
Course

The natural history of SSc is highly variable and difficult to predict, especially in early stages when the specific disease subset〞diffuse or limited cutaneous form〞is not clear. Patient with dcSSc have a more rapidly progressive disease and worse prognosis than those with lcSSc.

In dcSSc, early inflammatory symptoms such as fatigue, edema, arthralgia, and pruritus tend to subside 2每4 years after the onset of disease, and the extent of skin thickening reaches a plateau after which it generally shows slow regression. It is during the early edematous stage, generally lasting <3 years, that visceral organ involvement develops and progresses. While existing visceral organ involvement, such as pulmonary fibrosis, may continue to progress, new organ involvement is rare after the skin involvement reaches its peak. Scleroderma renal crisis almost invariably occurs within the first 4 years of disease. In dcSSc patients with late-stage disease (>6 years), the skin is usually soft and atrophic. Skin regression characteristically occurs in an order that is the reverse of initial involvement, with softening on the trunks followed by proximal and then distal extremities. Sclerodactyly and finger contractures generally persist. Cutaneous telangiectasia and calcinosis are common, making it difficult to differentiate late-stage dcSSc from lcSSc. Relapse or recurrence of skin thickening after the peak of skin involvement has been reached is rare. Patients with lcSSc follow a clinical course that is markedly different than that of dcSSc. In this subset of SSc, Raynaud's phenomenon typically precedes other disease manifestations by years or even decades. Visceral organ complications such as PAH and ILD generally develop late and tend to be slowly progressive.
 
Prognosis

SSc confers a substantial increase in the risk of premature death, with age- and gender-adjusted mortality rates that are fivefold to eightfold higher compared to the general population. In one population-based study of SSc patients with all forms of the disease, the median survival was 11 years. In patients with dcSSc, 5- and 10-year survivals are 70% and 55%, respectively, whereas in patients with lcSSc, 5- and 10-year survivals are 90% and 75%, respectively. The prognosis of SSc correlates with the extent of skin involvement, which itself is a surrogate for visceral organ involvement. Major causes of death are PAH, pulmonary fibrosis, gastrointestinal involvement, and cardiac disease. Scleroderma renal crisis is associated with a 30% 3-year mortality. Lung cancer and excess cardiovascular deaths also contribute to increased mortality. Markers of worse prognosis include male gender, African American race, older age of disease onset, extensive skin thickening with truncal involvement, evidence of significant or progressive visceral organ involvement, and the presence of anti-topoisomerase-I and anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies. Additional predictors of increased mortality at initial evaluation include an elevated ESR, anemia, and proteinuria. In one study, SSc patients with extensive skin involvement, lung vital capacity <55% predicted, significant gastrointestinal involvement (pseudoobstruction or malabsorption), evidence of cardiac involvement (arrhythmias or congestive heart failure), or scleroderma renal crisis had a cumulative 9-year survival <40%. The severity of PAH is itself strongly associated with mortality, and SSc patients who had a mean pulmonary arterial pressure 45 mmHg had a 33% 3-year survival. The advent of ACE inhibitor therapy for scleroderma renal crisis had a dramatic impact on survival, increasing from a <10% 1-year survival in the pre-ACE inhibitor era to a >70% 3-year survival at the present time.
 
Mixed Connective Tissue Disease

Patients who have lcSSc coexisting with features of SLE, polymyositis, and rheumatoid arthritis may have mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). This overlap syndrome is generally associated with the presence of high titers of autoantibodies to U1-RNP. The characteristic initial presentation is Raynaud's phenomenon associated with puffy fingers and myalgia. Gradually, lcSSc features of sclerodactyly, calcinosis, and cutaneous telangiectasia develop. Skin rashes suggestive of systemic lupus erythematosus (malar rash, photosensitivity) or of dermatomyositis (heliotrope rash on the eyelids, erythematous rash on the knuckles) occur. Arthralgia is common, and some patients develop erosive polyarthritis. Pulmonary fibrosis and isolated or secondary PAH may develop. Other manifestations include esophageal dysmotility, pericarditis, Sj?gren's syndrome, and renal disease, especially membranous glomerulonephritis. Laboratory evaluation indicates features of inflammation with elevated ESR and hypergammaglobulinemia. While anti-U1RNP antibodies are detected in the serum in high titers, SSc-specific autoantibodies are not found. In contrast to SSc, patients with MCTD often show a good response to treatment with glucocorticoids, and the long-term prognosis is better than that of SSc. Whether MCTD is a truly distinct entity or is, rather, a subset of SLE or SSc remains controversial.
 
Eosinophilic Fasciitis

Eosinophilic fasciitis is a rare idiopathic disorder associated with induration of the skin that generally develops rapidly. Adults are primarily affected. The skin has a coarse cobblestone "peau d'orange" appearance. In contrast to SSc, internal organ involvement is rare, and Raynaud's phenomenon and SSc-associated autoantibodies are absent. Furthermore, skin involvement spares the fingers. Full-thickness excisional biopsy of the lesional skin reveals fibrosis of the subcutaneous fascia, and is generally required for diagnosis. Inflammation and eosinophil infiltration in the fascia are variably present. In the acute phase of the illness, peripheral blood eosinophilia may be prominent. MRI appears to be a sensitive tool for the diagnosis of eosinophilic fasciitis. In some patients, eosinophilic fasciitis occurs in association with, or preceding, myelodysplastic syndromes or multiple myeloma. Treatment with glucocorticoids leads to prompt resolution of the eosinophilia. In contrast, skin changes generally show slow and variable improvement. The prognosis of patients with eosinophilic fasciitis is good.
 
Further Readings

Feghali-Bostwick C et al: Analysis of systemic sclerosis in twins reveals low concordance for disease and high concordance for the presence of antinuclear antibodies. Arthritis Rheum 48:1956, 2003[PMID: 12847690]  [Full Text]

 
Kuwana M et al: Defective vasculogenesis in systemic sclerosis. Lancet 364:603, 2004[PMID: 15313361]  [Full Text]

 
Mayes MD et al: Prevalence, incidence, survival, and disease characteristics of systemic sclerosis in a large US population. Arthritis Rheum 48:2246, 2003[PMID: 12905479]  [Full Text]

 
Milano A et al: Molecular subsets in the gene expression signatures of scleroderma skin. PLoS ONE 3:e2696, 2008; erratum: PLoS ONE 3:doi: 10.1371/annotation/05bed72c-c6f6-4685-a732-02c78e5f66c2, 2008 

 
Scussel-Lonzetti L et al: Predicting mortality in systemic sclerosis: Analysis of a cohort of 309 French Canadian patients with emphasis on features at diagnosis as predictive factors for survival. Medicine (Baltimore) 81:154, 2002[PMID: 11889414]  [Full Text]

 
Tashkin DP et al: Cyclophosphamide versus placebo in scleroderma lung disease. N Engl J Med 354:2655, 2006[PMID: 16790698]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞: Effects of 1-year treatment with cyclophosphamide on outcomes at 2 years in scleroderma lung disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 176:1026, 2007 

 
Varga J, Abraham D: Systemic sclerosis: A prototypic multisystem fibrotic disorder. J Clin Invest 117:557, 2007[PMID: 17332883]  [Full Text]

 
Whitfield ML et al: Systemic and cell type-specific gene expression patterns in SSc skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:12319, 2003[PMID: 14530402]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 325. The Spondyloarthritides >
 

The Spondyloarthritides: Introduction

The spondyloarthritides are a group of overlapping disorders that share certain clinical features and genetic associations. These disorders include ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and spondylitis, enteropathic arthritis and spondylitis, juvenile-onset spondyloarthritis (SpA), and undifferentiated SpA. The similarities in clinical manifestations and genetic predisposition suggest that these disorders share pathogenic mechanisms.
 
Ankylosing Spondylitis

Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is an inflammatory disorder of unknown cause that primarily affects the axial skeleton; peripheral joints and extraarticular structures are also frequently involved. The disease usually begins in the second or third decade; male to female prevalence is between 2:1 and 3:1. The term axial spondyloarthritis, coming into common use, includes early or mild forms that do not meet classical criteria for AS.

Epidemiology

AS shows a striking correlation with the histocompatibility antigen HLA-B27 and occurs worldwide roughly in proportion to the prevalence of B27 (Chap. 315). In North American whites, the prevalence of B27 is 7%, whereas it is 90% in patients with AS, independent of disease severity.

In population surveys, AS is present in 1每6% of adults inheriting B27, whereas the prevalence is 10每30% among B27+ adult first-degree relatives of AS probands. Concordance rate in identical twins is about 65%. Susceptibility to AS is determined largely by genetic factors, with B27 comprising up to one-half of the genetic component. Other HLA-linked genes may also contribute to susceptibility to AS. Genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis has identified additional susceptibility alleles in the genes encoding ERAP1 (chromosome 5q15) and IL-23R (chromosome 1p31.3). The genes encoding TNFSF15, TNFSF1A, STAT3, ANTXR2, and IL1R2, and at least six other chromosomal regions have also been implicated.

Pathology

The sites of axial inflammation in AS are inaccessible to routine biopsy and are rarely approached surgically. Knowledge of the axial histopathology is therefore based mostly on advanced cases. Sacroiliitis is often the earliest manifestations of AS. Synovitis, pannus, myxoid marrow, subchondral granulation tissue and marrow edema, enthesitis, and chondroid differentiation are found. Macrophages, T cells, and osteoclasts are prevalent. Eventually the eroded joint margins are gradually replaced by fibrocartilage regeneration and then by ossification. The joint may become totally obliterated.

In the spine, there is inflammatory granulation tissue at the junction of annulus fibrosis and vertebral bone. The outer annular fibers are eroded and eventually replaced by bone, forming the beginning of a syndesmophyte, which then grows by continued endochondral ossification, ultimately bridging the adjacent vertebral bodies. Ascending progression of this process leads to the "bamboo spine." Other lesions in the spine include diffuse osteoporosis, erosion of vertebral bodies at the disk margin, "squaring" or "barreling" of vertebrae, and inflammation and destruction of the disk-bone border. Inflammatory arthritis of the apophyseal joints is common, with erosion of cartilage by pannus, often followed by bony ankylosis. Bone mineral density is diminished in the spine and proximal femur early in the course of the disease.

Peripheral synovitis in AS shows marked vascularity, lining layer hyperplasia, lymphoid infiltration, and pannus formation. Central cartilaginous erosions caused by proliferation of subchondral granulation tissue are common.

Inflammation in the fibrocartilaginous enthesis, the region where a tendon, ligament, or joint capsule attaches to bone, is a characteristic lesion in AS and other SpA, both at axial and peripheral sites. Enthesitis is associated with prominent edema of the adjacent bone marrow and is often characterized by erosive lesions that eventually undergo ossification.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of AS is thought to be immune-mediated, but there is no direct evidence for autoimmunity. There is uncertainty regarding the primary site of disease initiation. A unifying concept is that the AS disease process begins at sites where articular cartilage, ligaments, and other structures attach to bone. The dramatic response of the disease to therapeutic blockade of tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) indicates that this cytokine plays a central role in the immunopathogenesis of AS. There is recent evidence that TH17 T cells and their cytokines may also play an important role.

The inflamed sacroiliac joint is infiltrated with CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and macrophages and shows high levels of TNF-, particularly early in the disease. Abundant transforming growth factor  (TGF-) has been found in more advanced lesions. Peripheral synovitis in AS and the other spondyloarthritides is characterized by neutrophils, macrophages expressing CD68 and CD163, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and B cells. There is prominent staining for intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), and myeloid-related proteins 8 and 14 (MRP-8 and MRP-14). Unlike rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovium, citrullinated proteins and cartilage gp39 peptide每major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) are absent. No specific event or exogenous agent that triggers the onset of disease has been identified, although overlapping features with reactive arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) suggest that enteric bacteria may play a role. Triggering of innate immunity by microdamage at entheseal sites has recently been emphasized. Strong evidence that B27 plays a direct role is provided by genetic epidemiology studies and by the finding that rats transgenic for B27 spontaneously develop dramatic arthritis and spondylitis. However, the role of B27 remains unresolved. Since B27 rats lacking CD8+ T cells still develop arthritis and spondylitis, classical peptide antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells is probably not the primary disease mechanism. However, the association of AS with ERAP1, which strongly influences the MHC class I peptide repertoire, is only found in B27+ patients and suggests that peptide binding to B27 is nonetheless important. The B27 heavy chain has an unusual tendency to misfold, a process that may be proinflammatory. Genetic and functional studies in humans have suggested a role for natural killer (NK) cells in AS, possibly through interaction with B27. Defective dendritic cell function is a consistent feature of SpA-prone B27 rats not yet well investigated in patients.

Clinical Manifestations

The symptoms of the disease are usually first noticed in late adolescence or early adulthood; the median age in Western countries is 23. In 5% of patients, symptoms begin after age 40. The initial symptom is usually dull pain, insidious in onset, felt deep in the lower lumbar or gluteal region, accompanied by low-back morning stiffness of up to a few hours' duration that improves with activity and returns following inactivity. Within a few months, the pain has usually become persistent and bilateral. Nocturnal exacerbation of pain often forces the patient to rise and move around.

In some patients, bony tenderness (presumably reflecting enthesitis or osteitis) may accompany back pain or stiffness, while in others it may be the predominant complaint. Common sites include the costosternal junctions, spinous processes, iliac crests, greater trochanters, ischial tuberosities, tibial tubercles, and heels. Arthritis in the hips and shoulders ("root" joints) occurs in 25每35% of patients. Severe isolated hip arthritis or bony chest pain may be the presenting complaint. Arthritis of peripheral joints other than the hips and shoulders, usually asymmetric, occurs in up to 30% of patients. Neck pain and stiffness from involvement of the cervical spine are usually relatively late manifestations but are occasionally dominant symptoms. Rare patients, particularly in the older age group, present with predominantly constitutional symptoms.

AS often has a juvenile onset in developing countries. Peripheral arthritis and enthesitis usually predominate, with axial symptoms supervening in late adolescence.

Initially, physical findings mirror the inflammatory process. The most specific findings involve loss of spinal mobility, with limitation of anterior and lateral flexion and extension of the lumbar spine and of chest expansion. Limitation of motion is usually out of proportion to the degree of bony ankylosis, reflecting muscle spasm secondary to pain and inflammation. Pain in the sacroiliac joints may be elicited either with direct pressure or with stress on the joints. In addition, there is commonly tenderness upon palpation at the sites of symptomatic bony tenderness and paraspinous muscle spasm.

The modified Schober test is a useful measure of lumbar spine flexion. The patient stands erect, with heels together, and marks are made on the spine at the lumbosacral junction (identified by a horizontal line between the posterosuperior iliac spines) and 10 cm above. The patient then bends forward maximally with knees fully extended, and the distance between the two marks is measured. This distance increases by 5 cm in the case of normal mobility and by <4 cm in the case of decreased mobility. Chest expansion is measured as the difference between maximal inspiration and maximal forced expiration in the fourth intercostal space in males or just below the breasts in females, with the patient's hands resting on or just behind the head. Normal chest expansion is 5 cm.

Limitation or pain with motion of the hips or shoulders is usually present if these joints are involved. It should be emphasized that early in the course of mild cases, symptoms may be subtle and nonspecific, and the physical examination may be completely normal.

The course of the disease is extremely variable, ranging from the individual with mild stiffness and normal radiographs to the patient with a totally fused spine and severe bilateral hip arthritis, accompanied by severe peripheral arthritis and extraarticular manifestations. Pain tends to be persistent early in the disease and then becomes intermittent, with alternating exacerbations and quiescent periods. In a typical severe untreated case with progression of the spondylitis to syndesmophyte formation, the patient's posture undergoes characteristic changes, with obliterated lumbar lordosis, buttock atrophy, and accentuated thoracic kyphosis. There may be a forward stoop of the neck or flexion contractures at the hips, compensated by flexion at the knees. Disease progression can be estimated clinically from loss of height, limitation of chest expansion and spinal flexion, and occiput-to-wall distance. Occasional individuals are encountered with advanced deformities who report having never had significant symptoms.

There is little consensus regarding the factors that predict disease progression and functional outcome. In some but not all studies, onset of AS in adolescence and early hip involvement correlate with a worse prognosis. AS in women tends to progress less frequently to total spinal ankylosis, although there is some evidence for an increased prevalence of isolated cervical ankylosis and peripheral arthritis in women. In industrialized countries, peripheral arthritis (distal to hips and shoulders) occurs in less than one-half of patients with AS, usually as a late manifestation, whereas in developing countries, the prevalence is much higher, with onset typically early in the disease course. Pregnancy has no consistent effect on AS, with symptoms improving, remaining the same, or deteriorating in about one-third of pregnant patients, respectively. Smoking correlates with adverse outcome.

The most serious complication of the spinal disease is spinal fracture, which can occur with even minor trauma to the rigid, osteoporotic spine. The lower cervical spine is most commonly involved. These fractures are often displaced and cause spinal cord injury. A recent survey suggested a >10% lifetime risk of fracture. Occasionally, fracture through a diskovertebral junction and adjacent neural arch, termed pseudoarthrosis, most common in the thoracolumbar spine, can be an unrecognized source of persistent localized pain and/or neurologic dysfunction. Wedging of thoracic vertebrae is common and correlates with accentuated kyphosis.

The most common extraarticular manifestation is acute anterior uveitis, which occurs in 40% of patients and can antedate the spondylitis. Attacks are typically unilateral, causing pain, photophobia, and increased lacrimation. These tend to recur, often in the opposite eye. Cataracts and secondary glaucoma are not uncommon sequelae. Up to 60% of patients have inflammation in the colon or ileum. This is usually asymptomatic, but frank IBD occurs in 5每10% of patients with AS (see "Enteropathic Arthritis," below). About 10% of patients meeting criteria for AS have psoriasis (see "Psoriatic Arthritis," below). Aortic insufficiency, sometimes leading to congestive heart failure, occurs in a few percent of patients, occasionally early in the course of the spinal disease but usually after prolonged disease. Third-degree heart block may occur alone or together with aortic insufficiency. Subclinical pulmonary lesions and cardiac dysfunction may be relatively common. Cauda equina syndrome and upper pulmonary lobe fibrosis are rare late complications. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare associated condition. Prostatitis has been reported to have an increased prevalence. Amyloidosis is rare (Chap. 112).

Several validated measures of disease activity and functional outcome are in widespread use in the study and management of AS, particularly the Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI), a measure of disease activity; the Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index (BASFI), a measure of limitation in activities of daily living; and several measures of radiographic changes. Despite persistence of the disease, most patients remain gainfully employed. Some but not all studies of survival in AS have suggested that AS shortens life span, compared with the general population. Mortality attributable to AS is largely the result of spinal trauma, aortic insufficiency, respiratory failure, amyloid nephropathy, or complications of therapy such as upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The impact of anti-TNF therapy on outcome and mortality is not yet known, but there is evidence for significantly improved work productivity.

Laboratory Findings

No laboratory test is diagnostic of AS. In most ethnic groups, HLA-B27 is present in 80每90% of patients. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are often, but not always, elevated. Mild anemia may be present. Patients with severe disease may show an elevated alkaline phosphatase level. Elevated serum IgA levels are common. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) are largely absent unless caused by a coexistent disease, although ANAs may appear with anti-TNF therapy. Synovial fluid from peripheral joints in AS is nonspecifically inflammatory. In cases with restriction of chest wall motion, decreased vital capacity and increased functional residual capacity are common, but airflow is normal and ventilatory function is usually well maintained.

Radiographic Findings

Radiographically demonstrable sacroiliitis is eventually present in AS. The earliest changes by standard radiography are blurring of the cortical margins of the subchondral bone, followed by erosions and sclerosis. Progression of the erosions leads to "pseudowidening" of the joint space; as fibrous and then bony ankylosis supervene, the joints may become obliterated. The changes and progression of the lesions are usually symmetric.

In the lumbar spine, progression of the disease leads to straightening, caused by loss of lordosis, and reactive sclerosis, caused by osteitis of the anterior corners of the vertebral bodies with subsequent erosion, leading to "squaring" or even "barreling" of one or more vertebral bodies. Progressive ossification leads to eventual formation of marginal syndesmophytes, visible on plain films as bony bridges connecting successive vertebral bodies anteriorly and laterally.

In many cases, years may elapse before unequivocal sacroiliac abnormalities are evident on plain radiographs, and consequently magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is being increasingly used in diagnosing AS. Active sacroiliitis is best visualized by dynamic MRI with fat saturation, either T2-weighed turbo spin-echo sequence or short tau inversion recovery (STIR) with high resolution, or T1-weighted images with contrast enhancement. These techniques are much more sensitive than conventional radiography for identifying early intraarticular inflammation, cartilage changes, and underlying bone marrow edema in sacroiliitis (Fig. 325-1). They are also highly sensitive for evaluation of acute and chronic spinal changes (Fig. 325-2).

Figure 325-1

 
 
 
Early sacroiliitis in a patient with AS, indicated by prominent edema in the juxtaarticular bone marrow (asterisks), synovium and joint capsule (thin arrow), and interosseous ligaments (thick arrow) on a STIR (short tau inversion recovery) magnetic resonance image. (From M. Bollow et al. Zeitschrift f邦r Rheumatologie 58:61, 1999. Reproduced with permission.)
 
 

Figure 325-2

 
 
 
Spinal inflammation (spondylodiskitis) in a patient with AS and its dramatic response to treatment with infliximab. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance images, with fat saturation, at baseline and after 24 weeks of infliximab therapy. (From J Braun et al.)
 
 

Reduced bone mineral density can be detected by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry of the femoral neck and the lumbar spine. By using a lateral projection of the L3 vertebral body, falsely elevated readings related to spinal ossification can be avoided.

Diagnosis

It is important to establish the diagnosis of early AS before the development of irreversible deformity. This goal presents a challenge for several reasons: (1) Back pain is very common, but AS is much less common; (2) an early presumptive diagnosis often relies on clinical grounds requiring considerable expertise; and (3) young individuals with early AS are often reluctant to seek medical care. The widely used modified New York criteria (1984) are based on the presence of definite radiographic sacroiliitis and are too insensitive in early or mild cases. In 2009, new criteria for axial SpA were proposed by the Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society (ASAS) (Table 325-1). They are applicable to individuals with 3 months of back pain with age of onset <45 years old. Active inflammation of the sacroiliac (SI) joints as determined by dynamic MRI is considered equivalent to the older criterion of definite radiographic sacroiliitis (see below).

Table 325-1 Asas Criteria for Classification of Axial Spondyloarthritis (to Be Applied for Patients with Back Pain 3 Months and Age of Onset <45 Years)a

 
 
Sacroiliitis on imaging plus 1 SpA feature
 or HLA-B27 plus 2 other SpA features
 
Sacroiliitis on imaging SpA features 
 Active (acute) inflammation on MRI highly suggestive of SpA-associated sacroiliitisb

and/or

 Definite radiographic sacroiliitis according to modified New York criteriac
  Inflammatory back paind

 Arthritise

 Enthesitis (heel)f

 Anterior uveitisg

 Dactylitise

 Psoriasise

 Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitise

 Good response to NSAIDsh

 Family history of SpAi

 HLA-B27

 Elevated CRPj
 
 


aSensitivity 83%, specificity 84%. The imaging arm (sacroiliitis) alone has a sensitivity of 66% and a specificity of 97%.

bBone marrow edema and/or osteitis on short tau inversion recovery (STIR) or gadolinium-enhanced T1 image.

cBilateral grade =2 or unilateral grade 3 or 4.

d See text for criteria.

ePast or present, diagnosed by a physician.

f Past or present pain or tenderness on examination at calcaneus insertion of Achilles tendon or plantar fascia.

g Past or present, confirmed by an ophthalmologist.

h Substantial relief of back pain at 24每48 h after a full dose of NSAID.

i First- or second-degree relatives with ankylosing spondylitis (AS), psoriasis, uveitis, reactive arthritis (ReA), or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

j After exclusion of other causes of elevated CRP.

Abbreviations: ASAS, Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society; CRP, C-reactive protein; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs; SpA, spondyloarthritis.

Source: From M Rudwaleit et al: Ann Rheum Dis 68:777, 2009. Copyright 2009, with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
 

AS must be differentiated from numerous other causes of low-back pain, some far more common than AS. To qualify as the criterion for inflammatory back pain of axial SpA (Table 325-1), the chronic (3 months) back pain should have four or more of these characteristic features: (1) age of onset below 40 years old, (2) insidious onset, (3) improvement with exercise and (4) no improvement with rest, and (5) pain at night with improvement upon getting up. Other common features of inflammatory back pain include morning stiffness >30 min, awakening from back pain during only the second half of the night, and alternating buttock pain. In clinical decision-making, all of these features are additive. The most common causes of back pain other than AS are primarily mechanical or degenerative rather than primarily inflammatory and tend not to show clustering of these features.

Less-common metabolic, infectious, and malignant causes of back pain must also be differentiated from AS, including infectious spondylitis, spondylodiskitis, and sacroiliitis, and primary or metastatic tumor. Ochronosis can produce a phenotype that is clinically and radiographically similar to AS. Calcification and ossification of paraspinous ligaments occur in diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH), which occurs in the middle-aged and elderly and is usually not symptomatic. Ligamentous calcification gives the appearance of "flowing wax" on the anterior bodies of the vertebrae. Intervertebral disk spaces are preserved, and sacroiliac and apophyseal joints appear normal, helping to differentiate DISH from spondylosis and from AS, respectively.

Treatment: Ankylosing Spondylitis

All management of AS should include an exercise program designed to maintain posture and range of motion. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the first line of pharmacologic therapy for AS. These agents reduce pain and tenderness and increase mobility in many patients with AS. There is evidence that daily NSAID therapy slows radiographic progression. However, many patients with AS have continued symptoms and develop deformity despite NSAID therapy. Beginning in 2000, dramatic responses to anti-TNF- therapy were reported in patients with AS and other spondyloarthritides. Patients with AS treated with either infliximab (chimeric human/mouse anti-TNF- monoclonal antibody), etanercept (soluble p75 TNF- receptor每IgG fusion protein), or adalimumab or golimumab (human anti-TNF- monoclonal antibodies) have shown rapid, profound, and sustained reductions in all clinical and laboratory measures of disease activity. Patients with long-standing disease and even some with complete spinal ankylosis have shown significant improvement in both objective and subjective indicators of disease activity and function, including morning stiffness, pain, spinal mobility, peripheral joint swelling, CRP, and ESR. MRI studies indicate substantial resolution of bone marrow edema, enthesitis, and joint effusions in the sacroiliac joints, spine, and peripheral joints (Fig. 325-2). Similar results have been obtained in large randomized controlled trials of all four agents and many open-label studies. About one-half of the patients achieve a 50% reduction in the BASDAI. The response tends to be stable over time, and partial or full remissions are common. Increased bone mineral density is found as early as 24 weeks after onset of therapy. There is evidence that anti-TNF therapy does not prevent syndesmophyte formation, although the practical clinical significance of this is not yet clear. A mechanism for this has been proposed based on the observation that TNF- inhibits new bone formation by upregulating DKK-1, a negative regulator of the wingless (Wnt) signaling pathway that promotes osteoblast activity. Serum DKK-1 levels are inappropriately low in AS patients and are also suppressed by anti-TNF therapy.

The dosages of anti-TNF agents used in AS patients have usually been similar to those in RA. Infliximab is given intravenously, 3每5 mg/kg body weight, and then repeated 2 weeks later, again 6 weeks later, and then at 8-week intervals. Etanercept is given by subcutaneous injection, 50 mg once weekly. Adalimumab is given by subcutaneous injection, 40 mg biweekly. Golimumab is given by subcutaneous injection, 50 or 100 mg every 4 weeks.

Although these potent immunosuppressive agents have so far been relatively safe, seven types of side effects are not rare: (1) serious infections, including disseminated tuberculosis; (2) hematologic disorders, such as pancytopenia; (3) demyelinating disorders; (4) exacerbation of congestive heart failure; (5) systemic lupus erythematosus每related autoantibodies and clinical features; (6) hypersensitivity infusion or injection site reactions; and (7) severe liver disease. No increased incidence of malignancy has been observed in AS patients treated for over 5 years.

Because of the expense, potentially serious side effects, and unknown long-term effects of these agents, their use should be restricted to patients with a definite diagnosis and active disease (BASDAI 4 out of 10 and expert opinion) that is inadequately responsive to therapy with at least two different NSAIDs. Before initiation of anti-TNF therapy, all patients should be tested for tuberculin (TB) reactivity, and reactors (5 mm) should be treated with anti-TB agents. Contraindications include active infection or high risk of infection; malignancy or premalignancy; and history of systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, or related autoimmunity. Pregnancy and breast-feeding are relative contraindications. Continuation beyond 12 weeks of therapy requires either a 50% reduction in BASDAI or absolute reduction of 2 out of 10, and favorable expert opinion. Sulfasalazine, in doses of 2每3 g/d, has been shown to be of modest benefit, primarily for peripheral arthritis. A therapeutic trial of this agent should precede any use of anti-TNF agents in patients with predominantly peripheral arthritis. Methotrexate, although widely used, has not been shown to be of benefit in AS, nor has any therapeutic role for gold or oral glucocorticoids been documented. Potential benefit in AS has been reported for thalidomide, 200 mg/d, perhaps acting through inhibition of TNF-.

The most common indication for surgery in patients with AS is severe hip joint arthritis, the pain and stiffness of which are usually dramatically relieved by total hip arthroplasty. Rare patients may benefit from surgical correction of extreme flexion deformities of the spine or of atlantoaxial subluxation.

Attacks of uveitis are usually managed effectively with local glucocorticoid administration in conjunction with mydriatic agents, although systemic glucocorticoids, immunosuppressive drugs, or anti-TNF therapy may be required. TNF inhibitors reduce the frequency of attacks of uveitis in patients with AS, although cases of new or recurrent uveitis after use of a TNF inhibitor have been observed, especially with etanercept.

Coexistent cardiac disease may require pacemaker implantation and/or aortic valve replacement. Management of axial osteoporosis is at present similar to that used for primary osteoporosis, since data specific for AS are not available.
 
Reactive Arthritis

Reactive arthritis (ReA) refers to acute nonpurulent arthritis complicating an infection elsewhere in the body. In recent years, the term has been used primarily to refer to SpA following enteric or urogenital infections.

Other forms of reactive and infection-related arthritis not associated with B27 and showing a spectrum of clinical features different from SpA, such as Lyme disease and rheumatic fever, are discussed in Chaps. 173 and 322.

Historic Background

The association of acute arthritis with episodes of diarrhea or urethritis has been recognized for centuries. A large number of cases during World Wars I and II focused attention on the triad of arthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis, often with additional mucocutaneous lesions, which became widely known by eponyms that are now of historic interest only.

The identification of bacterial species capable of triggering the clinical syndrome and the finding that many patients possess the B27 antigen led to the unifying concept of ReA as a clinical syndrome triggered by specific etiologic agents in a genetically susceptible host. A similar spectrum of clinical manifestations can be triggered by enteric infection with any of several Shigella, Salmonella, Yersinia, and Campylobacter species; by genital infection with Chlamydia trachomatis; and by other agents as well. The triad of arthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis represents a small part of the spectrum of the clinical manifestations of ReA. For the purposes of this chapter, the use of the term ReA will be restricted to those cases of SpA in which there is at least presumptive evidence for a related antecedent infection. Patients with clinical features of ReA who lack evidence of an antecedent infection will be considered to have undifferentiated spondyloarthritis, discussed below.

Epidemiology

Following the first reports of association of ReA with HLA-B27, in most hospital-based series in which Shigella, Yersinia, or Chlamydia were the triggering infectious agents, 60每85% of patients were found to be B27-positive, with a lower prevalence in ReA triggered by Salmonella and Campylobacter. In more recent community-based or common-source epidemic studies, the prevalence of B27 in ReA has often been below 50%, and in some instances not elevated at all. The most common age range is 18每40 years, but ReA can occur in children over 5 years of age and in older adults.

The gender ratio in ReA following enteric infection is nearly 1:1, whereas venereally acquired ReA occurs mainly in men. The overall prevalence and incidence of ReA are difficult to assess because of the variable prevalence of triggering infections and genetic susceptibility factors in different populations. In Scandinavia, an annual incidence of 10每28:100,000 has been reported. The spondylo-arthritides were formerly almost unknown in sub-Saharan Africa. However, ReA and other peripheral SpA have now become the most common rheumatic diseases in Africans in the wake of the AIDSepidemic, without association to B27, which is very rare in these populations. SpA in Africans with HIV infection usually occurs in individuals with stage I disease (as classified by the World Health Organization). It is often the first manifestation of infection and often remits with disease progression. In contrast, Western white patients with HIV and SpA are usually B27-positive, and the arthritis flares as AIDS advances.

Pathology

Synovial histology is similar to that of other SpA. Enthesitis shows increased vascularity and macrophage infiltration of fibrocartilage. Microscopic histopathologic evidence of inflammation has occasionally been noted in the colon and ileum of patients with post-venereal ReA, but much less commonly than in postenteric ReA. The skin lesions of keratoderma blenorrhagica, associated mainly with venereally acquired ReA, are histologically indistinguishable from psoriatic lesions.

Etiology and Pathogenesis

Of the four Shigella species S. sonnei, S. boydii, S. flexneri, and S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri has most often been implicated in cases of ReA, both sporadic and epidemic. S. sonnei and S. dysenteriae trigger some cases of ReA.

Other bacteria identified definitively as triggers of ReA include several Salmonella spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, Y. pseudotuberculosis, Campylobacter jejuni, and Chlamydia trachomatis. There is also evidence implicating Clostridium difficile, Campylobacter coli, certain toxigenic E. coli, and possibly Ureaplasma urealyticum and Mycoplasma genitalium. Respiratory infection with Chlamydia pneumoniae has also been implicated. There are also numerous isolated reports of acute arthritis preceded by other bacterial, viral, or parasitic infections, and even following intravesicular bacillus Calmette-Gu谷rin (BCG) treatment for bladder cancer.

It has not been determined whether ReA occurs by the same pathogenic mechanism following infection with each of these microorganisms, nor has the mechanism been elucidated in the case of any one of the known bacterial triggers. Most, if not all, of the organisms well established to be triggers produce lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and share a capacity to attack mucosal surfaces, to invade host cells, and to survive intracellularly. Antigens from Chlamydia, Yersinia, Salmonella, and Shigella have been shown to be present in the synovium and/or synovial fluid leukocytes of patients with ReA for long periods following the acute attack. In ReA triggered by Y. enterocolitica, bacterial LPS and heat-shock protein antigens have been found in peripheral blood cells years after the triggering infection. Yersinia DNA and C. trachomatis DNA and RNA have been detected in synovial tissue from ReA patients, suggesting the presence of viable organisms despite uniform failure to culture the organism from these specimens. The specificity of these findings is unclear, however, since chromosomal bacterial DNA has also been found in synovium in other rheumatic diseases, and 16S rRNA from a very wide variety of bacteria has been found in ReA synovium. In several older studies, synovial T cells that specifically responded to antigens of the inciting organism were reported and characterized as predominantly CD4+ with a TH2 or T regulatory phenotype. More recent work has documented high levels of IL-17 in ReA synovial fluid, but the source has not been identified. HLA-B27 seems to be associated with more severe and chronic forms of ReA, but its pathogenic role remains to be determined. HLA-B27 significantly prolongs the intracellular survival of Y. enterocolitica and S. enteritidis in human and mouse cell lines. Prolonged intracellular bacterial survival, promoted by B27, other factors, or both, may permit trafficking of infected leukocytes from the site of primary infection to joints, where an innate and/or adaptive immune response to persistent bacterial antigens may then promote arthritis.

Clinical Features

The clinical manifestations of ReA constitute a spectrum that ranges from an isolated, transient monarthritis or enthesitis to severe multisystem disease. A careful history will usually elicit evidence of an antecedent infection 1每4 weeks before onset of symptoms of the reactive disease. However, in a sizable minority, no clinical or laboratory evidence of an antecedent infection can be found. In cases of presumed venereally acquired reactive disease, there is often a history of a recent new sexual partner, even without laboratory evidence of infection.

Constitutional symptoms are common, including fatigue, malaise, fever, and weight loss. The musculoskeletal symptoms are usually acute in onset. Arthritis is usually asymmetric and additive, with involvement of new joints occurring over a few days to 1每2 weeks. The joints of the lower extremities, especially the knee, ankle, and subtalar, metatarsophalangeal, and toe interphalangeal joints, are most commonly involved, but the wrist and fingers can be involved as well. The arthritis is usually quite painful, and tense joint effusions are not uncommon, especially in the knee. Patients often cannot walk without support. Dactylitis, or "sausage digit," a diffuse swelling of a solitary finger or toe, is a distinctive feature of ReA and other peripheral spondyloarthritides but can be seen in polyarticular gout and sarcoidosis. Tendinitis and fasciitis are particularly characteristic lesions, producing pain at multiple insertion sites (entheses), especially the Achilles insertion, the plantar fascia, and sites along the axial skeleton. Spinal and low-back pain are quite common and may be caused by insertional inflammation, muscle spasm, acute sacroiliitis, or, presumably, arthritis in intervertebral joints.

Urogenital lesions may occur throughout the course of the disease. In males, urethritis may be marked or relatively asymptomatic and may be either an accompaniment of the triggering infection or a result of the reactive phase of the disease. Prostatitis is also common. Similarly, in females, cervicitis or salpingitis may be caused either by the infectious trigger or by the sterile reactive process.

Ocular disease is common, ranging from transient, asymptomatic conjunctivitis to an aggressive anterior uveitis that occasionally proves refractory to treatment and may result in blindness.

Mucocutaneous lesions are frequent. Oral ulcers tend to be superficial, transient, and often asymptomatic. The characteristic skin lesions, keratoderma blenorrhagica, consist of vesicles that become hyperkeratotic, ultimately forming a crust before disappearing. They are most common on the palms and soles but may occur elsewhere as well. In patients with HIV infection, these lesions are often extremely severe and extensive, sometimes dominating the clinical picture (Chap. 189). Lesions may occur on the glans penis, termed circinate balanitis; these consist of vesicles that quickly rupture to form painless superficial erosions, which in circumcised individuals can form crusts similar to those of keratoderma blenorrhagica. Nail changes are common and consist of onycholysis, distal yellowish discoloration, and/or heaped-up hyperkeratosis.

Less-frequent or rare manifestations of ReA include cardiac conduction defects, aortic insufficiency, central or peripheral nervous system lesions, and pleuropulmonary infiltrates.

Arthritis typically persists 3每5 months, but courses up to 1 year can occur. Chronic joint symptoms persist in about 15% of patients and in up to 60% in hospital-based series. Recurrences of the acute syndrome are also common. Work disability or forced change in occupation are common in those with persistent joint symptoms. Chronic heel pain is often particularly distressing. Low-back pain, sacroiliitis, and frank AS are also common sequelae. In most studies, HLA-B27每positive patients have shown a worse outcome than B27-negative patients. Patients with Yersinia- or Salmonella- induced arthritis have less chronic disease than those whose initial episode follows epidemic shigellosis.

Laboratory and Radiographic Findings

The ESR and acute-phase reactants are usually elevated during the acute phase of the disease. Mild anemia may be present. Synovial fluid is nonspecifically inflammatory. In most ethnic groups, about one-half of the patients are B27-positive. The triggering infection usually does not persist at the site of primary mucosal infection through the time of onset of the reactive disease, but it may be possible to culture the organism, e.g., in the case of Yersinia- or Chlamydia-induced disease. Serologic evidence of a recent infection may be present, such as a marked elevation of antibodies to Yersinia, Salmonella, or Chlamydia. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for chlamydial DNA in first-voided urine specimens is said to have high sensitivity.

In early or mild disease, radiographic changes may be absent or confined to juxtaarticular osteoporosis. With long-standing persistent disease, marginal erosions and loss of joint space can be seen in affected joints. Periostitis with reactive new bone formation is characteristic, as in all the SpA. Spurs at the insertion of the plantar fascia are common.

Sacroiliitis and spondylitis may be seen as late sequelae. Sacroiliitis is more commonly asymmetric than in AS, and spondylitis, rather than ascending symmetrically, can begin anywhere along the lumbar spine. The syndesmophytes may be asymmetric, coarse and nonmarginal, arising from the middle of a vertebral body, a pattern less commonly seen in primary AS. Progression to spinal fusion is uncommon.

Diagnosis

ReA is a clinical diagnosis with no definitively diagnostic laboratory test or radiographic finding. The diagnosis should be entertained in any patient with an acute inflammatory, asymmetric, additive arthritis or tendinitis. The evaluation should include questioning regarding possible triggering events such as an episode of diarrhea or dysuria. On physical examination, attention must be paid to the distribution of the joint and tendon involvement and to possible sites of extraarticular involvement, such as the eyes, mucous membranes, skin, nails, and genitalia. Synovial fluid analysis may be helpful in excluding septic or crystal-induced arthritis. Culture, serology, or molecular methods may help to identify a triggering infection.

Although typing for B27 has low negative predictive value in ReA, it may have prognostic significance in terms of severity, chronicity, and the propensity for spondylitis and uveitis. Furthermore, if positive, it can be helpful diagnostically in atypical cases. HIV testing is often indicated and may be necessary in order to select appropriate therapy.

It is important to differentiate ReA from disseminated gonococcal disease (Chap. 144), both of which can be venereally acquired and associated with urethritis. Unlike ReA, gonococcal arthritis and tenosynovitis tend to involve both upper and lower extremities equally, to lack back symptoms, and to be associated with characteristic vesicular skin lesions. A positive gonococcal culture from the urethra or cervix does not exclude a diagnosis of ReA; however, culturing gonococci from blood, skin lesion, or synovium establishes the diagnosis of disseminated gonococcal disease. PCR assay for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis may be helpful. Occasionally, only a therapeutic trial of antibiotics can distinguish the two.

ReA shares many features in common with psoriatic arthropathy. However, psoriatic arthritis is usually gradual in onset; the arthritis tends to affect primarily the upper extremities; there is less associated periarthritis; and there are usually no associated mouth ulcers, urethritis, or bowel symptoms.

Treatment Reactive Arthritis

Most patients with ReA benefit to some degree from high-dose NSAIDs, although acute symptoms are rarely completely ameliorated, and some patients fail to respond at all. Indomethacin, 75每150 mg/d in divided doses, is the initial treatment of choice, but other NSAIDs may be tried.

Prompt, appropriate antibiotic treatment of acute chlamydial urethritis or enteric infection may prevent the emergence of ReA. However, several controlled trials have failed to demonstrate any benefit for antibiotic therapy that is initiated after onset of arthritis. One long-term follow-up study suggested that although antibiotic therapy had no effect on the acute episode of ReA, it helped prevent subsequent chronic SpA. Another such study failed to demonstrate any long-term benefit. A promising recent double-blind placebo-controlled study showed that a majority of patients with chronic ReA due to Chlamydia benefited significantly from a 6-month course of rifampin 300 mg daily plus azithromycin 500 mg daily for 5 days then twice weekly, or 6 months of rifampin 300 mg daily plus doxycycline 100 mg twice daily.

Multicenter trials have suggested that sulfasalazine, up to 3 g/d in divided doses, may be beneficial to patients with persistent ReA.1 Patients with persistent disease may respond to azathioprine, 1每2 mg/kg per day, or to methotrexate, up to 20 mg per week. Although no controlled trials of anti-TNF- in ReA have been reported, anecdotal evidence supports the use of these agents in severe chronic cases, although lack of response has also been observed.1

Tendinitis and other enthesitic lesions may benefit from intralesional glucocorticoids. Uveitis may require aggressive treatment to prevent serious sequelae (see above). Skin lesions ordinarily require only symptomatic treatment. In patients with HIV infection and ReA, many of whom have severe skin lesions, the skin lesions in particular respond to antiretroviral therapy. Cardiac complications are managed conventionally; management of neurologic complications is symptomatic.

Comprehensive management includes counseling of patients in the avoidance of sexually transmitted disease and exposure to enteropathogens, as well as appropriate use of physical therapy, vocational counseling, and continued surveillance for long-term complications such as ankylosing spondylitis.
 
Psoriatic Arthritis

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) refers to an inflammatory arthritis that characteristically occurs in individuals with psoriasis.

Historic Background

The association between arthritis and psoriasis was noted in the nineteenth century. In the 1960s, on the basis of epidemiologic and clinical studies, it became clear that unlike RA the arthritis associated with psoriasis was usually seronegative, often involved the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of the fingers and the spine and sacroiliac joints, had distinctive radiographic features, and showed considerable familial aggregation. In the 1970s, PsA was included in the broader category of the spondyloarthritides because of features similar to those of AS and ReA.

Epidemiology

Estimates of the prevalence of PsA among individuals with psoriasis range from 5 to 30%. In white populations, psoriasis is estimated to have a prevalence of 1每3%. Psoriasis and PsA are less common in other races in the absence of HIV infection, and the prevalence of PsA in individuals with psoriasis may be less common. First-degree relatives of PsA patients have an elevated risk for psoriasis, for PsA itself, and for other forms of SpA. Of patients with psoriasis, up to 30% have an affected first-degree relative. In monozygotic twins, the reported concordance for psoriasis varies from 35 to 72%, and for PsA from 10 to 30%. A variety of HLA associations have been found. The HLA-Cw6 gene is directly associated with psoriasis, particularly familial juvenile-onset (type I) psoriasis. HLA-B27 is associated with psoriatic spondylitis (see below). HLA-DR7, -DQ3, and -B57 are associated with PsA because of linkage disequilibrium with Cw6. Other associations with PsA include HLA-B13, -B37, -B38, -B39, and DR4. A recent genome-wide scan found association of both psoriasis and PsA with a polymorphism at the HCP5 locus closely linked to HLA-B, and also to IL-23R, IL-12B (chromosome 5q31), and several other chromosomal regions.

Pathology

The inflamed synovium in PsA resembles that of RA, although with somewhat less hyperplasia and cellularity than in RA, and somewhat greater vascularity. Some studies have indicated a higher tendency to synovial fibrosis in PsA. Unlike RA, PsA shows prominent enthesitis, with histology similar to that of the other spondyloarthritides.

Pathogenesis

PsA is almost certainly immune-mediated and probably shares pathogenic mechanisms with psoriasis. PsA synovium shows infiltration with T cells, B cells, macrophages, and NK receptor每expressing cells, with upregulation of leukocyte homing receptors. Clonally expanded CD8+ T cells are frequent in PsA. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are thought to play a key role in psoriasis, and there is some evidence for their participation in psoriatic arthritis. There is abundant synovial overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines. Interleukin 2, interferon-, TNF-, and IL-1, -6, -8, -10, -12, -13, and -15 are found in PsA synovium or synovial fluid. TH17 derived cytokines are likely to be important in PsA, given their prominence in psoriasis and in other spondyloarthritides, the genetic association with genes in the IL-12/IL-23 axis, and the therapeutic response to an antibody to the shared IL-12/23 p40 subunit (see below). Consistent with the extensive bone lesions in PsA, patients with PsA have been found to have a marked increase in osteoclastic precursors in peripheral blood and upregulation of receptor activator of nuclear factor  ligand (RANKL) in the synovial lining layer.

Clinical Features

In 60每70% of cases, psoriasis precedes joint disease. In 15每20% of cases, the two manifestations appear within 1 year of each other. In about 15每20% of cases, the arthritis precedes the onset of psoriasis and can present a diagnostic challenge. The frequency in men and women is almost equal, although the frequency of disease patterns differs somewhat in the two sexes. The disease can begin in childhood or late in life but typically begins in the fourth or fifth decade, at an average age of 37 years.

The spectrum of arthropathy associated with psoriasis is quite broad. Many classification schemes have been proposed. In the original scheme of Wright and Moll, five patterns are described: (1) arthritis of the DIP joints; (2) asymmetric oligoarthritis; (3) symmetric polyarthritis similar to RA; (4) axial involvement (spine and sacroiliac joints); and (5) arthritis mutilans, a highly destructive form of disease. These patterns are not fixed, and the pattern that persists chronically often differs from that of the initial presentation. A simpler scheme in recent use contains three patterns: oligoarthritis, polyarthritis, and axial arthritis.

Nail changes in the fingers or toes occur in 90% of patients with PsA, compared with 40% of psoriatic patients without arthritis, and pustular psoriasis is said to be associated with more severe arthritis. Several articular features distinguish PsA from other joint disorders. Dactylitis occurs in >30%; enthesitis and tenosynovitis are also common and are probably present in most patients, although often not appreciated on physical examination. Shortening of digits because of underlying osteolysis is particularly characteristic of PsA (Fig. 325-3), and there is a much greater tendency than in RA for both fibrous and bony ankylosis of small joints. Rapid ankylosis of one or more proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints early in the course of disease is not uncommon. Back and neck pain and stiffness are also common in PsA.

Figure 325-3

 
 
 
Characteristic lesions of psoriatic arthritis. Inflammation is prominent in the DIP joints (left 5th, 4th, 2nd; right 2nd, 3rd, and 5th) and PIP joints (left 2nd, right 2nd, 4th, and 5th). There is dactylitis in the left 2nd finger and thumb, with pronounced telescoping of the left 2nd finger. Nail dystrophy (hyperkeratosis and onycholysis) affects each of the fingers except the left 3rd finger, the only finger without arthritis. (Courtesy of Donald Raddatz, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Arthropathy confined to the DIP joints predominates in about 15% of cases. Accompanying nail changes in the affected digits are almost always present. These joints are also often affected in the other patterns of PsA. Approximately 30% of patients have asymmetric oligoarthritis. This pattern commonly involves a knee or another large joint with a few small joints in the fingers or toes, often with dactylitis. Symmetric polyarthritis occurs in about 40% of PsA patients at presentation. It may be indistinguishable from RA in terms of the joints involved, but other features characteristic of PsA are usually also present. In general, peripheral joints in PsA tend to be somewhat less tender than in RA, although signs of inflammation are usually present. Almost any peripheral joint can be involved. Axial arthropathy without peripheral involvement is found in about 5% of PsA patients. It may be indistinguishable from idiopathic AS, although more neck involvement and less thoracolumbar spinal involvement is characteristic, and nail changes are not found in idiopathic AS. A small percentage of PsA patients have arthritis mutilans, in which there can be widespread shortening of digits ("telescoping"), sometimes coexisting with ankylosis and contractures in other digits.

Six patterns of nail involvement are identified: pitting, horizontal ridging, onycholysis, yellowish discoloration of the nail margins, dystrophic hyperkeratosis, and combinations of these findings. Other extraarticular manifestations of the spondyloarthritides are common. Eye involvement, either conjunctivitis or uveitis, is reported in 7每33% of PsA patients. Unlike the uveitis associated with AS, the uveitis in PsA is more often bilateral, chronic, and/or posterior. Aortic valve insufficiency has been found in <4% of patients, usually after long-standing disease.

Widely varying estimates of clinical outcome have been reported in PsA. At its worst, severe PsA with arthritis mutilans is at least as crippling and ultimately fatal as severe RA. Unlike RA, however, many patients with PsA experience temporary remissions. Overall, erosive disease develops in the majority of patients, progressive disease with deformity and disability is common, and in some large published series, mortality was found to be significantly increased compared with the general population.

The psoriasis and associated arthropathy seen with HIV infection both tend to be severe and can occur in populations with very little psoriasis in noninfected individuals. Severe enthesopathy, dactylitis, and rapidly progressive joint destruction are seen, but axial involvement is very rare. This condition is prevented by or responds well to antiretroviral therapy.

Laboratory and Radiographic Findings

There are no laboratory tests diagnostic of PsA. ESR and CRP are often elevated. A small percentage of patients may have low titers of rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibodies. About 10% of patients have anti-CCP antibodies. Uric acid may be elevated in the presence of extensive psoriasis. HLA-B27 is found in 50每70% of patients with axial disease, but 20% in patients with only peripheral joint involvement.

The peripheral and axial arthropathies in PsA show a number of radiographic features that distinguish them from RA and AS, respectively. Characteristics of peripheral PsA include DIP involvement, including the classic "pencil-in-cup" deformity; marginal erosions with adjacent bony proliferation ("whiskering"); small-joint ankylosis; osteolysis of phalangeal and metacarpal bone, with telescoping of digits; and periostitis and proliferative new bone at sites of enthesitis. Characteristics of axial PsA include asymmetric sacroiliitis; compared with idiopathic AS, less zygapophyseal joint arthritis, fewer and less symmetric and delicate syndesmophytes; fluffy hyperperiostosis on anterior vertebral bodies; severe cervical spine involvement, with a tendency to atlantoaxial subluxation but relative sparing of the thoracolumbar spine; and paravertebral ossification. Ultrasound and MRI both readily demonstrate enthesitis and tendon sheath effusions that can be difficult to assess on physical examination. A recent MRI study of 68 PsA patients found sacroiliitis in 35%, unrelated to B27 but correlated with restricted spinal movement.

Diagnosis

Classification criteria for PsA were published in 2006 [Classification of Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR) criteria] that have been widely accepted (Table 325-2). The sensitivity and specificity of these criteria exceed 90%, and they are useful for early diagnosis. The criteria are based on the history, presence of psoriasis, characteristic peripheral or spinal joint symptoms, signs, and imaging. Diagnosis can be challenging when the arthritis precedes psoriasis, the psoriasis is undiagnosed or obscure, or the joint involvement closely resembles another form of arthritis. A high index of suspicion is needed in any patient with an undiagnosed inflammatory arthropathy. The history should include inquiry about psoriasis in the patient and family members. Patients should be asked to disrobe for the physical examination, and psoriasiform lesions should be sought in the scalp, ears, umbilicus, and gluteal folds in addition to more accessible sites; the finger and toe nails should also be carefully examined. Axial symptoms or signs, dactylitis, enthesitis, ankylosis, the pattern of joint involvement, and characteristic radiographic changes can be helpful clues. The differential diagnosis includes all other forms of arthritis, which can occur coincidentally in individuals with psoriasis. The differential diagnosis of isolated DIP involvement is short. Osteoarthritis (Heberden's nodes) is usually not inflammatory; gout involving more than one DIP joint often involves other sites and may be accompanied by tophi; the very rare entity multicentric reticulohistiocytosis involves other joints and has characteristic small pearly periungual skin nodules; and the uncommon entity inflammatory osteoarthritis, like the others, lacks the nail changes of PsA. Radiography can be helpful in all of these cases and in distinguishing between psoriatic spondylitis and idiopathic AS. A history of trauma to an affected joint preceding the onset of arthritis is said to occur more frequently in PsA than in other types of arthritis, perhaps reflecting the Koebner phenomenon in which psoriatic skin lesions can arise at sites of the skin trauma.

Table 325-2 The Caspar (C Lassification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis) Criteriaa

 
 
To meet the CASPAR criteria, a patient must have inflammatory articular disease (joint, spine, or entheseal) with 3 points from any of the following five categories:

Evidence of current psoriasis,b, c a personal history of psoriasis, or a family history of psoriasisd

Typical psoriatic nail dystrophye observed on current physical examination

A negative test result for rheumatoid factor

Either current dactylitisf or a history of dactylitis recorded by a rheumatologist

Radiographic evidence of juxtaarticular new bone formationg in the hand or foot
 
 


aSpecificity of 99% and sensitivity of 91%.

bCurrent psoriasis is assigned 2 points; all other features are assigned 1 point.

c Psoriatic skin or scalp disease present at the time of examination, as judged by a rheumatologist or dermatologist.

d History of psoriasis in a first- or second-degree relative.

e Onycholysis, pitting, or hyperkeratosis.

f Swelling of an entire digit.

g Ill-defined ossification near joint margins, excluding osteophyte formation.

Source: From W Taylor et al.
 

Treatment: Psoriatic Arthritis

Ideally, coordinated therapy is directed at both the skin and joints in PsA. As described above for AS, use of the anti-TNF- agents has revolutionized the treatment of PsA. Prompt and dramatic resolution of both arthritis and skin lesions has been observed in large, randomized controlled trials of etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, and golimumab. Many of the responding patients had long-standing disease that was resistant to all previous therapy, as well as extensive skin disease. The clinical response is more dramatic than in RA, and delay of disease progression has been demonstrated radiographically. Paradoxically, rare cases have been reported of exacerbation or de novo appearance of psoriasis precipitated by anti-TNF therapy for a variety of conditions. In some cases, the therapy can nevertheless be continued.

The anti-T cell biologic agent alefacept, in combination with methotrexate, has shown benefit in both psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. Ustekinumab, a monoclonal antibody to the shared IL-23/IL-12p40 subunit, has shown promise in treating both psoriasis and PsA in early clinical trials.

Other treatment for PsA has been based on drugs that have efficacy in RA and/or in psoriasis. Although methotrexate in doses of 15每25 mg/week and sulfasalazine (usually given in doses of 2每3 g/d) have each been found to have clinical efficacy in controlled trials, neither effectively halts progression of erosive joint disease. Other agents with efficacy in psoriasis reported to benefit PsA are cyclosporine, retinoic acid derivatives, and psoralens plus ultraviolet A light (PUVA). There is controversy regarding the efficacy in PsA of gold and antimalarials, which have been widely used in RA. The pyrimidine synthetase inhibitor leflunomide has been shown in a randomized controlled trial to be beneficial in both psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

All of these treatments require careful monitoring. Immunosuppressive therapy may be used cautiously in HIV-associated PsA if the HIV infection is well controlled.

In one large prospective series, 7% of patients with PsA required musculoskeletal surgery beginning at a mean of 13 years' disease duration. Indications for surgery are similar to those in RA, although there is an impression that outcomes in PsA may be less satisfactory.
 
Undifferentiated and Juvenile-Onset Spondyloarthritis

Many patients, usually young adults, present with some features of one or more of the spondyloarthritides discussed above. Until recently, these patients were said to have undifferentiated spondyloarthritis, or simply spondyloarthritis, as defined by the 1991 European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group criteria (Table 325-3). For example, a patient may present with inflammatory synovitis of one knee, Achilles tendinitis, and dactylitis of one digit. Some of these patients may have ReA in which the triggering infection remains clinically silent. In some other cases, the patient subsequently develops IBD or psoriasis or the process eventually meets criteria for AS. This diagnosis of undifferentiated SpA was also commonly applied to patients with inflammatory back pain, who did meet modified New York criteria for AS. Most of these would now be classified under the new category of axial spondyloarthritis (Table 325-1).

Table 325-3 European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group (Essg) Criteria for Spondyloarthritisa

 
 
Inflammatory Back Painb
  or  Synovitis 
     Asymmetric or  
     Predominantly in lower extremities 
  and    
One or more of the following: 
 Family history of SpAb  
 Psoriasisb
  
 Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitisc
  
 Nongonococcal urethritis, cervicitis, or acute diarrhea within 1 month before arthritis 
 Alternating buttock paind
  
?Enthesitisb
  
?Radiographic sacroiliitisb
  
 


a Sensitivity >85%, specificity >85%.

b See definition in Table 325-1.

c Past or present, diagnosed by a physician and confirmed by endoscopy or radiography.

d Past or present pain alternating between the right and left gluteal regions.

SpA, spondyloarthritis.

Source: From M Dougados et al; J Sieper J et al. Copyright 2009, with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
 

Approximately one-half of the patients with undifferentiated SpA are HLA-B27-positive, and thus the absence of B27 is not useful in establishing or excluding the diagnosis. In familial cases, which are much more frequently B27-positive, there is often eventual progression to classical AS.

In juvenile-onset SpA, which begins between ages 7 and 16, most commonly in boys (60每80%), an asymmetric, predominantly lower-extremity oligoarthritis and enthesitis without extraarticular features is the typical mode of presentation. The prevalence of B27 in this condition, which has been termed the seronegative enthesopathy and arthropathy (SEA) syndrome, is approximately 80%. Many, but not all, of these patients go on to develop AS in late adolescence or adulthood.

Management of undifferentiated SpA is similar to that of the other spondyloarthritides. Response to anti-TNF- therapy has been documented, and this therapy is indicated in severe, persistent cases not responsive to other treatment. One 2004 publication reported significant benefit in patients with long-standing undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy treated for 9 months with doxycycline and rifampin. These data await confirmation.

Current pediatric textbooks and journals should be consulted for information on management of juvenile-onset SpA.
 
Enteropathic Arthritis

Historic Background

A relationship between arthritis and IBD was observed in the 1930s. The relationship was further defined by the epidemiologic studies in the 1950s and 1960s and included in the concept of the spondyloarthritides in the 1970s.

Epidemiology

Both of the common forms of IBD, ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) (Chap. 295), are associated with SpA. UC and CD both have an estimated prevalence of 0.05每0.1%, and the incidence of each is thought to have increased in recent decades. AS and peripheral arthritis are both associated with UC and with CD. Wide variations have been reported in the estimated frequencies of these associations. In recent series, AS was diagnosed in 1每10%, and peripheral arthritis in 10每50% of patients with IBD. Inflammatory back pain and enthesopathy are common, and many patients have sacroiliitis on imaging studies.

The prevalence of UC or CD in patients with AS is thought to be 5每10%. However, investigation of unselected SpA patients by ileocolonoscopy has revealed that from one-third to two-thirds of patients with AS have subclinical intestinal inflammation that is evident either macroscopically or histologically. These lesions have also been found in patients with undifferentiated SpA or ReA (both enterically and urogenitally acquired).

Both UC and CD have a tendency to familial aggregation, more so for CD. HLA associations have been weak and inconsistent. HLA-B27 is found in up to 70% of patients with IBD and AS, but in 15% of patients with IBD and peripheral arthritis or IBD alone. Three alleles of the NOD2/CARD15 gene on chromosome 16 have been found in approximately one-half of patients with CD. These alleles are not associated with the spondyloarthritides per se. However, they are found significantly more often in (1) CD patients with sacroiliitis than in those without sacroiliitis, and (2) SpA patients with chronic inflammatory gut lesions than in those with normal gut histology. These associations are independent of HLA-B27.

Genome studies have shown that CD and UC have some susceptibility genes in common and some specific to each condition. Among these, IL-23R (highly associated with CD and to a lesser degree with UC) is shared with AS and psoriasis. TNFSF15, associated with CD, has also been found linked to SpA.

Pathology

Available data for IBD-associated peripheral arthritis suggest a synovial histology similar to other spondyloarthritides. Association with arthropathy does not affect the gut histology of UC or CD (Chap. 295). The subclinical inflammatory lesions in the colon and distal ileum associated with SpA have been classified as either acute or chronic. The former resemble acute bacterial enteritis, with largely intact architecture and neutrophilic infiltration in the lamina propria. The latter resemble the lesions of CD, with distortion of villi and crypts, aphthoid ulceration, and mononuclear cell infiltration in the lamina propria.

Pathogenesis

Both IBD and SpA are immune-mediated, but the specific pathogenic mechanisms are poorly understood, and the connection between the two is obscure. The shared genetics could reflect either shared pathogenetic mechanisms, close genetic linkage of separate susceptibility alleles, or both. IBD is a common phenotype in a number of rodent lines with transgenic overexpression or targeted deletion of genes involved in immune processes. Arthritis is an accompanying prominent feature in two of these IBD models, B27 transgenic rats and mice with constitutive overexpression of TNF-, and immune dysregulation is prominent in both. Several lines of evidence indicate trafficking of leukocytes between the gut and the joint. Mucosal leukocytes from IBD patients have been shown to bind avidly to synovial vasculature through several different adhesion molecules. Macrophages expressing CD163 are prominent in the inflammatory lesions of both gut and synovium in the spondyloarthritides.

Clinical Features

AS associated with IBD is clinically indistinguishable from idiopathic AS. It runs a course independent of the bowel disease, and in many patients it precedes the onset of IBD, sometimes by many years. Peripheral arthritis not infrequently begins before onset of overt bowel disease. The spectrum of peripheral arthritis includes acute self-limited attacks of oligoarthritis that often coincide with relapses of IBD, and more chronic and symmetric polyarticular arthritis that runs a course independent of IBD activity. The patterns of joint involvement are similar in UC and CD. In general, erosions and deformities are infrequent in IBD-associated peripheral arthritis, and joint surgery is infrequently required. Isolated destructive hip arthritis is a rare complication of CD, apparently distinct from osteonecrosis and septic arthritis. Dactylitis and enthesopathy are occasionally found. In addition to the 20% of IBD patients with SpA, a comparable percentage have arthralgias or fibromyalgia symptoms.

Other extraintestinal manifestations of IBD are seen in addition to arthropathy, including uveitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, erythema nodosum, and finger clubbing, all somewhat more commonly in CD than UC. The uveitis shares the features described above for PsA-associated uveitis.

Laboratory and Radiographic Findings

Laboratory findings reflect the inflammatory and metabolic manifestations of IBD. Joint fluid is usually at least mildly inflammatory. Of patients with AS and IBD, 30每70% carry the HLA-B27 gene, compared with >90% of patients with AS alone and 50每70% of those with AS and psoriasis. Hence, definite or probable AS in a B27-negative individual in the absence of psoriasis should prompt a search for occult IBD. Radiographic changes in the axial skeleton are the same as in uncomplicated AS. Erosions are uncommon in peripheral arthritis but may occur, particularly in the metatarsophalangeal joints. Isolated destructive hip disease has been described.

Diagnosis

Diarrhea and arthritis are both common conditions that can coexist for a variety of reasons. When etiopathogenically related, reactive arthritis and IBD-associated arthritis are the most common causes. Rare causes include celiac disease, blind loop syndromes, and Whipple's disease. In most cases, diagnosis depends upon investigation of the bowel disease.

Treatment: Enteropathic Arthritis

Treatment of CD has been improved by therapy with anti-TNF agents. Infliximab and adalimumab are effective for induction and maintenance of clinical remission in CD, and infliximab has been shown to be effective in fistulizing CD. IBD-associated arthritis also responds to these agents. Other treatment for IBD, including sulfasalazine and related drugs, systemic glucocorticoids, and immunosuppressive drugs, are also usually of benefit for associated peripheral arthritis. NSAIDs are generally helpful and well tolerated, but they can precipitate flares of IBD. Rare cases of IBD, usually UC, have apparently been precipitated by anti-TNF therapy, usually etanercept, given for any of several rheumatic diseases.
 
Sapho Syndrome

The syndrome of synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis (SAPHO) is characterized by a variety of skin and musculoskeletal manifestations. Dermatologic manifestations include palmoplantar pustulosis, acne conglobata, acne fulminans, and hidradenitis suppurativa. The main musculoskeletal findings are sternoclavicular and spinal hyperostosis, chronic recurrent foci of sterile osteomyelitis, and axial or peripheral arthritis. Cases with one or a few manifestations are probably the rule. The ESR is usually elevated, sometimes dramatically. In some cases, bacteria, most often Propionibacterium acnes, have been cultured from bone biopsy specimens and occasionally other sites. Inflammatory bowel disease was coexistent in 8% of patients in one large series. B27 is not associated. Either bone scan or CT scan is helpful diagnostically. A recent MRI report described a characteristic vertebral body corner cortical erosions in 12 out of 12 patients. High-dose NSAIDs may provide relief from bone pain. A number of uncontrolled series and case reports describe successful therapy with pamidronate or other bisphosphonates. Response to anti-TNF- therapy has also been observed, although in a few cases this has been associated with a flare of skin manifestations. Successful prolonged antibiotic therapy has also been reported.
 
Whipple's Disease

Whipple's disease (Chap. 294) is a rare chronic bacterial infection, mostly of middle-aged white men, caused by Tropheryma whipplei. At least 75% of affected individuals develop an oligo- or polyarthritis. The joint manifestations usually precede other symptoms of the disease by 5 years or more; they are thus particularly important because appropriate antibiotic therapy is curative, whereas the untreated disease is fatal. Large and small peripheral joints and sacroiliac joints may be involved. The arthritis is abrupt in onset, migratory, usually lasts hours to a few days, and then resolves completely. Chronic polyarthritis can occur but is not typical. Eventually prolonged diarrhea, malabsorption, and weight loss occur. Other manifestations of systemic disease include fever, edema, serositis, endocarditis, pneumonia, hypotension, lymphadenopathy, hyperpigmentation, subcutaneous nodules, clubbing, and uveitis. Central nervous system involvement eventually develops in 80% of untreated patients, with cognitive changes, headache, diplopia, and papilledema, and may be detectable on MRI. Oculomasticatory and oculofacial-skeletal myorhythmia with supranuclear vertical gaze palsy are said to be pathognomonic. Laboratory abnormalities include anemia and changes from malabsorption. Synovial fluid is usually inflammatory. Radiography rarely shows joint erosions but may show sacroiliitis. Abdominal CT may reveal lymphadenopathy. Foamy macrophages containing periodic acid每Schiff (PAS)-staining bacterial remnants can be seen in biopsies of small intestine, synovium, lymph node, and other tissues.

The complete genome sequence of T. whipplei was published in 2003. Diagnosis is facilitated by PCR amplification of sequences of the 16S ribosomal gene or other genes of T. whipplei in biopsied tissue. In the future, this may be supplanted or complemented by serologic tests. The organism is ubiquitous in the environment and is found in some healthy individuals, so the mere presence of DNA does not establish a diagnosis. The syndrome responds to therapy with penicillin (or ceftriaxone) and streptomycin for 2 weeks followed by trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 1每2 years, but other antibiotic regimens may be preferable, and infectious disease consultation is strongly advised. Monitoring for central nervous system relapse is critical. Recently, nonclassical infections with T. whipplei have been described, including endocarditis.
 
Further Readings

Australo-Anglo-American Spondyloarthritis Consortium (TASC) et al: Genome-wide association study of ankylosing spondylitis identifies non-MHC susceptibility loci. Nat Genet 42:123, 2010 

 
Benjamin M et al: Microdamage and altered vascularity at the enthesis-bone interface provides an anatomic explanation for bone involvement in the HLA-B27-associated spondylarthritides and allied disorders. Arthritis Rheum 56:224, 2007[PMID: 17195226]  [Full Text]

 
Braun J et al: Persistent clinical efficacy and safety of anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha therapy with infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis over 5 years: Evidence for different types of response. Ann Rheum Dis 67:340, 2008[PMID: 17967831]  [Full Text]

 
Brown MA: Genetics and the pathogenesis of ankylosing spondylitis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 21:318, 2009[PMID: 19496308]  [Full Text]

 
Burton PR et al: Association scan of 14,500 nonsynonymous SNPs in four diseases identifies autoimmunity variants. Nat Genet 39:1329, 2007[PMID: 17952073]  [Full Text]

 
Carter J et al: Combination antibiotics as a treatment for chronic Chlamydia-induced reactive arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 62:1298, 2010[PMID: 20155838]  [Full Text]

 
Chandran V et al: Sensitivity of the classification of psoriatic arthritis criteria in early psoriatic arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 57:1560, 2007[PMID: 18050230]  [Full Text]

 
Davis JC, Jr et al: Efficacy and safety of up to 192 weeks of etanercept therapy in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Ann Rheum Dis 67:346, 2008[PMID: 17967833]  [Full Text]

 
Diarra D et al: Dickkopf-1 is a master regulator of joint remodeling. Nat Med 13:156, 2007[PMID: 17237793]  [Full Text]

 
Dougados M et al: The European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group preliminary criteria for the classification of spondyloarthropathy. Arthritis Rheum 34:1218, 1991[PMID: 1930310]  [Full Text]

 
Fitzgerald O, Winchester R: Psoriatic arthritis: From pathogenesis to therapy. Arthritis Res Ther 11:214, 2009[PMID: 19232079]  [Full Text]

 
Inman rd et al: Efficacy and safety of golimumab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis: Results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial. Arthritis Rheum 58:3402, 2008[PMID: 18975305]  [Full Text]

 
L車pez-larrea C, Diaz-Pe?a R (eds): Molecular mechanisms of spondyloarthropathies, in Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, vol. 649. Austin, TX, Springer Science+ Business Media and Landes Bioscience, 2009 

 
Magrey M, Khan MA: New insights into synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis (SAPHO) syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep 11:329, 2009[PMID: 19772827]  [Full Text]

 
Maksymowych WP et al: Inflammatory lesions of the spine on magnetic resonance imaging predict the development of new syndesmophytes in ankylosing spondylitis: evidence of a relationship between inflammation and new bone formation. Arthritis Rheum 60:93, 2009[PMID: 19116919]  [Full Text]

 
Rudwaleit M et al: The early disease stage in axial spondylarthritis: Results from the German Spondyloarthritis Inception Cohort. Arthritis Rheum 60:717, 2009[PMID: 19248087]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞: The development of Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for axial spondyloarthritis (pt. I): Classification of paper patients by expert opinion including uncertainty appraisal. Ann Rheum Dis 68:770, 2009 

 
〞〞〞: The development of Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for axial spondyloarthritis (pt. II): Validation and final selection. Ann Rheum Dis 68:777, 2009 

 
Schneider T et al: Whipple's disease: New aspects of pathogenesis and treatment. Lancet Infect Dis 8:179, 2008[PMID: 18291339]  [Full Text]

 
Sieper J et al: The Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society (ASAS) handbook: A guide to assess spondyloarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 68:ii1, 2009 

 
Singh R et al: Th1/Th17 cytokine profiles in patients with reactive arthritis/undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy. J Rheumatol 34:2285, 2007[PMID: 17937463]  [Full Text]

 
Taylor W et al: Classification criteria for psoriatic arthritis. Development of new criteria from a large international study. Arthritis Rheum, 54:2665, 2006[PMID: 16871531]  [Full Text]

 
Zinovieva E et al: Comprehensive linkage and association analyses identify haplotype, near to the TNFSF15 gene, significantly associated with spondyloarthritis. PLoS Genet 5:e1000528, 2009 
 
 

^^
Chapter 326. The Vasculitis Syndromes >
 

Definition

Vasculitis is a clinicopathologic process characterized by inflammation of and damage to blood vessels. The vessel lumen is usually compromised, and this is associated with ischemia of the tissues supplied by the involved vessel. A broad and heterogeneous group of syndromes may result from this process, since any type, size, and location of blood vessel may be involved. Vasculitis and its consequences may be the primary or sole manifestation of a disease; alternatively, vasculitis may be a secondary component of another primary disease. Vasculitis may be confined to a single organ, such as the skin, or it may simultaneously involve several organ systems.
 
Classification

A major feature of the vasculitic syndromes as a group is the fact that there is a great deal of heterogeneity at the same time as there is considerable overlap among them. This heterogeneity and overlap in addition to a lack of understanding of the pathogenesis of these syndromes have been major impediments to the development of a coherent classification system for these diseases. Table 326-1 lists the major vasculitis syndromes. The distinguishing and overlapping features of these syndromes are discussed below.

Table 326-1 Vasculitis Syndromes

 
 
Primary Vasculitis Syndromes
 Secondary Vasculitis Syndromes
 
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)
 Drug-induced vasculitis
 
Churg-Strauss syndrome

Polyarteritis nodosa

Microscopic polyangiitis

Giant cell arteritis

Takayasu's arteritis

Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura

Idiopathiccutaneousvasculitis

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis

Beh?et's syndrome

Isolated vasculitis of the central nervous system

Cogan's syndrome

Kawasaki disease
 Serum sickness

Vasculitis associated with other primary diseases

    Infection

    Malignancy

    Rheumatic disease
 
 

 
 
Pathophysiology and Pathogenesis

Generally, most of the vasculitic syndromes are assumed to be mediated at least in part by immunopathogenic mechanisms that occur in response to certain antigenic stimuli (Table 326-2). However, evidence supporting this hypothesis is for the most part indirect and may reflect epiphenomena as opposed to true causality. Furthermore, it is unknown why some individuals might develop vasculitis in response to certain antigenic stimuli, whereas others do not. It is likely that a number of factors are involved in the ultimate expression of a vasculitic syndrome. These include the genetic predisposition, environmental exposures, and the regulatory mechanisms associated with immune response to certain antigens.

Table 326-2 Potential Mechanisms of Vessel Damage in Vasculitis Syndromes

 
 
Pathogenic immune complex formation and/or deposition

    Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura

    Vasculitis associated with collagen vascular diseases

    Serum sickness and cutaneousvasculitis syndromes

    Hepatitis C每associated cryoglobulinemic vasculitis

    Polyarteritis nodosa每like vasculitis associated with hepatitis B
 
Production of antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies

    Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)

    Churg-Strauss syndrome

    Microscopic polyangiitis
 
Pathogenic T lymphocyte responses and granuloma formation

    Giant cell arteritis

    Takayasu's arteritis

    Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's)

    Churg-Strauss syndrome
 
 


Source: Adapted from Sneller and Fauci.
 

Pathogenic Immune-Complex Formation

Vasculitis is generally considered within the broader category of immune-complex diseases that include serum sickness and certain of the connective tissue diseases, of which systemic lupus erythematosus (Chap. 319) is the prototype. Although deposition of immune complexes in vessel walls is the most widely accepted pathogenic mechanism of vasculitis, the causal role of immune complexes has not been clearly established in most of the vasculitic syndromes. Circulating immune complexes need not result in deposition of the complexes in blood vessels with ensuing vasculitis, and many patients with active vasculitis do not have demonstrable circulating or deposited immune complexes. The actual antigen contained in the immune complex has only rarely been identified in vasculitic syndromes. In this regard, hepatitis B antigen has been identified in both the circulating and deposited immune complexes in a subset of patients who have features of a systemic vasculitis, most notably in polyarteritis nodosa (PAN; see "Polyarteritis Nodosa"). Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis is strongly associated with hepatitis C virus infection; hepatitis C virions and hepatitis C virus antigen-antibody complexes have been identified in the cryoprecipitates of these patients (see "Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis").

The mechanisms of tissue damage in immune complex每mediated vasculitis resemble those described for serum sickness. In this model, antigen-antibody complexes are formed in antigen excess and are deposited in vessel walls whose permeability has been increased by vasoactive amines such as histamine, bradykinin, and leukotrienes released from platelets or from mast cells as a result of IgE-triggered mechanisms. The deposition of complexes results in activation of complement components, particularly C5a, which is strongly chemotactic for neutrophils. These cells then infiltrate the vessel wall, phagocytose the immune complexes, and release their intracytoplasmic enzymes, which damage the vessel wall. As the process becomes subacute or chronic, mononuclear cells infiltrate the vessel wall. The common denominator of the resulting syndrome is compromise of the vessel lumen with ischemic changes in the tissues supplied by the involved vessel. Several variables may explain why only certain types of immune complexes cause vasculitis and why only certain vessels are affected in individual patients. These include the ability of the reticuloendothelial system to clear circulating complexes from the blood, the size and physicochemical properties of immune complexes, the relative degree of turbulence of blood flow, the intravascular hydrostatic pressure in different vessels, and the preexisting integrity of the vessel endothelium.
 
Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA)

ANCA are antibodies directed against certain proteins in the cytoplasmic granules of neutrophils and monocytes. These autoantibodies are present in a high percentage of patients with active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) and microscopic polyangiitis, and in a lower percentage of patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome. Because these diseases share the presence of ANCA and small-vessel vasculitis, some investigators have come to refer to them collectively as "ANCA-associated vasculitis." However, as these diseases possess unique clinical phenotypes in which ANCA may be absent, it remains our opinion that granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), microscopic polyangiitis, and Churg-Strauss syndrome should continue to be viewed as separate entities.

There are two major categories of ANCA based on different targets for the antibodies. The terminology of cytoplasmic ANCA (cANCA) refers to the diffuse, granular cytoplasmic staining pattern observed by immunofluorescence microscopy when serum antibodies bind to indicator neutrophils. Proteinase-3, a 29-kDa neutral serine proteinase present in neutrophil azurophilic granules, is the major cANCA antigen. More than 90% of patients with typical active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) have detectable antibodies to proteinase-3 (see below). The terminology of perinuclear ANCA (pANCA) refers to the more localized perinuclear or nuclear staining pattern of the indicator neutrophils. The major target for pANCA is the enzyme myeloperoxidase; other targets that can produce a pANCA pattern of staining include elastase, cathepsin G, lactoferrin, lysozyme, and bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein. However, only antibodies to myeloperoxidase have been convincingly associated with vasculitis. Antimyeloperoxidase antibodies have been reported to occur in variable percentages of patients with microscopic polyangiitis, Churg-Strauss syndrome, crescentic glomerulonephritis, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) (see below). A pANCA pattern of staining that is not due to antimyeloperoxidase antibodies has been associated with nonvasculitic entities such as rheumatic and nonrheumatic autoimmune diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, certain drugs, and infections such as endocarditis and bacterial airway infections in patients with cystic fibrosis.

It is unclear why patients with these vasculitis syndromes develop antibodies to myeloperoxidase or proteinase-3, whereas such antibodies are rare in other inflammatory diseases and autoimmune diseases. It is also unclear what role these antibodies play in disease pathogenesis. There are a number of in vitro observations that suggest possible mechanisms whereby these antibodies can contribute to the pathogenesis of the vasculitis syndromes. Proteinase-3 and myeloperoxidase reside in the azurophilic granules and lysosomes of resting neutrophils and monocytes, where they are apparently inaccessible to serum antibodies. However, when neutrophils or monocytes are primed by tumor necrosis factor  (TNF-) or interleukin 1 (IL-1), proteinase-3 and myeloperoxidase translocate to the cell membrane, where they can interact with extracellular ANCA. The neutrophils then degranulate and produce reactive oxygen species that can cause tissue damage. Furthermore, ANCA-activated neutrophils can adhere to and kill endothelial cells in vitro. Activation of neutrophils and monocytes by ANCA also induces the release of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and IL-8. Recent adoptive transfer experiments in genetically engineered mice provide further evidence for a direct pathogenic role of ANCA in vivo. In contradiction, however, a number of clinical and laboratory observations argue against a primary pathogenic role for ANCA. Patients may have active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) in the absence of ANCA; the absolute height of the antibody titers does not correlate well with disease activity; and patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) in remission may continue to have high antiproteinase-3 (cANCA) titers for years (see below). Thus, the role of these autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of systemic vasculitis remains unclear.

Pathogenic T Lymphocyte Responses and Granuloma Formation

In addition to the classic immune complex每mediated mechanisms of vasculitis as well as ANCA, other immunopathogenic mechanisms may be involved in damage to vessels. The most prominent of these are delayed hypersensitivity and cell-mediated immune injury as reflected in the histopathologic feature of granulomatous vasculitis. However, immune complexes themselves may induce granulomatous responses. Vascular endothelial cells can express HLA class II molecules following activation by cytokines such as interferon (IFN) . This allows these cells to participate in immunologic reactions such as interaction with CD4+ T lymphocytes in a manner similar to antigen-presenting macrophages. Endothelial cells can secrete IL-1, which may activate T lymphocytes and initiate or propagate in situ immunologic processes within the blood vessel. In addition, IL-1 and TNF- are potent inducers of endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (ELAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), which may enhance the adhesion of leukocytes to endothelial cells in the blood vessel wall. Other mechanisms such as direct cellular cytotoxicity, antibody directed against vessel components, or antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity have been suggested in certain types of vessel damage. However, there is no convincing evidence to support their causal contribution to the pathogenesis of any of the recognized vasculitic syndromes.

Approach to the Patient: General Principles of Diagnosis

The diagnosis of vasculitis is often considered in any patient with an unexplained systemic illness. However, there are certain clinical abnormalities that when present alone or in combination should suggest a diagnosis of vasculitis. These include palpable purpura, pulmonary infiltrates and microscopic hematuria, chronic inflammatory sinusitis, mononeuritis multiplex, unexplained ischemic events, and glomerulonephritis with evidence of multisystem disease. A number of nonvasculitic diseases may also produce some or all of these abnormalities. Thus, the first step in the workup of a patient with suspected vasculitis is to exclude other diseases that produce clinical manifestations that can mimic vasculitis (Table 326-3). It is particularly important to exclude infectious diseases with features that overlap those of vasculitis, especially if the patient's clinical condition is deteriorating rapidly and empirical immunosuppressive treatment is being contemplated.

Table 326-3 Conditions that Can Mimic Vasculitis

 
 
Infectious diseases

    Bacterial endocarditis

    Disseminated gonococcal infection

    Pulmonary histoplasmosis

    Coccidioidomycosis

    Syphilis

    Lyme disease

    Rocky Mountain spotted fever

    Whipple's disease

Coagulopathies/thrombotic microangiopathies

    Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome

    Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

Neoplasms

    Atrial myxoma

    Lymphoma

    Carcinomatosis

Drug toxicity

    Cocaine

    Amphetamines

    Ergot alkaloids

    Methysergide

    Arsenic

Sarcoidosis

Atheroembolic disease

Antiglomerular basement membrane disease (Goodpasture's syndrome)

Amyloidosis

Migraine
 
 

 

Once diseases that mimic vasculitis have been excluded, the workup should follow a series of progressive steps that establish the diagnosis of vasculitis and determine, where possible, the category of the vasculitis syndrome (Fig. 326-1). This approach is of considerable importance since several of the vasculitis syndromes require aggressive therapy with glucocorticoids and cytotoxic agents, while other syndromes usually resolve spontaneously and require symptomatic treatment only. The definitive diagnosis of vasculitis is made upon biopsy of involved tissue. The yield of "blind" biopsies of organs with no subjective or objective evidence of involvement is very low and should be avoided. When syndromes such as PAN, Takayasu's arteritis, or isolated central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis are suspected, arteriogram of organs with suspected involvement should be performed. However, arteriograms should not be performed routinely when patients present with localized cutaneous vasculitis with no clinical indication of visceral involvement.

Figure 326-1

 
 
 
Algorithm for the approach to a patient with suspected diagnosis of vasculitis. PAN, polyarteritis nodosa.
 
 

General Principles of Treatment

Once a diagnosis of vasculitis has been established, a decision regarding therapeutic strategy must be made (Fig. 326-1). If an offending antigen that precipitates the vasculitis is recognized, the antigen should be removed where possible. If the vasculitis is associated with an underlying disease such as an infection, neoplasm, or connective tissue disease, the underlying disease should be treated. If the syndrome represents a primary vasculitic disease, treatment should be initiated according to the category of the vasculitis syndrome. Specific therapeutic regimens are discussed below for the individual vasculitis syndromes; however, certain general principles regarding therapy should be considered. Decisions regarding treatment should be based upon the use of regimens for which there has been published literature supporting efficacy for that particular vasculitic disease. Since the potential toxic side effects of certain therapeutic regimens may be substantial, the risk-versus-benefit ratio of any therapeutic approach should be weighed carefully. On the one hand, glucocorticoids and/or cytotoxic therapy should be instituted immediately in diseases where irreversible organ system dysfunction and high morbidity and mortality rates have been clearly established. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is the prototype of a severe systemic vasculitis requiring such a therapeutic approach (see below). On the other hand, when feasible, aggressive therapy should be avoided for vasculitic manifestations that rarely result in irreversible organ system dysfunction and that usually do not respond to such therapy. For example, idiopathiccutaneous vasculitis usually resolves with symptomatic treatment, and prolonged courses of glucocorticoids uncommonly result in clinical benefit. Cytotoxic agents have not proved to be beneficial in idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis, and their toxic side effects generally outweigh any potential beneficial effects. Glucocorticoids should be initiated in those systemic vasculitides that cannot be specifically categorized or for which there is no established standard therapy; cytotoxic therapy should be added in these diseases only if an adequate response does not result or if remission can only be achieved and maintained with an unacceptably toxic regimen of glucocorticoids. When remission is achieved, one should continually attempt to taper glucocorticoids and discontinue when possible. When using cytotoxic regimens, one should base the choice of agent upon the available therapeutic data supporting efficacy in that disease, the site and severity of organ involvement, and the toxicity profile of the drug.

Physicians should be thoroughly aware of the toxic side effects of therapeutic agents employed that can include both acute and long-term complications (Table 326-4). Morbidity and mortality can occur as a result of treatment and strategies to monitor for and prevent toxicity represent an essential part of patient care. Glucocorticoids are an important part of treatment for most vasculitides but are associated with substantial toxicities. Monitoring and prevention of glucocorticoid-induced bone loss is important in all patients. With the use of daily cyclophosphamide, strategies are particularly important and are directed toward minimization of bladder toxicity and prevention of leukopenia. Instructing the patient to take cyclophosphamide all at once in the morning with a large amount of fluid throughout the day in order to maintain a dilute urine can reduce the risk of bladder injury. Bladder cancer can occur several years after discontinuation of cyclophosphamide therapy; therefore, monitoring for bladder cancer should continue indefinitely in patients who have received cyclophosphamide. Bone marrow suppression is an important toxicity of cyclophosphamide and can be observed during glucocorticoid tapering or over time, even after periods of stable measurements. Monitoring of the complete blood count every 1每2 weeks for as long as the patient receives cyclophosphamide can effectively prevent cytopenias. Maintaining the white blood count (WBC) at >3000/L and the neutrophil count >1500/L is essential to reduce the risk of life-threatening infections.

Table 326-4 Major Toxic Side Effects of Drugs Commonly Used in the Treatment of Systemic Vasculitis

 
 
Glucocorticoids
   
Osteoporosis
 Growth suppression in children
 
Cataracts
 Hypertension
 
Glaucoma
 Avascular necrosis of bone
 
Diabetes mellitus
 Myopathy
 
Electrolyte abnormalities
 Alterations in mood
 
Metabolic abnormalities
 Psychosis
 
Suppression of inflammatory and immune responses leading to opportunistic infections
 Pseudotumor cerebri Peptic ulcer diathesis Pancreatitis
 
Cushingoid features
   
Cyclophosphamide
   
Bone marrow suppression
 Hypogammaglobulinemia
 
Cystitis
 Pulmonary fibrosis
 
Bladder carcinoma
 Myelodysplasia
 
Gonadal suppression
 Oncogenesis
 
Gastrointestinal intolerance
 Teratogenicity
 
  Opportunistic infections
 
Methotrexate
   
Gastrointestinal intolerance
 Pneumonitis
 
Stomatitis
 Teratogenicity
 
Bone marrow suppression
 Opportunistic infections
 
Hepatotoxicity (may lead to fibrosis or cirrhosis)
   
Azathioprine
   
Gastrointestinal intolerance
 Opportunistic infections
 
Bone marrow suppression
 Hypersensitivity
 
Hepatotoxicity
   
 

 

Methotrexate and azathioprine are also associated with bone marrow suppression, and complete blood counts should be obtained every 1每2 weeks for the first 1每2 months after their initiation and once a month thereafter. To lessen toxicity, methotrexate is often given together with folic acid, 1 mg daily, or folinic acid, 5每10 mg once a week 24 h following methotrexate. Prior to initiation of azathioprine, thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme involved in the metabolism of azathioprine, should be assayed because inadequate levels may result in severe cytopenia.

Infection represents a significant toxicity for all vasculitis patients treated with immunosuppressive therapy. Infections with Pneumocystis jiroveci and certain fungi can be seen even in the face of WBCs that are within normal limits, particularly in patients receiving glucocorticoids. All vasculitis patients who are receiving daily glucocorticoids in combination with a cytotoxic drug should receive trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) or another prophylactic therapy to prevent P. jiroveci infection.

Finally, it should be emphasized that each patient is unique and requires individual decision-making. The above outline should serve as a framework to guide therapeutic approaches; however, flexibility should be practiced in order to provide maximal therapeutic efficacy with minimal toxic side effects in each patient.
 
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener's)

Definition

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is a distinct clinicopathologic entity characterized by granulomatous vasculitis of the upper and lower respiratory tracts together with glomerulonephritis. In addition, variable degrees of disseminated vasculitis involving both small arteries and veins may occur.

Incidence and Prevalence

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is an uncommon disease with an estimated prevalence of 3 per 100,000. It is extremely rare in blacks compared with whites; the male-to-female ratio is 1:1. The disease can be seen at any age; 15% of patients are <19 years of age, but only rarely does the disease occur before adolescence; the mean age of onset is 40 years.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The histopathologic hallmarks of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) are necrotizing vasculitis of small arteries and veins together with granuloma formation, which may be either intravascular or extravascular (Fig. 326-2). Lung involvement typically appears as multiple, bilateral, nodular cavitary infiltrates (Fig. 326-3), which on biopsy almost invariably reveal the typical necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis. Upper airway lesions, particularly those in the sinuses and nasopharynx, typically reveal inflammation, necrosis, and granuloma formation, with or without vasculitis.

Figure 326-2

 
 
 
Lung histology in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). This area of geographic necrosis has a serpiginous border of histiocytes and giant cells surrounding a central necrotic zone. Vasculitis is also present with neutrophils and lymphocytes infiltrating the wall of a small arteriole (upper right). (Courtesy of William D. Travis, MD; with permission.)
 
 

Figure 326-3

 
 
 
Computed tomography scan of a patient with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). The patient developed multiple, bilateral, and cavitary infiltrates.
 
 

In its earliest form, renal involvement is characterized by a focal and segmental glomerulitis that may evolve into a rapidly progressive crescentic glomerulonephritis. Granuloma formation is only rarely seen on renal biopsy. In contrast to other forms of glomerulonephritis, evidence of immune complex deposition is not found in the renal lesion of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). In addition to the classic triad of disease of the upper and lower respiratory tracts and kidney, virtually any organ can be involved with vasculitis, granuloma, or both.

The immunopathogenesis of this disease is unclear, although the involvement of upper airways and lungs with granulomatous vasculitis suggests an aberrant cell-mediated immune response to an exogenous or even endogenous antigen that enters through or resides in the upper airway. Chronic nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus has been reported to be associated with a higher relapse rate of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's); however, there is no evidence for a role of this organism in the pathogenesis of the disease.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) manifest increased secretion of IFN- but not of IL-4, IL-5, or IL-10 compared to normal controls. In addition, TNF- production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells and CD4+ T cells is elevated. Furthermore, monocytes from patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) produce increased amounts of IL-12. These findings indicate an unbalanced TH1-type T cell cytokine pattern in this disease that may have pathogenic and perhaps ultimately therapeutic implications.

A high percentage of patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) develop ANCA, and these autoantibodies may play a role in the pathogenesis of this disease (see above).

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Involvement of the upper airways occurs in 95% of patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Patients often present with severe upper respiratory tract findings such as paranasal sinus pain and drainage and purulent or bloody nasal discharge, with or without nasal mucosal ulceration (Table 326-5). Nasal septal perforation may follow, leading to saddle nose deformity. Serous otitis media may occur as a result of eustachian tube blockage. Subglottic tracheal stenosis resulting from active disease or scarring occurs in 16% of patients and may result in severe airway obstruction.

Table 326-5 Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener's): Frequency of Clinical Manifestations in 158 Patients Studied at the National Institutes of Health

 
 
Manifestation
 Percent at Disease Onset
 Percent Throughout Course of Disease
 
Kidney

    Glomerulonephritis
 18
 77
 
Ear/nose/throat

    Sinusitis

    Nasal disease

    Otitis media

    Hearing loss

    Subglottic stenosis

    Ear pain

    Oral lesions
 73

51

36

25

14

1

9

3
 92

85

68

44

42

16

14

10
 
Lung

    Pulmonary infiltrates

    Pulmonary nodules

    Hemoptysis

    Pleuritis
 45

25

24

12

10
 85

66

58

30

28
 
Eyes

    Conjunctivitis

    Dacryocystitis

    Scleritis

    Proptosis

    Eye pain

    Visual loss

    Retinal lesions

    Corneal lesions

    Iritis
 5

1

6

2

3

0

0

0

0
 18

18

16

15

11

8

4

1

2
 
Othera

    Arthralgias/arthritis

    Fever

    Cough

    Skin abnormalities

    Weight loss (>10% body weight)

    Peripheral neuropathy

    Central nervous system disease

    Pericarditis

    Hyperthyroidism
 32

23

19

13

15

1

1

2

1
 67

50

46

46

35

15

8

6

3
 
 


aFewer than 1% had parotid, pulmonary artery, breast, or lower genitourinary (urethra, cervix, vagina, testicular) involvement.

Source: Hoffman et al.
 

Pulmonary involvement may be manifested as asymptomatic infiltrates or may be clinically expressed as cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and chest discomfort. It is present in 85每90% of patients. Endobronchial disease, either in its active form or as a result of fibrous scarring, may lead to obstruction with atelectasis.

Eye involvement (52% of patients) may range from a mild conjunctivitis to dacryocystitis, episcleritis, scleritis, granulomatous sclerouveitis, ciliary vessel vasculitis, and retroorbital mass lesions leading to proptosis.

Skin lesions (46% of patients) appear as papules, vesicles, palpable purpura, ulcers, or subcutaneous nodules; biopsy reveals vasculitis, granuloma, or both. Cardiac involvement (8% of patients) manifests as pericarditis, coronary vasculitis, or, rarely, cardiomyopathy. Nervous system manifestations (23% of patients) include cranial neuritis, mononeuritis multiplex, or, rarely, cerebral vasculitis and/or granuloma.

Renal disease (77% of patients) generally dominates the clinical picture and, if left untreated, accounts directly or indirectly for most of the mortality rate in this disease. Although it may smolder in some cases as a mild glomerulitis with proteinuria, hematuria, and red blood cell casts, it is clear that once clinically detectable renal functional impairment occurs, rapidly progressive renal failure usually ensues unless appropriate treatment is instituted.

While the disease is active, most patients have nonspecific symptoms and signs such as malaise, weakness, arthralgias, anorexia, and weight loss. Fever may indicate activity of the underlying disease but more often reflects secondary infection, usually of the upper airway.

Characteristic laboratory findings include a markedly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), mild anemia and leukocytosis, mild hypergammaglobulinemia (particularly of the IgA class), and mildly elevated rheumatoid factor. Thrombocytosis may be seen as an acute-phase reactant. Approximately 90% of patients with active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) have a positive antiproteinase-3 ANCA. However, in the absence of active disease, the sensitivity drops to 60每70%. A small percentage of patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) may have antimyeloperoxidase rather than antiproteinase-3 antibodies, and up to 20% may lack ANCA.

Patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) have been found to have an increased incidence of venous thrombotic events. Although routine anticoagulation for all patients is not recommended, a heightened awareness for any clinical features suggestive of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary emboli is warranted.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is made by the demonstration of necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis on tissue biopsy in a patient with compatible clinical features. Pulmonary tissue offers the highest diagnostic yield, almost invariably revealing granulomatous vasculitis. Biopsy of upper airway tissue usually reveals granulomatous inflammation with necrosis but may not show vasculitis. Renal biopsy can confirm the presence of pauci-immune glomerulonephritis.

The specificity of a positive antiproteinase-3 ANCA for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is very high, especially if active glomerulonephritis is present. However, the presence of ANCA should be adjunctive and, with rare exceptions, should not substitute for a tissue diagnosis. False-positive ANCA titers have been reported in certain infectious and neoplastic diseases.

In its typical presentation, the clinicopathologic complex of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) usually provides ready differentiation from other disorders. However, if all the typical features are not present at once, it needs to be differentiated from the other vasculitides, antiglomerular basement membrane disease (Goodpasture's syndrome) (Chap. 283), relapsing polychondritis (Chap. 328), tumors of the upper airway or lung, and infectious diseases such as histoplasmosis (Chap. 199), mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (Chap. 212), and rhinoscleroma (Chap. 31) as well as noninfectious granulomatous diseases.

Of particular note is the differentiation from midline granuloma and upper airway neoplasms, which are part of the spectrum of midline destructive diseases. These diseases lead to extreme tissue destruction and mutilation localized to the midline upper airway structures including the sinuses; erosion through the skin of the face commonly occurs, a feature that is extremely rare in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Although blood vessels may be involved in the intense inflammatory reaction and necrosis, primary vasculitis is not seen. Midline granuloma is part of the spectrum of angiocentric immunoproliferative lesions that are considered to represent a spectrum of postthymic T cell proliferative lesions and should be treated as such (Chap. 110). The term idiopathic has been applied to midline granuloma when extensive diagnostic workup including multiple biopsies has failed to reveal anything other than inflammation and necrosis. Under these circumstances, it is possible that the tumor cells were masked by the intensive inflammatory response. Such cases have responded to local irradiation with 50 Gy (5000 rad). Upper airway lesions should never be irradiated in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Cocaine-induced tissue injury can be another important mimic of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) in patients who present with isolated midline destructive disease. ANCA that target human neutrophil elastase can be found in patients with cocaine-induced midline destructive lesions and can confound the differentiation from granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's).

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) must also be differentiated from lymphomatoid granulomatosis, which is an Epstein-Barr virus每positive B cell proliferation that is associated with an exuberant T cell reaction. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is characterized by lung, skin, CNS, and kidney involvement in which atypical lymphocytoid and plasmacytoid cells infiltrate nonlymphoid tissue in an angioinvasive manner. In this regard, it clearly differs from granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) in that it is not an inflammatory vasculitis in the classic sense but an infiltration of vessels with atypical mononuclear cells; granuloma may be present in involved tissues. Up to 50% of patients may develop a true malignant lymphoma.

Treatment: Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener's)

Prior to the introduction of effective therapy, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) was universally fatal within a few months of diagnosis. Glucocorticoids alone led to some symptomatic improvement, with little effect on the ultimate course of the disease. The development of treatment with cyclophophamide dramatically changed patient outcome such that marked improvement was seen in >90% of patients, complete remission in 75% of patients, and 5-year patient survival was seen in over 80%.

Despite the ability to successfully induce remission, 50每70% of remissions are later associated with one or more relapses. The determination of relapse should be based on objective evidence of disease activity, taking care to rule out other features that may have a similar appearance such as infection, medication toxicity, or chronic disease sequelae. The ANCA titer can be misleading and should not be used to assess disease activity. Many patients who achieve remission continue to have elevated titers for years. Results from a large prospective study found that increases in ANCA were not associated with relapse and that only 43% relapsed within 1 year of an increase in ANCA levels. Thus, a rise in ANCA by itself is not a harbinger of immediate disease relapse and should not lead to reinstitution or increase in immunosuppressive therapy.

Reinduction of remission after relapse is almost always achieved; however, a high percentage of patients ultimately have some degree of damage from irreversible features of their disease, such as varying degrees of renal insufficiency, hearing loss, tracheal stenosis, saddle nose deformity, and chronically impaired sinus function. Patients who developed irreversible renal failure but who achieved subsequent remission have undergone successful renal transplantation.

Because long-term cyclophosphamide is associated with substantial toxicity, approaches have been developed that seek to minimize the duration of exposure to cyclophosphamide while still taking advantage of its efficacy for severe disease. Treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) is currently viewed as having two phases: induction, where active disease is put into remission, followed by maintenance. The decision regarding which agents to use for induction and maintenance is based upon disease severity together with individual patient factors that include contraindication, relapse history, and comorbidities.

Cyclophosphamide Induction for Severe Disease?

For patients with severe disease, daily cyclophosphamide combined with glucocorticoids has been repeatedly proved to effectively induce remission and prolong survival. At the initiation of therapy, glucocorticoids are usually given as prednisone, 1 mg/kg per day for the first month, followed by gradual tapering on an alternate-day or daily schedule with discontinuation after 6每9 months. Cyclophosphamide is given in doses of 2 mg/kg per day orally, but as it is renally eliminated, dosage reduction should be considered in patients with renal insufficiency. Some reports have indicated therapeutic success with less frequent and severe toxic side effects using IV cyclophosphamide. In a recent randomized trial, IV cyclophosphamide 15 mg/kg, three infusions given every 2 weeks, then every 3 weeks thereafter, was compared to cyclophosphamide 2 mg/kg daily given for 3 months followed by 1.5 mg/kg daily. Although IV cyclophosphamide was found to have a comparable rate of remission with a lower cumulative cyclophosphamide dose and occurrence of leukopenia, the use of a consolidation phase and an insufficient frequency of blood count monitoring may have negatively influenced the results in those who received daily cyclophosphamide. Of note in this study was that relapse occurred in 19% of those who received IV cyclophosphamide as compared to 9% who received daily oral administration. We continue to strongly favor daily cyclophosphamide with utilization of blood count monitoring every 1每2 weeks (as discussed above) and limiting the duration of induction exposure to 3每6 months.

In patients with imminently life-threatening disease, such as rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis or pulmonary hemorrhage requiring mechanical ventilation, a regimen of daily cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids is the treatment of choice to induce remission. Adjunctive plasmapheresis was found to further improve renal recovery in a study of patients with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis who had a creatinine of greater than 5.8 mg/dL.

Remission Maintenance after Cyclophosphamide?

After 3每6 months of induction treatment, cyclophosphamide should be stopped and switched to another agent for remission maintenance. The agents with which there has been the greatest published experience are methotrexate and azathioprine. Methotrexate is administered orally or subcutaneously starting at a dosage of 0.3 mg/kg as a single weekly dose, not to exceed 15 mg/week. If the treatment is well tolerated after 1每2 weeks, the dosage should be increased by 2.5 mg weekly up to a dosage of 20每25 mg/week and maintained at that level. Azathioprine, 2 mg/kg per day, has also proved effective in maintaining remission following induction with daily cyclophosphamide. In a randomized trial comparing methotrexate to azathioprine for remission maintenance, comparable rates of toxicity and relapse were seen. Therefore, the choice of agent is often based on toxicity profile, as methotrexate cannot be given to patients with renal insufficiency or chronic liver disease, as well as on other individual patient factors. In patients who are unable to receive methotrexate or azathioprine or who have relapsed through such treatment, mycophenolate mofetil, 1000 mg twice a day, may also sustain remission following cyclophosphamide induction.

The optimal duration of maintenance therapy is uncertain. In the absence of toxicity, maintenance therapy is usually given for a minimum of 2 years past remission, after which time consideration can be given for tapering over a 6每12 month period until discontinuation. Some patients with significant organ damage or a history of relapse may benefit from longer-term continuation of a maintenance agent.

Methotrexate Induction for Nonsevere Disease?

For selected patients whose disease is not immediately life threatening or in those patients who have experienced significant cyclophosphamide toxicity, methotrexate together with glucocorticoids given at the dosages described above may be considered as an alternative for induction therapy, which is then continued for maintenance.

Rituximab Induction for Severe Disease?

Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against CD20 present on normal and malignant B lymphocytes that is FDA approved for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic lymphoma, and rheumatoid arthritis. In two recent randomized trials that enrolled ANCA positive patients with severe active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) or microscopic polyangiitis, rituximab 375 mg/m2 once a week for 4 weeks in combination with glucocorticoids was found to be as effective as cyclophosphamide with glucocorticoids for inducing disease remission. In the trial which also enrolled patients with relapsing disease, rituximab was found to be statistically superior to cyclophosphamide.

While the data supports that rituximab is effective for remission induction severe active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) or microscopic polyangiitis, there remain a number of ongoing questions regarding rituximab that must be considered in weighing its use in the individual patient. These include that there are no long-term data regarding relapse risk or long-term safety with rituximab, it is unclear how often rituximab needs to be given, and as all patients in the randomized trials were ANCA positive, its efficacy in ANCA negative patients is unknown. It is also uncertain whether the use of other maintenance agents after rituximab would provide any additional benefit in prolonging remission or increase toxicity as these were not used in either randomized trial.

While rituximab does not have the bladder toxicity or infertility concerns, as can occur with cyclophosphamide, in both of the randomized trials, the rate of adverse events was similar in the rituximab and cyclophosphamide arms. Serious side effects of rituximab include infusion reactions, severe mucocutaneous reactions, and rare reports of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. As rituximab can bring about reactivation of hepatitis B, all patients should undergo hepatitis screening prior to treatment with rituximab.

Other Biologic Therapies?

Etanercept, a dimeric fusion protein containing the 75-kDa TNF receptor bound to human IgG1, was not found to sustain remission when used adjunctively to standard therapy and should not be used in the treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's).

Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole?

Although certain reports have indicated that TMP-SMX may be of benefit in the treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) isolated to the sinonasal tissues, it should never be used alone to treat active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) outside of the upper airway such as in patients with renal or pulmonary disease. In a study examining the effect of TMP-SMX on relapse, decreased relapses were shown only with regard to upper airway disease, and no differences in major organ relapses were observed.

Organ-Specific Treatment

Not all manifestations of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) require or respond to cytotoxic therapy. In managing non-major organ disease, such as that isolated to the sinus, joints, or skin, the risks of treatment should be carefully weighed against the benefits. Treatment with cyclophosphamide is rarely if ever justified for the treatment of isolated sinus disease in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Although patients with non-major organ disease may be effectively treated without cytotoxic therapy, these individuals must be monitored closely for the development of disease activity affecting the lungs, kidneys, or other major organs. Subglottic tracheal stenosis and endobronchial stenosis are examples of disease manifestations that do not typically respond to systemic immunosuppressive treatment.
 
Microscopic Polyangiitis

Definition

The term microscopic polyarteritis was introduced into the literature by Davson in 1948 in recognition of the presence of glomerulonephritis in patients with PAN. In 1992, the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference on the Nomenclature of Systemic Vasculitis adopted the term microscopic polyangiitis to connote a necrotizing vasculitis with few or no immune complexes affecting small vessels (capillaries, venules, or arterioles). Glomerulonephritis is very common in microscopic polyangiitis, and pulmonary capillaritis often occurs. The absence of granulomatous inflammation in microscopic polyangiitis is said to differentiate it from granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's).

Incidence and Prevalence

The incidence of microscopic polyangiitis has not yet been reliably established due to its previous inclusion as part of PAN. The mean age of onset is 57 years of age, and males are slightly more frequently affected than females.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The vasculitis seen in microscopic polyangiitis has a predilection to involve capillaries and venules in addition to small and medium-sized arteries. Immunohistochemical staining reveals a paucity of immunoglobulin deposition in the vascular lesion of microscopic polyangiitis, suggesting that immune-complex formation does not play a role in the pathogenesis of this syndrome. The renal lesion seen in microscopic polyangiitis is identical to that of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Like granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's), microscopic polyangiitis is highly associated with the presence of ANCA, which may play a role in pathogenesis of this syndrome (see above).

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Because of its predilection to involve the small vessels, microscopic polyangiitis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) share similar clinical features. Disease onset may be gradual, with initial symptoms of fever, weight loss, and musculoskeletal pain; however, it is often acute. Glomerulonephritis occurs in at least 79% of patients and can be rapidly progressive, leading to renal failure. Hemoptysis may be the first symptom of alveolar hemorrhage, which occurs in 12% of patients. Other manifestations include mononeuritis multiplex and gastrointestinal tract and cutaneousvasculitis. Upper airway disease and pulmonary nodules are not typically found in microscopic polyangiitis and, if present, suggest granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's).

Features of inflammation may be seen, including an elevated ESR, anemia, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis. ANCA are present in 75% of patients with microscopic polyangiitis, with antimyeloperoxidase antibodies being the predominant ANCA associated with this disease.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis is based on histologic evidence of vasculitis or pauci-immune glomerulonephritis in a patient with compatible clinical features of multisystem disease. Although microscopic polyangiitis is strongly ANCA-associated, no studies have as yet established the sensitivity and specificity of ANCA in this disease.

Treatment: Microscopic Polyangiitis

The 5-year survival rate for patients with treated microscopic polyangiitis is 74%, with disease-related mortality occurring from alveolar hemorrhage or gastrointestinal, cardiac, or renal disease. Studies on treatment have come from trials that have included patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) or microscopic polyangiitis. Currently, the treatment approach for microscopic polyangiitis is the same as is used for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) [see "Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis (Wegener's)"] for a detailed description of this therapeutic regimen), and patients with immediately life-threatening disease should be treated with the combination of prednisone and daily cyclophosphamide. Recent studies with rituximab also included ANCA positive patients with microscopic polyangiitis. Disease relapse has been observed in at least 34% of patients. Treatment for such relapses would be similar to that used at the time of initial presentation and based upon site and severity of disease.
 
Churg-Strauss Syndrome

Definition

Churg-Strauss syndrome, also referred to as allergic angiitis and granulomatosis, was described in 1951 by Churg and Strauss and is characterized by asthma, peripheral and tissue eosinophilia, extravascular granuloma formation, and vasculitis of multiple organ systems.

Incidence and Prevalence

Churg-Strauss syndrome is an uncommon disease with an estimated annual incidence of 1每3 per million. The disease can occur at any age with the possible exception of infants. The mean age of onset is 48 years, with a female-to-male ratio of 1.2:1.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The necrotizing vasculitis of Churg-Strauss syndrome involves small and medium-sized muscular arteries, capillaries, veins, and venules. A characteristic histopathologic feature of Churg-Strauss syndrome is granulomatous reactions that may be present in the tissues or even within the walls of the vessels themselves. These are usually associated with infiltration of the tissues with eosinophils. This process can occur in any organ in the body; lung involvement is predominant, with skin, cardiovascular system, kidney, peripheral nervous system, and gastrointestinal tract also commonly involved. Although the precise pathogenesis of this disease is uncertain, its strong association with asthma and its clinicopathologic manifestations, including eosinophilia, granuloma, and vasculitis, point to aberrant immunologic phenomena.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome often exhibit nonspecific manifestations such as fever, malaise, anorexia, and weight loss, which are characteristic of a multisystem disease. The pulmonary findings in Churg-Strauss syndrome clearly dominate the clinical picture with severe asthmatic attacks and the presence of pulmonary infiltrates. Mononeuritis multiplex is the second most common manifestation and occurs in up to 72% of patients. Allergic rhinitis and sinusitis develop in up to 61% of patients and are often observed early in the course of disease. Clinically recognizable heart disease occurs in 14% of patients and is an important cause of mortality. Skin lesions occur in 51% of patients and include purpura in addition to cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules. The renal disease in Churg-Strauss syndrome is less common and generally less severe than that of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) and microscopic polyangiitis.

The characteristic laboratory finding in virtually all patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome is a striking eosinophilia, which reaches levels >1000 cells/L in >80% of patients. Evidence of inflammation as evidenced by elevated ESR, fibrinogen, or 2-globulins can be found in 81% of patients. The other laboratory findings reflect the organ systems involved. Approximately 48% of patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome have circulating ANCA that is usually antimyeloperoxidase.

Diagnosis

Although the diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome is optimally made by biopsy in a patient with the characteristic clinical manifestations (see above), histologic confirmation can be challenging as the pathognomonic features often do not occur simultaneously. In order to be diagnosed with Churg-Strauss syndrome, a patient should have evidence of asthma, peripheral blood eosinophilia, and clinical features consistent with vasculitis.

Treatment: Churg-Strauss Syndrome

The prognosis of untreated Churg-Strauss syndrome is poor, with a reported 5-year survival of 25%. With treatment, prognosis is favorable, with one study finding a 78-month actuarial survival rate of 72%. Myocardial involvement is the most frequent cause of death and is responsible for 39% of patient mortality. Glucocorticoids alone appear to be effective in many patients. Dosage tapering is often limited by asthma, and many patients require low-dose prednisone for persistent asthma many years after clinical recovery from vasculitis. In glucocorticoid failure or in patients who present with fulminant multisystem disease, the treatment of choice is a combined regimen of daily cyclophosphamide and prednisone (see "Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis (Wegener's)" for a detailed description of this therapeutic regimen).
 
Polyarteritis Nodosa

Definition

PAN, also referred to as classic PAN, was described in 1866 by Kussmaul and Maier. It is a multisystem, necrotizing vasculitis of small and medium-sized muscular arteries in which involvement of the renal and visceral arteries is characteristic. PAN does not involve pulmonary arteries, although bronchial vessels may be involved; granulomas, significant eosinophilia, and an allergic diathesis are not observed.

Incidence and Prevalence

It is difficult to establish an accurate incidence of PAN because previous reports have included PAN and microscopic polyangiitis as well as other related vasculitides. PAN, as currently defined, is felt to be a very uncommon disease.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The vascular lesion in PAN is a necrotizing inflammation of small and medium-sized muscular arteries. The lesions are segmental and tend to involve bifurcations and branchings of arteries. They may spread circumferentially to involve adjacent veins. However, involvement of venules is not seen in PAN and, if present, suggests microscopic polyangiitis (see below). In the acute stages of disease, polymorphonuclear neutrophils infiltrate all layers of the vessel wall and perivascular areas, which results in intimal proliferation and degeneration of the vessel wall. Mononuclear cells infiltrate the area as the lesions progress to the subacute and chronic stages. Fibrinoid necrosis of the vessels ensues with compromise of the lumen, thrombosis, infarction of the tissues supplied by the involved vessel, and, in some cases, hemorrhage. As the lesions heal, there is collagen deposition, which may lead to further occlusion of the vessel lumen. Aneurysmal dilations up to 1 cm in size along the involved arteries are characteristic of PAN. Granulomas and substantial eosinophilia with eosinophilic tissue infiltrations are not characteristically found and suggest Churg-Strauss syndrome (see above).

Multiple organ systems are involved, and the clinicopathologic findings reflect the degree and location of vessel involvement and the resulting ischemic changes. As mentioned above, pulmonary arteries are not involved in PAN, and bronchial artery involvement is uncommon. The pathology in the kidney in classic PAN is that of arteritis without glomerulonephritis. In patients with significant hypertension, typical pathologic features of glomerulosclerosis may be seen. In addition, pathologic sequelae of hypertension may be found elsewhere in the body.

The presence of a PAN-like vasculitis in patients with hepatitis B together with the isolation of circulating immune complexes composed of hepatitis B antigen and immunoglobulin, and the demonstration by immunofluorescence of hepatitis B antigen, IgM, and complement in the blood vessel walls, strongly suggest the role of immunologic phenomena in the pathogenesis of this disease. Hairy cell leukemia can be associated with PAN; the pathogenic mechanisms of this association are unclear.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Nonspecific signs and symptoms are the hallmarks of PAN. Fever, weight loss, and malaise are present in over one-half of cases. Patients usually present with vague symptoms such as weakness, malaise, headache, abdominal pain, and myalgias that can rapidly progress to a fulminant illness. Specific complaints related to the vascular involvement within a particular organ system may also dominate the presenting clinical picture as well as the entire course of the illness (Table 326-6). In PAN, renal involvement most commonly manifests as hypertension, renal insufficiency, or hemorrhage due to microaneurysms.

Table 326-6 Clinical Manifestations Related to Organ System Involvement in Classic Polyarteritis Nodosa

 
 
Organ System
 Percent Incidence
 Clinical Manifestations
 
Renal
 60
 Renal failure, hypertension
 
Musculoskeletal
 64
 Arthritis, arthralgia, myalgia
 
Peripheral nervous system
 51
 Peripheral neuropathy, mononeuritis multiplex
 
Gastrointestinal tract
 44
 Abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, bleeding, bowel infarction and perforation, cholecystitis, hepatic infarction, pancreatic infarction
 
Skin
 43
 Rash, purpura, nodules, cutaneous infarcts, livedo reticularis, Raynaud's phenomenon
 
Cardiac
 36
 Congestive heart failure, myocar-dial infarction, pericarditis
 
Genitourinary
 25
 Testicular, ovarian, or epididymal pain
 
Central nervous system
 23
 Cerebral vascular accident, altered mental status, seizure
 
 


Source: From TR Cupps, AS Fauci: The Vasculitides. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1981.
 

There are no diagnostic serologic tests for PAN. In >75% of patients, the leukocyte count is elevated with a predominance of neutrophils. Eosinophilia is seen only rarely and, when present at high levels, suggests the diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome. The anemia of chronic disease may be seen, and an elevated ESR is almost always present. Other common laboratory findings reflect the particular organ involved. Hypergammaglobulinemia may be present, and all patients should be screened for hepatitis B. Antibodies against myeloperoxidase or proteinase-3 (ANCA) are rarely found in patients with PAN.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of PAN is based on the demonstration of characteristic findings of vasculitis on biopsy material of involved organs. In the absence of easily accessible tissue for biopsy, the arteriographic demonstration of involved vessels, particularly in the form of aneurysms of small and medium-sized arteries in the renal, hepatic, and visceral vasculature, is sufficient to make the diagnosis. Aneurysms of vessels are not pathognomonic of PAN; furthermore, aneurysms need not always be present, and arteriographic findings may be limited to stenotic segments and obliteration of vessels. Biopsy of symptomatic organs such as nodular skin lesions, painful testes, and nerve/muscle provides the highest diagnostic yields.

Treatment: Polyarteritis Nodosa

The prognosis of untreated PAN is extremely poor, with a reported 5-year survival rate between 10 and 20%. Death usually results from gastrointestinal complications, particularly bowel infarcts and perforation, and cardiovascular causes. Intractable hypertension often compounds dysfunction in other organ systems, such as the kidneys, heart, and CNS, leading to additional late morbidity and mortality in PAN. With the introduction of treatment, survival rate has increased substantially. Favorable therapeutic results have been reported in PAN with the combination of prednisone and cyclophosphamide (see "Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis (Wegener's)" for a detailed description of this therapeutic regimen). In less severe cases of PAN, glucocorticoids alone have resulted in disease remission. In patients with hepatitis B who have a PAN-like vasculitis, antiviral therapy represents an important part of therapy and has been used in combination with glucocorticoids and plasma exchange. Careful attention to the treatment of hypertension can lessen the acute and late morbidity and mortality rates associated with renal, cardiac, and CNS complications of PAN. Following successful treatment, relapse of PAN has been estimated to occur in 10每20% of patients.
 
Giant Cell Arteritis and Polymyalgia Rheumatica

Definition

Giant cell arteritis, also referred to as cranial arteritis or temporal arteritis, is an inflammation of medium- and large-sized arteries. It characteristically involves one or more branches of the carotid artery, particularly the temporal artery. However, it is a systemic disease that can involve arteries in multiple locations, particularly the aorta and its main branches.

Giant cell arteritis is closely associated with polymyalgia rheumatica, which is characterized by stiffness, aching, and pain in the muscles of the neck, shoulders, lower back, hips, and thighs. Most commonly, polymyalgia rheumatica occurs in isolation, but it may be seen in 40每50% of patients with giant cell arteritis. In addition, 10每20% of patients who initially present with features of isolated polymyalgia rheumatica later go on to develop giant cell arteritis. This strong clinical association together with data from pathophysiologic studies has increasingly supported that giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica represent differing clinical spectrums of a single disease process.

Incidence and Prevalence

Giant cell arteritis occurs almost exclusively in individuals >50 years. It is more common in women than in men and is rare in blacks. The incidence of giant cell arteritis varies widely in different studies and in different geographic regions. A high incidence has been found in Scandinavia and in regions of the United States with large Scandinavian populations, compared to a lower incidence in southern Europe. The annual incidence rates in individuals 50 years range from 6.9 to 32.8 per 100,000 population. Familial aggregation has been reported, as has an association with HLA-DR4. In addition, genetic linkage studies have demonstrated an association of giant cell arteritis with alleles at the HLA-DRB1 locus, particularly HLA-DRB1* 04 variants. In Olmsted County, Minnesota, the annual incidence of polymyalgia rheumatica in individuals 50 years is 58.7 per 100,000 population.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Although the temporal artery is most frequently involved in giant cell arteritis, patients often have a systemic vasculitis of multiple medium- and large-sized arteries, which may go undetected. Histopathologically, the disease is a panarteritis with inflammatory mononuclear cell infiltrates within the vessel wall with frequent giant cell formation. There is proliferation of the intima and fragmentation of the internal elastic lamina. Pathophysiologic findings in organs result from the ischemia related to the involved vessels.

Experimental data support that giant cell arteritis is an antigen-driven disease in which activated T lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells play a critical role in the disease pathogenesis. Sequence analysis of the T cell receptor of tissue-infiltrating T cells in lesions of giant cell arteritis indicates restricted clonal expansion, suggesting the presence of an antigen residing in the arterial wall. Giant cell arteritis is believed to be initiated in the adventitia where CD4+ T cells enter through the vasa vasorum, become activated, and orchestrate macrophage differentiation. T cells recruited to vasculitic lesions in patients with giant cell arteritis produce predominantly IL-2 and IFN-, and the latter has been suggested to be involved in the progression to overt arteritis.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Giant cell arteritis is most commonly characterized clinically by the complex of fever, anemia, high ESR, and headaches in a patient over the age of 50 years. Other phenotypic manifestations include features of systemic inflammation including malaise, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, sweats, arthralgias, polymyalgia rheumatica, or large-vessel disease.

In patients with involvement of the cranial arteries, headache is the predominant symptom and may be associated with a tender, thickened, or nodular artery, which may pulsate early in the disease but may become occluded later. Scalp pain and claudication of the jaw and tongue may occur. A well-recognized and dreaded complication of giant cell arteritis, particularly in untreated patients, is ischemic optic neuropathy, which may lead to serious visual symptoms, even sudden blindness in some patients. However, most patients have complaints relating to the head or eyes before visual loss. Attention to such symptoms with institution of appropriate therapy (see below) will usually avoid this complication. Other cranial ischemic complications include strokes, scalp or tongue infarction.

Up to one-third of patients can have large-vessel disease that can be the primary presentation of giant cell arteritis or can emerge at a later point in patients who have had previous cranial arteritis features or polymyalgia rheumatica. Manifestations of large-vessel disease can include subclavian artery stenosis that can present as arm claudication or aortic aneurysms involving the thoracic and to a lesser degree the abdominal aorta, which carry risks of rupture or dissection.

Characteristic laboratory findings in addition to the elevated ESR include a normochromic or slightly hypochromic anemia. Liver function abnormalities are common, particularly increased alkaline phosphatase levels. Increased levels of IgG and complement have been reported. Levels of enzymes indicative of muscle damage such as serum creatine kinase are not elevated.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of giant cell arteritis and its associated clinicopathologic syndrome can often be suggested clinically by the demonstration of the complex of fever, anemia, and high ESR with or without symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica in a patient >50 years. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the temporal artery. Since involvement of the vessel may be segmental, positive yield is increased by obtaining a biopsy segment of 3每5 cm together with serial sectioning of biopsy specimens. Ultrasonography of the temporal artery has been reported to be helpful in diagnosis. A temporal artery biopsy should be obtained as quickly as possible in the setting of ocular signs and symptoms, and under these circumstances therapy should not be delayed pending a biopsy. In this regard, it has been reported that temporal artery biopsies may show vasculitis even after 14 days of glucocorticoid therapy. A dramatic clinical response to a trial of glucocorticoid therapy can further support the diagnosis.

Large vessel disease may be suggested by symptoms and findings on physical examination such as diminished pulses or bruits. It is confirmed by vascular imaging, most commonly through magnetic resonance or computed tomography.

Isolated polymyalgia rheumatica is a clinical diagnosis made by the presence of typical symptoms of stiffness, aching, and pain in the muscles of the hip and shoulder girdle, an increased ESR, the absence of clinical features suggestive of giant cell arteritis, and a prompt therapeutic response to low-dose prednisone.

Treatment: Giant Cell Arteritis and Polymyalgia Rheumatica

Acute disease-related mortality directly from giant cell arteritis is very uncommon with fatalities occurring from cerebrovascular events or myocardial infarction. However, patients are at risk of late mortality from aortic aneurysm rupture or dissection as patients with giant cell arteritis are 18 times more likely to develop thoracic aortic aneurysms than the general population.

The goals of treatment in giant cell arteritis are to reduce symptoms and, most importantly, to prevent visual loss. The treatment approach for cranial and large-vessel disease in giant cell arteritis is currently the same. Giant cell arteritis and its associated symptoms are exquisitely sensitive to glucocorticoid therapy. Treatment should begin with prednisone, 40每60 mg/d for 1 month, followed by a gradual tapering. When ocular signs and symptoms occur, consideration should be given for the use of methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 3 days to protect remaining vision. Although the optimal duration of glucocorticoid therapy has not been established, most series have found that patients require treatment for 2 years. Symptom recurrence during prednisone tapering develops in 60每85% of patients with giant cell arteritis, requiring a dosage increase. The ESR can serve as a useful indicator of inflammatory disease activity in monitoring and tapering therapy and can be used to judge the pace of the tapering schedule. However, minor increases in the ESR can occur as glucocorticoids are being tapered and do not necessarily reflect an exacerbation of arteritis, particularly if the patient remains symptom-free. Under these circumstances, the tapering should continue with caution. Glucocorticoid toxicity occurs in 35每65% of patients and represents an important cause of patient morbidity. Aspirin 81 mg daily has been found to reduce the occurrence of cranial ischemic complications in giant cell arteritis and should be given in addition to glucocorticoids in patients who do not have contraindications. The use of weekly methotrexate as a glucocorticoid-sparing agent has been examined in two randomized placebo-controlled trials that reached conflicting conclusions. Infliximab, a monoclonal antibody to TNF, was studied in a randomized trial and was not found to provide benefit.

Patients with isolated polymyalgia rheumatica respond promptly to prednisone, which can be started at a lower dose of 10每20 mg/d. Similar to giant cell arteritis, the ESR can serve as a useful indicator in monitoring and prednisone reduction. Recurrent polymyalgia symptoms develop in the majority of patients during prednisone tapering. One study of weekly methotrexate found that the use of this drug reduced the prednisone dose on average by only 1 mg and did not decrease prednisone-related side effects. A randomized trial in polymyalgia rheumatica did not find infliximab to lessen relapse or glucocorticoid requirements.
 
Definition

Takayasu's arteritis is an inflammatory and stenotic disease of medium- and large-sized arteries characterized by a strong predilection for the aortic arch and its branches. For this reason, it is often referred to as the aortic arch syndrome.

Incidence and Prevalence

Takayasu's arteritis is an uncommon disease with an estimated annual incidence rate of 1.2每2.6 cases per million. It is most prevalent in adolescent girls and young women. Although it is more common in Asia, it is neither racially nor geographically restricted.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The disease involves medium- and large-sized arteries, with a strong predilection for the aortic arch and its branches; the pulmonary artery may also be involved. The most commonly affected arteries seen by arteriography are listed in Table 326-7. The involvement of the major branches of the aorta is much more marked at their origin than distally. The disease is a panarteritis with inflammatory mononuclear cell infiltrates and occasionally giant cells. There are marked intimal proliferation and fibrosis, scarring and vascularization of the media, and disruption and degeneration of the elastic lamina. Narrowing of the lumen occurs with or without thrombosis. The vasa vasorum are frequently involved. Pathologic changes in various organs reflect the compromise of blood flow through the involved vessels.

Table 326-7 Frequency of Arteriographic Abnormalities and Potential Clinical Manifestations of Arterial Involvement in Takayasu's Arteritis

 
 
Artery
 Percent of Arteriographic Abnormalities
 Potential Clinical Manifestations
 
Subclavian
 93
 Arm claudication, Raynaud's phenomenon
 
Common carotid
 58
 Visual changes, syncope, transient ischemic attacks, stroke
 
Abdominal aortaa
 47
 Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
 
Renal
 38
 Hypertension, renal failure
 
Aortic arch or root
 35
 Aortic insufficiency, congestive heart failure
 
Vertebral
 35
 Visual changes, dizziness
 
Coeliac axisa
 18
 Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
 
Superior mesenterica
 18
 Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
 
Iliac
 17
 Leg claudication
 
Pulmonary
 10每40
 Atypical chest pain, dyspnea
 
Coronary
 <10
 Chest pain, myocardial infarction
 
 


aArteriographic lesions at these locations are usually asymptomatic but may potentially cause these symptoms.

Source: Kerr et al.
 

Immunopathogenic mechanisms, the precise nature of which is uncertain, are suspected in this disease. As with several of the vasculitis syndromes, circulating immune complexes have been demonstrated, but their pathogenic significance is unclear.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

Takayasu's arteritis is a systemic disease with generalized as well as vascular symptoms. The generalized symptoms include malaise, fever, night sweats, arthralgias, anorexia, and weight loss, which may occur months before vessel involvement is apparent. These symptoms may merge into those related to vascular compromise and organ ischemia. Pulses are commonly absent in the involved vessels, particularly the subclavian artery. The frequency of arteriographic abnormalities and the potentially associated clinical manifestations are listed in Table 326-7. Hypertension occurs in 32每93% of patients and contributes to renal, cardiac, and cerebral injury.

Characteristic laboratory findings include an elevated ESR, mild anemia, and elevated immunoglobulin levels.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of Takayasu's arteritis should be suspected strongly in a young woman who develops a decrease or absence of peripheral pulses, discrepancies in blood pressure, and arterial bruits. The diagnosis is confirmed by the characteristic pattern on arteriography, which includes irregular vessel walls, stenosis, poststenotic dilation, aneurysm formation, occlusion, and evidence of increased collateral circulation. Complete aortic arteriography by catheter-directed dye arteriography or magnetic resonance arteriography should be obtained in order to fully delineate the distribution and degree of arterial disease. Histopathologic demonstration of inflamed vessels adds confirmatory data; however, tissue is rarely readily available for examination.

Treatment: Takayasu's Arteritis

The long-term outcome of patients with Takayasu's arteritis has varied widely between studies. Although two North American reports found overall survival to be >94%, the 5-year mortality rate from other studies has ranged from 0 to 35%. Disease-related mortality most often occurs from congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular events, myocardial infarction, aneurysm rupture, or renal failure. Even in the absence of life-threatening disease, Takayasu's arteritis can be associated with significant morbidity. The course of the disease is variable, and although spontaneous remissions may occur, Takayasu's arteritis is most often chronic and relapsing. Although glucocorticoid therapy in doses of 40每60 mg prednisone per day alleviates symptoms, there are no convincing studies that indicate that they increase survival. The combination of glucocorticoid therapy for acute signs and symptoms and an aggressive surgical and/or arterioplastic approach to stenosed vessels has markedly improved outcome and decreased morbidity by lessening the risk of stroke, correcting hypertension due to renal artery stenosis, and improving blood flow to ischemic viscera and limbs. Unless it is urgently required, surgical correction of stenosed arteries should be undertaken only when the vascular inflammatory process is well controlled with medical therapy. In individuals who are refractory to or unable to taper glucocorticoids, methotrexate in doses up to 25 mg per week has yielded encouraging results. Preliminary results with anti-TNF therapies have been encouraging, but will require further study through randomized trials to determine efficacy.
 
Henoch-Sch?nlein Purpura

Definition

Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura, also referred to as anaphylactoid purpura, is a small-vessel vasculitis characterized by palpable purpura (most commonly distributed over the buttocks and lower extremities), arthralgias, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms, and glomerulonephritis.

Incidence and Prevalence

Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura is usually seen in children; most patients range in age from 4 to 7 years; however, the disease may also be seen in infants and adults. It is not a rare disease; in one series it accounted for between 5 and 24 admissions per year at a pediatric hospital. The male-to-female ratio is 1.5:1. A seasonal variation with a peak incidence in spring has been noted.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The presumptive pathogenic mechanism for Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura is immune-complex deposition. A number of inciting antigens have been suggested including upper respiratory tract infections, various drugs, foods, insect bites, and immunizations. IgA is the antibody class most often seen in the immune complexes and has been demonstrated in the renal biopsies of these patients.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

In pediatric patients, palpable purpura is seen in virtually all patients; most patients develop polyarthralgias in the absence of frank arthritis. Gastrointestinal involvement, which is seen in almost 70% of pediatric patients, is characterized by colicky abdominal pain usually associated with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation and is frequently accompanied by the passage of blood and mucus per rectum; bowel intussusception may occur. Renal involvement occurs in 10每50% of patients and is usually characterized by mild glomerulonephritis leading to proteinuria and microscopic hematuria, with red blood cell casts in the majority of patients (Chap. 283); it usually resolves spontaneously without therapy. Rarely, a progressive glomerulonephritis will develop. In adults, presenting symptoms are most frequently related to the skin and joints, while initial complaints related to the gut are less common. Although certain studies have found that renal disease is more frequent and more severe in adults, this has not been a consistent finding. However, the course of renal disease in adults may be more insidious and thus requires close follow-up. Myocardial involvement can occur in adults but is rare in children.

Laboratory studies generally show a mild leukocytosis, a normal platelet count, and occasionally eosinophilia. Serum complement components are normal, and IgA levels are elevated in about one-half of patients.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura is based on clinical signs and symptoms. Skin biopsy specimen can be useful in confirming leukocytoclastic vasculitis with IgA and C3 deposition by immunofluorescence. Renal biopsy is rarely needed for diagnosis but may provide prognostic information in some patients.

Treatment: Henoch-Sch?nlein Purpura

The prognosis of Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura is excellent. Mortality is exceedingly rare, and 1每5% of children progress to end-stage renal disease. Most patients recover completely, and some do not require therapy. Treatment is similar for adults and children. When glucocorticoid therapy is required, prednisone, in doses of 1 mg/kg per day and tapered according to clinical response, has been shown to be useful in decreasing tissue edema, arthralgias, and abdominal discomfort; however, it has not proved beneficial in the treatment of skin or renal disease and does not appear to shorten the duration of active disease or lessen the chance of recurrence. Patients with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis have been anecdotally reported to benefit from intensive plasma exchange combined with cytotoxic drugs. Disease recurrences have been reported in 10每40% of patients.
 
Idiopathic Cutaneous Vasculitis

Definition

The term cutaneousvasculitis is defined broadly as inflammation of the blood vessels of the dermis. Due to its heterogeneity, cutaneous vasculitis has been described by a variety of terms including hypersensitivity vasculitis and cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis. However, cutaneous vasculitis is not one specific disease but a manifestation that can be seen in a variety of settings. In >70% of cases, cutaneous vasculitis occurs either as part of a primary systemic vasculitis or as a secondary vasculitis related to an inciting agent or an underlying disease (see "Secondary Vasculitis," below). In the remaining 30% of cases, cutaneous vasculitis occurs idiopathically.

Incidence and Prevalence

Cutaneousvasculitis represents the most commonly encountered vasculitis in clinical practice. The exact incidence of idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis has not been determined due to the predilection for cutaneous vasculitis to be associated with an underlying process and the variability of its clinical course.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

The typical histopathologic feature of cutaneousvasculitis is the presence of vasculitis of small vessels. Postcapillary venules are the most commonly involved vessels; capillaries and arterioles may be involved less frequently. This vasculitis is characterized by a leukocytoclasis, a term that refers to the nuclear debris remaining from the neutrophils that have infiltrated in and around the vessels during the acute stages. In the subacute or chronic stages, mononuclear cells predominate; in certain subgroups, eosinophilic infiltration is seen. Erythrocytes often extravasate from the involved vessels, leading to palpable purpura.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

The hallmark of idiopathiccutaneousvasculitis is the predominance of skin involvement. Skin lesions may appear typically as palpable purpura; however, other cutaneous manifestations of the vasculitis may occur, including macules, papules, vesicles, bullae, subcutaneous nodules, ulcers, and recurrent or chronic urticaria. The skin lesions may be pruritic or even quite painful, with a burning or stinging sensation. Lesions most commonly occur in the lower extremities in ambulatory patients or in the sacral area in bedridden patients due to the effects of hydrostatic forces on the postcapillary venules. Edema may accompany certain lesions, and hyperpigmentation often occurs in areas of recurrent or chronic lesions.

There are no specific laboratory tests diagnostic of idiopathiccutaneousvasculitis. A mild leukocytosis with or without eosinophilia is characteristic, as is an elevated ESR. Laboratory studies should be aimed toward ruling out features to suggest an underlying disease or a systemic vasculitis.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of cutaneousvasculitis is made by the demonstration of vasculitis on biopsy. An important diagnostic principle in patients with cutaneous vasculitis is to search for an etiology of the vasculitis〞be it an exogenous agent, such as a drug or an infection, or an endogenous condition, such as an underlying disease (Fig. 326-1). In addition, a careful physical and laboratory examination should be performed to rule out the possibility of systemic vasculitis. This should start with the least invasive diagnostic approach and proceed to the more invasive only if clinically indicated.

Treatment: Idiopathic Cutaneous Vasculitis

When an antigenic stimulus is recognized as the precipitating factor in the cutaneousvasculitis, it should be removed; if this is a microbe, appropriate antimicrobial therapy should be instituted. If the vasculitis is associated with another underlying disease, treatment of the latter often results in resolution of the former. In situations where disease is apparently self-limited, no therapy, except possibly symptomatic therapy, is indicated. When cutaneous vasculitis persists and when there is no evidence of an inciting agent, an associated disease, or an underlying systemic vasculitis, the decision to treat should be based on weighing the balance between the degree of symptoms and the risk of treatment. Some cases of idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis resolve spontaneously, while others remit and relapse. In those patients with persistent vasculitis, a variety of therapeutic regimens have been tried with variable results. In general, the treatment of idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis has not been satisfactory. Fortunately, since the disease is generally limited to the skin, this lack of consistent response to therapy usually does not lead to a life-threatening situation. Agents with which there have been anecdotal reports of success include dapsone, colchicine, hydroxychloroquine, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. Glucocorticoids are often used in the treatment of idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis. Therapy is usually instituted as prednisone, 1 mg/kg per day, with rapid tapering where possible, either directly to discontinuation or by conversion to an alternate-day regimen followed by ultimate discontinuation. In cases that prove refractory to glucocorticoids, a trial of a cytotoxic agent may be indicated. Patients with chronic vasculitis isolated to cutaneous venules rarely respond dramatically to any therapeutic regimen, and cytotoxic agents should be used only as a last resort in these patients. Methotrexate and azathioprine have been used in such situations in anecdotal reports. Although cyclophosphamide is the most effective therapy for the systemic vasculitides, it should almost never be used for idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis because of the potential toxicity.
 
Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis

Definition

Cryoglobulins are cold-precipitable monoclonal or polyclonal immunoglobulins. Cryoglobulinemia may be associated with a systemic vasculitis characterized by palpable purpura, arthralgias, weakness, neuropathy, and glomerulonephritis. Although this can be observed in association with a variety of underlying disorders including multiple myeloma, lymphoproliferative disorders, connective tissue diseases, infection, and liver disease, in many instances it appeared to be idiopathic. Because of the apparent absence of an underlying disease and the presence of cryoprecipitate containing oligoclonal/polyclonal immunoglobulins, this entity was referred to as essential mixed cryoglobulinemia. Since the discovery of hepatitis C, it has been established that the vast majority of patients who were considered to have essential mixed cryoglobulinemia have cryoglobulinemic vasculitis related to hepatitis C infection.

Incidence and Prevalence

The incidence of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis has not been established. It has been estimated, however, that 5% of patients with chronic hepatitis C will develop cryoglobulinemic vasculitis.

Pathology and Pathogenesis

Skin biopsies in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis reveal an inflammatory infiltrate surrounding and involving blood vessel walls, with fibrinoid necrosis, endothelial cell hyperplasia, and hemorrhage. Deposition of immunoglobulin and complement is common. Abnormalities of uninvolved skin including basement membrane alterations and deposits in vessel walls may be found. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis is responsible for 80% of all renal lesions in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis.

The association between hepatitis C and cryoglobulinemic vasculitis has been supported by the high frequency of documented hepatitis C infection, the presence of hepatitis C RNA and anti每hepatitis C antibodies in serum cryoprecipitates, evidence of hepatitis C antigens in vasculitic skin lesions, and the effectiveness of antiviral therapy (see below). Current evidence suggests that in the majority of cases, cryoglobulinemic vasculitis occurs when an aberrant immune response to hepatitis C infection leads to the formation of immune complexes consisting of hepatitis C antigens, polyclonal hepatitis C每specific IgG, and monoclonal IgM rheumatoid factor. The deposition of these immune complexes in blood vessel walls triggers an inflammatory cascade that results in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis.

Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations

The most common clinical manifestations of cryoglobulinemic vasculitis are cutaneous vasculitis, arthritis, peripheral neuropathy, and glomerulonephritis. Renal disease develops in 10每30% of patients. Life-threatening rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis or vasculitis of the CNS, gastrointestinal tract, or heart occurs infrequently.

The presence of circulating cryoprecipitates is the fundamental finding in cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Rheumatoid factor is almost always found and may be a useful clue to the disease when cryoglobulins are not detected. Hypocomplementemia occurs in 90% of patients. An elevated ESR and anemia occur frequently. Evidence for hepatitis C infection must be sought in all patients by testing for hepatitis C antibodies and hepatitis C RNA.

Treatment: Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis

Acute mortality directly from cryoglobulinemic vasculitis is uncommon, but the presence of glomerulonephritis is a poor prognostic sign for overall outcome. In such patients, 15% progress to end-stage renal disease, with 40% later experiencing fatal cardiovascular disease, infection, or liver failure. As indicated above, the majority of cases are associated with hepatitis C infection. In such patients, treatment with IFN- and ribavirin (Chap. 304) can prove beneficial. Clinical improvement with antiviral therapy is dependent on the virologic response. Patients who clear hepatitis C from the blood have objective improvement in their vasculitis along with significant reductions in levels of circulating cryoglobulins, IgM, and rheumatoid factor. However, substantial portions of patients with hepatitis C do not have a sustained virologic response to such therapy, and the vasculitis typically relapses with the return of viremia. While transient improvement can be observed with glucocorticoids, a complete response is seen in only 7% of patients. Plasmapheresis and cytotoxic agents have been used in anecdotal reports. These observations have not been confirmed, and such therapies carry significant risks.
 
Beh?ET's Syndrome

Beh?et's syndrome is a clinicopathologic entity characterized by recurrent episodes of oral and genital ulcers, iritis, and cutaneous lesions. The underlying pathologic process is a leukocytoclastic venulitis, although vessels of any size and in any organ can be involved. This disorder is described in detail in Chap. 327.
 
Isolated Vasculitis of the Central Nervous System

Isolated vasculitis of the CNS, which is also called primary angiitis of the CNS (PACNS), is an uncommon clinicopathologic entity characterized by vasculitis restricted to the vessels of the CNS without other apparent systemic vasculitis. The inflammatory process is usually composed of mononuclear cell infiltrates with or without granuloma formation.

Patients may present with headaches, altered mental function, and focal neurologic defects. Systemic symptoms are generally absent. Devastating neurologic abnormalities may occur depending on the extent of vessel involvement. The diagnosis can be suggested by abnormal MRI of the brain, an abnormal lumbar puncture, and/or demonstration of characteristic vessel abnormalities on arteriography (Fig. 326-4), but it is confirmed by biopsy of the brain parenchyma and leptomeninges. In the absence of a brain biopsy, care should be taken not to misinterpret as true primary vasculitis arteriographic abnormalities that might actually be related to another cause. An important entity in the differential diagnosis is reversible cerebral vasoconstrictive syndrome, which typically presents with "thunderclap" headache and is associated with arteriographic abnormalities that mimic PACNS that are reversible. Other diagnostic considerations include infection, atherosclerosis, emboli, connective tissue disease, sarcoidosis, malignancy, and drug-associated causes. The prognosis of granulomatous PACNS is poor; however, some reports indicate that glucocorticoid therapy, alone or together with cyclophosphamide administered as described above, has induced clinical remissions.

Figure 326-4

 
 
 
Cerebral arteriogram from a 32-year-old male with central nervous system vasculitis. Dramatic beading (arrow) typical of vasculitis is seen.
 
 
 
Cogan's Syndrome

Cogan's syndrome is characterized by interstitial keratitis together with vestibuloauditory symptoms. It may be associated with a systemic vasculitis, particularly aortitis with involvement of the aortic valve. Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of treatment. Initiation of treatment as early as possible after the onset of hearing loss improves the likelihood of a favorable outcome.
 
Kawasaki Disease

Kawasaki disease, also referred to as mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, is an acute, febrile, multisystem disease of children. Some 80% of cases occur prior to the age of 5, with the peak incidence occurring at 2 years. It is characterized by nonsuppurative cervical adenitis and changes in the skin and mucous membranes such as edema; congested conjunctivae; erythema of the oral cavity, lips, and palms; and desquamation of the skin of the fingertips. Although the disease is generally benign and self-limited, it is associated with coronary artery aneurysms in 25% of cases, with an overall case-fatality rate of 0.5每2.8%. These complications usually occur between the third and fourth weeks of illness during the convalescent stage. Vasculitis of the coronary arteries is seen in almost all the fatal cases that have been autopsied. There is typical intimal proliferation and infiltration of the vessel wall with mononuclear cells. Beadlike aneurysms and thromboses may be seen along the artery. Other manifestations include pericarditis, myocarditis, myocardial ischemia and infarction, and cardiomegaly.

Apart from the up to 2.8% of patients who develop fatal complications, the prognosis of this disease for uneventful recovery is excellent. High-dose IV  globulin (2 g/kg as a single infusion over 10 h) together with aspirin (100 mg/kg per day for 14 days followed by 3每5 mg/kg per day for several weeks) have been shown to be effective in reducing the prevalence of coronary artery abnormalities when administered early in the course of the disease. Surgery may be necessary for Kawasaki disease patients that have giant coronary artery aneurysms or other coronary complications. Surgical treatment most commonly includes thromboendarterectomy, thrombus clearing, aneurysmal reconstruction, and coronary artery bypass grafting.
 
Polyangiitis Overlap Syndromes

Some patients with systemic vasculitis manifest clinicopathologic characteristics that do not fit precisely into any specific disease but have overlapping features of different vasculitides. Active systemic vasculitis in such settings has the same potential for causing irreversible organ system damage as when it occurs in one of the defined syndromes listed in Table 326-1. The diagnostic and therapeutic considerations as well as the prognosis for these patients depend on the sites and severity of active vasculitis. Patients with vasculitis that could potentially cause irreversible damage to a major organ system should be treated as described under "Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis (Wegener's)."
 
Secondary Vasculitis

Drug-Induced Vasculitis

Vasculitis associated with drug reactions usually presents as palpable purpura that may be generalized or limited to the lower extremities or other dependent areas; however, urticarial lesions, ulcers, and hemorrhagic blisters may also occur (Chap. 55). Signs and symptoms may be limited to the skin, although systemic manifestations such as fever, malaise, and polyarthralgias may occur. Although the skin is the predominant organ involved, systemic vasculitis may result from drug reactions. Drugs that have been implicated in vasculitis include allopurinol, thiazides, gold, sulfonamides, phenytoin, and penicillin (Chap. 55).

An increasing number of drugs have been reported to cause vasculitis associated with antimyeloperoxidase ANCA. Of these, the best evidence of causality exists for hydralazine and propylthiouracil. The clinical manifestations in ANCA-positive drug-induced vasculitis can range from cutaneous lesions to glomerulonephritis and pulmonary hemorrhage. Outside of drug discontinuation, treatment should be based on the severity of the vasculitis. Patients with immediately life-threatening small-vessel vasculitis should initially be treated with glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide as described for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's). Following clinical improvement, consideration may be given for tapering such agents along a more rapid schedule.

Serum Sickness and Serum Sickness每Like Reactions

These reactions are characterized by the occurrence of fever, urticaria, polyarthralgias, and lymphadenopathy 7每10 days after primary exposure and 2每4 days after secondary exposure to a heterologous protein (classic serum sickness) or a nonprotein drug such as penicillin or sulfa (serum sickness每like reaction). Most of the manifestations are not due to a vasculitis; however, occasional patients will have typical cutaneous venulitis that may progress rarely to a systemic vasculitis.

Vasculitis Associated with Other Underlying Diseases

Certain infections may directly trigger an inflammatory vasculitic process. For example, rickettsias can invade and proliferate in the endothelial cells of small blood vessels causing a vasculitis (Chap. 174). In addition, the inflammatory response around blood vessels associated with certain systemic fungal diseases such as histoplasmosis (Chap. 199) may mimic a primary vasculitic process. A leukocytoclastic vasculitis predominantly involving the skin with occasional involvement of other organ systems may be a minor component of many other infections. These include subacute bacterial endocarditis, Epstein-Barr virus infection, HIV infection, as well as a number of other infections.

Vasculitis can be associated with certain malignancies, particularly lymphoid or reticuloendothelial neoplasms. Leukocytoclastic venulitis confined to the skin is the most common finding; however, widespread systemic vasculitis may occur. Of particular note is the association of hairy cell leukemia(Chap. 110) with PAN.

A number of connective tissue diseases have vasculitis as a secondary manifestation of the underlying primary process. Foremost among these are systemic lupus erythematosus(Chap. 319), rheumatoid arthritis(Chap. 321), inflammatory myositis(Chap. 388), relapsing polychondritis(Chap. 328), and Sj?gren's syndrome(Chap. 324). The most common form of vasculitis in these conditions is the small-vessel venulitis isolated to the skin. However, certain patients may develop a fulminant systemic necrotizing vasculitis.

Secondary vasculitis has also been observed in association with ulcerative colitis, congenital deficiencies of various complement components, retroperitoneal fibrosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, 1-antitrypsin deficiency, and intestinal bypass surgery.
 
Further Readings

de Groot K et al: Randomized trial of cyclophosphamide versus methotrexate for induction of remission in early systemic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis. Arthritis Rheum 52:2461, 2005 

 
Finkielman JD et al: Antiproteinase 3 antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and disease activity in Wegener granulomatosis. Ann Intern Med 147:611, 2007[PMID: 17975183]  [Full Text]

 
Guillevin L et al: Microscopic polyangiitis. Clinical and laboratory findings in eighty-five patients. Arthritis Rheum 42:421, 1999[PMID: 10088763]  [Full Text]

 
Hoffman GS, Specks U: Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Arthritis Rheum 41:1521, 1998[PMID: 9751084]  [Full Text]

 
〞〞〞 et al: Wegener's granulomatosis: An analysis of 158 patients. Ann Intern Med 116:488, 1992 

 
Jayne D et al: A randomized trial of maintenance therapy for vasculitis associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies. N Engl J Med 349:36, 2003[PMID: 12840090]  [Full Text]

 
Jennette JC et al: Nomenclature of systemic vasculitis. Proposal of an international consensus conference. Arthritis Rheum 37:187, 1994[PMID: 8129773]  [Full Text]

 
Kerr G et al: Takayasu arteritis. Ann Intern Med 120:919, 1994[PMID: 7909656]  [Full Text]

 
Langford CA et al: Use of a cyclophosphamide-induction methotrexate-maintenance regimen for the treatment of Wegener's granulomatosis: Extended follow-up and rate of relapse. Am J Med 114:463, 2003[PMID: 12727579]  [Full Text]

 
Ludviksson BR et al: Active Wegener's granulomatosis is associated with HLA-DR+ CD4+ T cells exhibiting an unbalanced Th-1 type T cell cytokine pattern: Reversal with IL-10. J Immunol 160:3602, 1998[PMID: 9531324]  [Full Text]

 
Sneller MC, Fauci AS: Pathogenesis of vasculitis syndromes. Med Clin North Am 81:221, 1997[PMID: 9012762]  [Full Text]

 
Stone JH et al: Rituximab versus cyclophosphamide for ANCA-associated vasculitis. N Engl J Med 363:221, 2010[PMID: 20647199]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 328. Relapsing Polychondritis >
 

Relapsing Polychondritis: Introduction

Relapsing polychondritis is an uncommon disorder of unknown cause characterized by inflammation of cartilage predominantly affecting the ears, nose, and laryngotracheobronchial tree. Other manifestations include scleritis, neurosensory hearing loss, polyarthritis, cardiac abnormalities, skin lesions, and glomerulonephritis. Relapsing polychondritis has been estimated to have an incidence of 3.5 per million population per year. The peak age of onset is between the ages of 40每50 years, but relapsing polychondritis may affect children and the elderly. It is found in all races, and both sexes are equally affected. No familial tendency is apparent. A significantly higher frequency of HLA-DR4 has been found in patients with relapsing polychondritis than in healthy individuals. A predominant subtype allele(s) of HLA-DR4 was not found. Approximately 30% of patients with relapsing polychondritis will have another rheumatologic disorder, the most frequent being systemic vasculitis, followed by rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sj?gren's syndrome, or the spondyloarthritides. Nonrheumatic disorders associated with relapsing polychondritis include inflammatory bowel disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, and myelodysplastic syndrome (Table 328-1). In most cases, these disorders antedate the appearance of relapsing polychondritis, usually by months or years.

Table 328-1 Disorders Associated with Relapsing Polychondritisa

 
 
Systemic vasculitis
 
Rheumatoid arthritis
 
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 
Sj?gren's syndrome
 
Spondyloarthritides
 
Beh?et's disease
 
Inflammatory bowel disease
 
Primary biliary cirrhosis
 
Myelodysplastic syndrome
 
 


aSystemic vasculitis is the most common association followed by rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Sj?gren's syndrome.

Source: Modified from Michet.
 
 
Pathology and Pathophysiology

The earliest abnormality of hyaline and elastic cartilage noted histologically is a focal or diffuse loss of basophilic staining indicating depletion of proteoglycan from the cartilage matrix. Inflammatory infiltrates are found adjacent to involved cartilage and consist predominantly of mononuclear cells and occasional plasma cells. In acute disease, polymorphonuclear white cells may also be present. Destruction of cartilage begins at the outer edges and advances centrally. There is lacunar breakdown and loss of chondrocytes. Degenerating cartilage is replaced by granulation tissue and later by fibrosis and focal areas of calcification. Small loci of cartilage regeneration may be present. Immunofluorescence studies have shown immunoglobulins and complement at sites of involvement. Extracellular granular material observed in the degenerating cartilage matrix by electron microscopy has been interpreted to be enzymes, immunoglobulins, or proteoglycans.

Immunologic mechanisms play a role in the pathogenesis of relapsing polychondritis. The accumulating data strongly suggest that both humoral and cell-mediated immunity play an important role in the pathogenesis of relapsing polychondritis. Immunoglobulin and complement deposits are found at sites of inflammation. In addition, antibodies to type II collagen and to matrilin-1 and immune complexes are detected in the sera of some patients. The possibility that an immune response to type II collagen may be important in the pathogenesis is supported experimentally by the occurrence of auricular chondritis in rats immunized with type II collagen. Antibodies to type II collagen are found in the sera of these animals, and immune deposits are detected at sites of ear inflammation. Humoral immune responses to type IX and type XI collagen, matrilin-1, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein have been demonstrated in some patients. In a study, rats immunized with matrilin-1 were found to develop severe inspiratory stridor and swelling of the nasal septum. The rats had severe inflammation with erosions of the involved cartilage, which was characterized by increased numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the lesions. The cartilage of the joints and ear pinna was not involved. All had IgG antibodies to matrilin-1. Matrilin-1 is a noncollagenous protein present in the extracellular matrix in cartilage. It is present in high concentrations in the trachea and is also present in the nasal septum but not in articular cartilage. A subsequent study demonstrated serum anti-matrilin-1 antibodies in approximately 13% of patients with relapsing polychondritis; approximately 70% of these patients had respiratory symptoms. Cell-mediated immunity may also be operative in causing tissue injury, since lymphocyte transformation can be demonstrated when lymphocytes of patients are exposed to cartilage extracts. T cells specific for type II collagen have been found in some patients, and CD4+ T cells have been observed at sites of cartilage inflammation.
 
Clinical Manifestations

The onset of relapsing polychondritis is frequently abrupt with the appearance of one or two sites of cartilaginous inflammation. The pattern of cartilaginous involvement and the frequency of episodes vary widely among patients. Non-cartilaginous presentations may also occur. Systemic inflammatory features such as fever, fatigue, and weight loss occur and may precede the clinical signs of relapsing polychondritis by several weeks. Relapsing polychondritis may go unrecognized for several months or even years in patients who only initially manifest intermittent joint pain and/or swelling, or who have unexplained eye inflammation, hearing loss, valvular heart disease, or pulmonary symptoms.

Auricular chondritis is the most frequent presenting manifestation of relapsing polychondritis occurring in 40% of patients and eventually affecting about 85% of patients (Table 328-2). One or both ears are involved, either sequentially or simultaneously. Patients experience the sudden onset of pain, tenderness, and swelling of the cartilaginous portion of the ear (Fig. 328-1). This typically involves the pinna of the ears, sparing the earlobes because they do not contain cartilage. The overlying skin has a beefy red or violaceous color. Prolonged or recurrent episodes lead to cartilage destruction and result in a flabby or droopy ear. Swelling may close off the eustachian tube or the external auditory meatus, either of which can impair hearing. Inflammation of the internal auditory artery or its cochlear branch produces hearing loss, vertigo, ataxia, nausea, and vomiting. Vertigo is almost always accompanied by hearing loss.

Table 328-2 Clinical Manifestations of Relapsing Polychondritis

 
 
Clinical Feature
 Presenting
 Cumulative
 
  Frequency, %
 
Auricular chondritis
 43
 89
 
Arthritis
 32
 72
 
Nasal chondritis
 21
 61
 
Ocular inflammation
 18
 59
 
Laryngotracheal symptoms
 23
 55
 
Reduced hearing
 7
 40
 
Saddle nose deformity
 11
 25
 
Cutaneous
 4
 25
 
Laryngotracheal stricture
 15
 23
 
Vasculitis
 2
 14
 
Elevated creatinine
 7
 13
 
Aortic or mitral regurgitation
 0
 12
 
 


Source: Modified from Kent et al.
 
Figure 328-1

 
 
 
Left. The pinna is erythematous, swollen, and tender. Not shown is the ear lobule that is spared as there is no underlying cartilage. Right. The pinna is thickened and deformed. The destruction of the underlying cartilage results in a floppy ear. (Reprinted from the Clinical Slide Collection on the Rheumatic Diseases, ?1991, 1995, 1997, 1998, 1999. Used by permission of the American College of Rheumatology.)
 
 


Approximately 61% of patients will develop nasal involvement, with 21% having this at the time of presentation. Patients may experience nasal stuffiness, rhinorrhea, and epistaxis. The bridge of the nose and surrounding tissue becomes red, swollen, and tender and may collapse, producing a saddlenose deformity (Fig. 328-2). In some patients, nasal deformity develops insidiously without overt inflammation. Saddlenose is observed more frequently in younger patients, especially in women.

Figure 328-2

 
 
 
Saddlenose results from destruction and collapse of the nasal cartilage. (Reprinted from the Clinical Slide Collection on the Rheumatic Diseases, ?1991, 1995, 1997, 1998, 1999. Used by permission of the American College of Rheumatology.)
 
 

Joint involvement is the presenting manifestation in relapsing polychondritis in approximately one-third of patients and may be present for several months before other features appear. Eventually, more than one-half of the patients will have arthralgias or arthritis. The arthritis is usually asymmetric and oligo- or polyarticular, and it involves both large and small peripheral joints. An episode of arthritis lasts from a few days to several weeks and resolves spontaneously without joint erosion or deformity. Attacks of arthritis may not be temporally related to other manifestations of relapsing polychondritis. Joint fluid has been reported to be noninflammatory. In addition to peripheral joints, inflammation may involve the costochondral, sternomanubrial, and sternoclavicular cartilages. Destruction of these cartilages may result in a pectus excavatum deformity or even a flail anterior chest wall.

Eye manifestations occur in more than one-half of patients and include conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis, iritis, uveitis, and keratitis. Ocular inflammation can be severe and visually threatening. Other manifestations include eyelid and periorbital edema, proptosis, optic neuritis, extraocular muscle palsies, retinal vasculitis, and renal vein occlusion.

Laryngotracheobronchial involvement occurs in 50% of patients and is among the most serious manifestations of relapsing polychondritis. Symptoms include hoarseness, a nonproductive cough, and tenderness over the larynx and proximal trachea. Mucosal edema, strictures, and/or collapse of laryngeal or tracheal cartilage may cause stridor and life-threatening airway obstruction necessitating tracheostomy. Involvement can extend into the lower airways resulting in tracheobronchomalacia. Collapse of cartilage in bronchi leads to pneumonia and, when extensive, to respiratory insufficiency.

Cardiac valvular regurgitation occurs in about 5每10% of patients and is due to progressive dilation of the valvular ring or to destruction of the valve cusps. Aortic regurgitation occurs in about 7% of patients with the mitral and other heart valves being affected less often. Other cardiac manifestations include pericarditis, myocarditis, coronary vasculitis, and conduction abnormalities. Aneurysms of the proximal, thoracic, or abdominal aorta may occur even in the absence of active chondritis and occasionally rupture.

Renal disease occurs in about 10% of patients. The most common renal lesions include mesangial expansion or segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis, which have been reported to have small amounts of electron-dense deposits in the mesangium where there is also faint deposition of C3 and/or IgG or IgM. Tubulointerstitial disease and IgA nephropathy have also been reported.

Approximately 25% of patients have skin lesions, which can include purpura, erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, angioedema/urticaria, livedo reticularis, and panniculitis.

Features of vasculitis are seen in up to 25% of patients and can affect any size vessel. Large vessel vasculitis may present with aortic aneurysms and medium vessel disease may affect the coronary, hepatic, mesenteric, or renal arteries or vessel supplying nerves. Skin vessel disease and involvement of the postcapillary venules can also occur. A variety of primary vasculitides have also been reported to occur in association with relapsing polychondritis (Chap. 326). One specific overlap is the "MAGIC" syndrome (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage) in which patients present with features of both relapsing polychondritis and Beh?et's disease (Chap. 327).
 
Laboratory Findings and Diagnostic Imaging

There are no laboratory features that are diagnostic for relapsing polychondritis. Mild leukocytosis and normocytic, normochromic anemia are often present. Eosinophilia is observed in 10% of patients. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are usually elevated. Rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody tests are occasionally positive in low titers and complement levels are normal. Antibodies to type II collagen are present in fewer than one-half of the patients and are not specific. Circulating immune complexes may be detected, especially in patients with early active disease. Elevated levels of  globulin may be present. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), either cytoplasmic (cANCA) or perinuclear (pANCA), are found in some patients with active disease. However, on target antigen specific testing, there are only occasional reports of positive myeloperoxidase-ANCA and proteinase 3-ANCA are very rarely found in relapsing polychondritis.

The upper and lower airways can be evaluated by imaging techniques such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Bronchoscopy provides direct visualization of the airways but can be a high-risk procedure in patients with airway compromise. Pulmonary function testing with flow-volume loops can show inspiratory and/or expiratory obstruction. Imaging can also be useful to detect extracartilaginous disease. The chest film may show widening of the ascending or descending aorta due to an aneurysm, and cardiomegaly when aortic insufficiency is present. MRI can assess aortic aneurysmal dilatation. Electrocardiography and echocardiography can be useful in further evaluating for cardiac features of disease.
 
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is based on recognition of the typical clinical features. Biopsies of the involved cartilage from the ear, nose, or respiratory tract will confirm the diagnosis but are only necessary when clinical features are not typical. Diagnostic criteria were suggested in 1976 by McAdam et al and modified by Damiani and Levine in 1979. These criteria continue to be generally used in clinical practice. McAdam et al proposed the following: (1) recurrent chondritis of both auricles; (2) nonerosive inflammatory arthritis; (3) chondritis of nasal cartilage; (4) inflammation of ocular structures, including conjunctivitis, keratitis, scleritis/episcleritis, and/or uveitis; (5) chondritis of the laryngeal and/or tracheal cartilages; and (6) cochlear and/or vestibular damage manifested by neurosensory hearing loss, tinnitus, and/or vertigo. The diagnosis is certain when three or more of these features are present along with a positive biopsy from the ear, nasal, or respiratory cartilage. Damiani and Levine later suggested that the diagnosis could be made when one or more of the above features and a positive biopsy were present, when two or more separate sites of cartilage inflammation were present that responded to glucocorticoids or dapsone, or when three or more of the above features were present.

The differential diagnosis of relapsing polychondritis is centered around its sites of clinical involvement. Patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's) may have a saddlenose and tracheal involvement but can be distinguished by the primary inflammation occurring in the mucosa at these sites, the absence of auricular involvement, and the presence of pulmonary parenchymal disease. Patients with Cogan's syndrome have interstitial keratitis and vestibular and auditory abnormalities, but this syndrome does not involve the respiratory tract or ears. Reactive arthritis may initially resemble relapsing polychondritis because of oligoarticular arthritis and eye involvement, but it is distinguished in time by the appearance of urethritis and typical mucocutaneous lesions and the absence of nose or ear cartilage involvement. Rheumatoid arthritis may initially suggest relapsing polychondritis because of arthritis and eye inflammation. The arthritis in rheumatoid arthritis, however, is erosive and symmetric. In addition, rheumatoid factor titers are usually high compared with those in relapsing polychondritis and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide is usually not seen. Bacterial infection of the pinna may be mistaken for relapsing polychondritis but differs by usually involving only one ear, including the earlobe. Auricular cartilage may also be damaged by trauma or frostbite.

Treatment: Relapsing Polychondritis

In patients with active chondritis, prednisone, 40每60 mg/d, is often effective in suppressing disease activity; it is tapered gradually once disease is controlled. In some patients, prednisone can be stopped, while in others low doses in the range of 5每10 mg/d are required for continued suppression of disease. Dapsone 50每100 mg/d has been effective for cartilage inflammation and joint features in some patients. Other immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, azathioprine, or cyclosporine should be reserved for patients who have severe organ-threatening disease, fail to respond to prednisone, or who require high doses for control of disease activity. Patients with significant ocular inflammation often require intraocular glucocorticoids as well as high doses of prednisone. There are a small number of reports on the use of tumor necrosis factor antagonists, which are too few in number to assess efficacy. A small retrospective series of nine patients did not find anti-CD20 (rituximab) to provide benefit although this experience remains too small to draw firm conclusions. Heart valve replacement or repair of an aortic aneurysm may be necessary. When obstruction is severe, tracheostomy is required. Stents may be necessary in patients with tracheobronchial collapse.
 
Patient Outcome, Prognosis, and Survival

The course of relapsing polychondritis is highly variable, with inflammatory episodes lasting from a few days to several weeks and then subsiding spontaneously. Attacks may recur at intervals varying from weeks to months. In other patients, the disease has a chronic, smoldering course. In a few patients, the disease may be limited to one or two episodes of cartilage inflammation. In one study, the 5-year estimated survival rate was 74% and the 10-year survival rate 55%. In contrast to earlier series, only about one-half of the deaths could be attributed to relapsing polychondritis or complications of treatment. Pulmonary complications accounted for only 10% of all fatalities. In general, patients with more widespread disease have a worse prognosis.
 
Acknowledgment

This chapter represents a revised version of the text authored by Dr. Bruce C. Gilliland that appeared in previous editions of Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine. Dr. Gilliland passed away on February 17, 2007, and had been a contributor to Harrison's since the 11th edition.
 
Further Readings

Ernst A et al: Relapsing polychondritis and airway involvement. Chest 135:1024, 2009[PMID: 19017885]  [Full Text]

 
Kent PD et al: Relapsing polychondritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 16:56, 2004[PMID: 14673390]  [Full Text]

 
Letko E et al: Relapsing polychondritis: A clinical review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 31:384, 2002[PMID: 12077711]  [Full Text]

 
Michet CJ et al: Relapsing polychondritis. Survival and predictive role of early disease manifestations. Ann Intern Med 104:74, 1986[PMID: 3484422]  [Full Text]

 
Staats BA et al: Relapsing polychondritis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 23:145, 2002[PMID: 16088607]  [Full Text]

 
Trentham DE, Le CH: Relapsing polychondritis. Ann Intern Med 129:114, 1998[PMID: 9669970]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 329. Sarcoidosis >
 

Definition

Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disease characterized by the presence of noncaseating granulomas. The disease is often multisystem and requires the presence of involvement in two or more organs for a specific diagnosis. The finding of granulomas is not specific for sarcoidosis, and other conditions known to cause granulomas must be ruled out. These conditions include mycobacterial and fungal infections, malignancy, and environmental agents such as beryllium. While sarcoidosis can affect virtually every organ of the body, the lung is most commonly affected. Other organs commonly affected are the liver, skin, and eye. The clinical outcome of sarcoidosis varies, with remission occurring in over one-half of the patients within a few years of diagnosis; however, the remaining patients may develop a chronic disease that lasts for decades.
 
Etiology

Despite multiple investigations, the cause of sarcoidosis remains unknown. Currently, the most likely etiology is an infectious or noninfectious environmental agent that triggers an inflammatory response in a genetically susceptible host. Among the possible infectious agents, careful studies have shown a much higher incidence of Propionibacter acnes in the lymph nodes of sarcoidosis patients compared to controls. An animal model has shown that P. acnes can induce a granulomatous response in mice similar to sarcoidosis. Others have demonstrated the presence of a mycobacterial protein [Mycobacterium tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase (mKatG)] in the granulomas of some sarcoidosis patients. This protein is very resistant to degradation and may represent the persistent antigen in sarcoidosis. Immune response to this and other mycobacterial proteins has been documented by another laboratory. These studies suggest that a mycobacterium similar to M. tuberculosis could be responsible for sarcoidosis. The mechanism exposure/infection with such agents has been the focus of other studies. Environmental exposures to insecticides and mold have been associated with an increased risk for disease. In addition, health care workers appear to have an increased risk. Also, sarcoidosis in a donor organ has occurred after transplantation into a sarcoidosis patient. Some authors have suggested that sarcoidosis is not due to a single agent but represents a particular host response to multiple agents. Some studies have been able to correlate the environmental exposures to genetic markers. These studies have supported the hypothesis that a genetically susceptible host is a key factor in the disease.
 
Incidence and Prevalence

Sarcoidosis is seen worldwide, with the highest prevalence reported in the Nordic population. In the United States, the disease has been reported more commonly in African Americans than whites, with the ratio of African Americans to whites ranging from 3:1 to 17:0. Women appear to be slightly more susceptible than men. The lower estimate is from a large health maintenance organization in Detroit. The earlier American studies finding the higher incidence in African Americans may have been influenced by the fact that African Americans seem to develop more extensive and chronic pulmonary disease. Since most sarcoidosis clinics are run by pulmonologists, a selection bias may have occurred. Worldwide, the prevalence of the disease varies from 20每60 per 100,000 for many groups such as Japanese, Italians, and American whites. Higher rate occurs in Ireland and Nordic countries. In one closely observed community in Sweden, the lifetime risk for developing sarcoidosis was 3%.

Sarcoidosis often occurs in young, otherwise healthy adults. It is uncommon to diagnose the disease in someone under age 18. However, it has become clear that a second peak in incidence develops around age 60. In a study of >700 newly diagnosed sarcoidosis patients in the United States, one-half of the patients were 40 years at the time of diagnosis.

Although most cases of sarcoidosis are sporadic, a familial form of the disease exists. At least 5% of patients with sarcoidosis will have a family member with sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis patients who are Irish or African American seem to have a two to three times higher rate of familial disease.
 
Pathophysiology and Immunopathogenesis

The granuloma is the pathologic hallmark of sarcoidosis. A distinct feature of sarcoidosis is the local accumulation of inflammatory cells. Extensive studies in the lung using bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) have demonstrated that the initial inflammatory response is an influx of T helper cells. In addition, there is an accumulation of activated monocytes. Figure 329-1 is a proposed model for sarcoidosis. Using the HLA-CD4 complex, antigen-presenting cells present an unknown antigen to the helper T cell. Studies have clarified that specific HLA haplotypes such as HLA-DRB1*1101 are associated with an increased risk for developing sarcoidosis. In addition, different HLA haplotypes are associated with different clinical outcomes.

Figure 329-1

 
 
 
Schematic representation of initial events of sarcoidosis. The antigen-presenting cell and helper T cell complex leads to the release of multiple cytokines. This forms a granuloma. Over time, the granuloma may resolve or lead to chronic disease, including fibrosis. APC, antigen-presenting cell; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 
 

The macrophage/helper T cell cluster leads to activation with the increased release of several cytokines. These include interleukin (IL)-2 released from the T cell and interferon  and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) released by the macrophage. The T cell is a necessary part of the initial inflammatory response. In advanced, untreated HIV infection, patients who lack helper T cells rarely develop sarcoidosis. In contrast, several reports confirm that sarcoidosis becomes unmasked as HIV-infected individuals receive antiretroviral therapy, with subsequent restoration of their immune system. In contrast, treatment of established pulmonary sarcoidosis with cyclosporine, a drug that downregulates helper T cell responses, seems to have little impact on sarcoidosis.

The granulomatous response of sarcoidosis can resolve with or without therapy. However, in at least 20% of patients with sarcoidosis, a chronic form of the disease develops. This persistent form of the disease is associated with the secretion of high levels of IL-8. Also, studies have reported that in patients with this chronic form of disease excessive amounts of TNF are released in the areas of inflammation.

It is sometimes difficult to determine early on the ultimate clinical outcome of sarcoidosis. One form of the disease, L?fgren's syndrome, consists of erythema nodosum, hilar adenopathy on chest roentgenogram, and uveitis. L?fgren's syndrome is associated with a good prognosis, with >90% of patients experiencing disease resolution within 2 years. A recently proposed expansion of the term Lofgren's syndrome includes periarticular arthritis without erythema nodosum. Recent studies have demonstrated that the HLA-DRB1*03 was found in two-thirds of Scandinavian patients with L?fgren's syndrome. More than 95% of those patients who were HLA-DRB1*03 positive had resolution of their disease within 2 years, while nearly one-half of the remaining patients had disease for more than 2 years. It remains to be determined whether these observations can be applied to a non-Scandinavian population.
 
Clinical Manifestations

The presentation of sarcoidosis ranges from patients who are asymptomatic to those with organ failure. It is unclear how often sarcoidosis is asymptomatic. In countries where routine chest roentgenogram screening is performed, 20每30% of pulmonary cases are detected in asymptomatic individuals. The inability to screen for other asymptomatic forms of the disease would suggest that as many as one-third of sarcoidosis patients are asymptomatic.

Respiratory complaints including cough and dyspnea are the most common presenting symptoms. In many cases, the patient presents with a 2每4 week history of these symptoms. Unfortunately, due to the nonspecific nature of pulmonary symptoms, the patient may see physicians for up to a year before a diagnosis is confirmed. For these patients, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis is usually only suggested when a chest roentgenogram is performed.

Symptoms related to cutaneous and ocular disease are the next two most common complaints. Skin lesions are often nonspecific. However, since these lesions are readily observed, the patient and treating physician are often led to a diagnosis. In contrast to patients with pulmonary disease, patients with cutaneous lesions are more likely to be diagnosed within 6 months of symptoms.

Nonspecific constitutional symptoms include fatigue, fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Fatigue is perhaps the most common constitutional symptom that affects these patients. Given its insidious nature, patients are usually not aware of the association with their sarcoidosis until their disease resolves.

The overall incidence of sarcoidosis at the time of diagnosis and eventual common organ involvement are summarized in Table 329-1. Over time, skin, eye, and neurologic involvement seem more apparent. In the United States, the frequency of specific organ involvement appears to be affected by age, race, and gender. For example, eye disease is more common among African Americans. Under the age of 40, it occurs more frequently in women. However, in those diagnosed over the age of 40, eye disease is more common in men.

Table 329-1 Frequency of Common Organ Involvement and Lifetime Riska

 
 
  Presentation, %b
 Follow-up, %c
 
Lung
 95
 94
 
Skin
 24
 43
 
Eye
 12
 29
 
Extrathoracic lymph node
 15
 16
 
Liver
 12
 14
 
Spleen
 7
 8
 
Neurologic
 5
 16
 
Cardiac
 2
 3
 
 


aPatients could have more than one organ involved.

bFrom ACCESS study of 736 patients evaluated. within 6 months of diagnosis.

cFrom follow-up of 1024 sarcoidosis patients seen at the University of Cincinnati Interstitial Lung Disease and Sarcoidosis Clinic from 2002每2006.
 

Lung

Lung involvement occurs in >90% of sarcoidosis patients. The most commonly used method for detecting lung disease is still the chest roentgenogram. Figure 329-2 illustrates the chest roentgenogram from a sarcoidosis patient with bilateral hilar adenopathy. Although the CT scan has changed the diagnostic approach to interstitial lung disease, the CT scan is not usually considered a monitoring tool for patients with sarcoidosis. Figure 329-3 demonstrates some of the characteristic CT features, including peribronchial thickening and reticular nodular changes, which are predominantly subpleural. The peribronchial thickening seen on CT scan seems to explain the high yield of granulomas from bronchial biopsies performed for diagnosis.

Figure 329-2

 
 
 
Posterior-anterior chest roentgenogram demonstrating bilateral hilar adenopathy, stage 1 disease.
 
 

Figure 329-3

 
 
 
High-resolution CT scan of chest demonstrating patchy reticular nodularity, including areas of confluence.
 
 

While the CT scan is more sensitive, the standard scoring system described by Scadding in 1961 for chest roentgenograms remains the preferred method of characterizing the chest involvement. Stage 1 is hilar adenopathy alone (Fig. 329-2), often with right paratracheal involvement. Stage 2 is a combination of adenopathy plus infiltrates, whereas stage 3 reveals infiltrates alone. Stage 4 consists of fibrosis. Usually the infiltrates in sarcoidosis are predominantly an upper lobe process. Only in a few noninfectious diseases is an upper lobe predominance noted. In addition to sarcoidosis, the differential diagnosis of upper lobe disease includes hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. For infectious diseases, tuberculosis and Pneumocystis pneumonia can often present as upper lobe diseases.

Lung volumes, mechanics, and diffusion all are useful in evaluating interstitial lung diseases such as sarcoidosis. The diffusion of carbon monoxide (DLCO) is the most sensitive test for an interstitial lung disease. Reduced lung volumes are a reflection of the restrictive lung disease seen in sarcoidosis. However, a third of the patients presenting with sarcoidosis still have lung volumes within the normal range, despite abnormal chest roentgenograms and dyspnea.

Approximately one-half of sarcoidosis patients present with obstructive disease, reflected by a reduced ratio of forced vital capacity expired in one second (FEV1/FVC). Cough is a very common symptom. Airway involvement causing varying degrees of obstruction underlies the cough in most sarcoidosis patients. Airway hyperreactivity as determined by methacholine challenge will be positive in some of these patients. A few patients with cough will respond to traditional bronchodilators as the only form of treatment. In some cases, high-dose inhaled glucocorticoids alone are useful.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension is reported in at least 5% of sarcoidosis patients. Either direct vascular involvement or the consequence of fibrotic changes in the lung can lead to pulmonary arterial hypertension. In sarcoidosis patients with end-stage fibrosis awaiting lung transplant, 70% will have pulmonary arterial hypertension. This is a much higher incidence than that reported for other fibrotic lung diseases. In less advanced, but still symptomatic, patients pulmonary arterial hypertension has been noted in up to 50% of the cases. Because sarcoidosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension may respond to therapy, evaluation for this should be considered in persistently symptomatic patients.

Skin

Skin involvement is eventually identified in over a third of patients with sarcoidosis. The classic cutaneous lesions include erythema nodosum, maculopapular lesions, hyper- and hypopigmentation, keloid formation, and subcutaneous nodules. A specific complex of involvement of the bridge of the nose, the area beneath the eyes, and the cheeks is referred to as lupus pernio(Fig. 329-4) and is diagnostic for a chronic form of sarcoidosis.

Figure 329-4

 
 
 
Chronic inflammatory lesions around nose, eyes, and cheeks, referred to as lupus pernio.
 
 


In contrast, erythema nodosum is a transient rash that can be seen in association with hilar adenopathy and uveitis (L?fgren's syndrome). Erythema nodosum is more common in women and in certain self-described demographic groups including whites and Puerto Ricans. In the United States, the other manifestations of skin sarcoidosis, especially lupus pernio, are more common in African Americans than whites.

The maculopapular lesions from sarcoidosis are the most common chronic form of the disease (Fig. 329-5). These are often overlooked by the patient and physician, since they are chronic and not painful. Initially, these lesions are usually purplish papules and are often indurated. They can become confluent and infiltrate large areas of the skin. With treatment, the color and induration may fade. Because these lesions are caused by noncaseating granulomas, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis can be readily made by a skin biopsy.

Figure 329-5

 
 
 
Maculopapular lesions on the trunk of a sarcoidosis patient.
 
 

Eye

The frequency of ocular manifestations for sarcoidosis varies depending on race. In Japan, >70% of sarcoidosis patients develop ocular disease, while in the United States only 30% have eye disease, with problems more common in African Americans than whites. Although the most common manifestation is an anterior uveitis, over a quarter of patients will have inflammation at the posterior of the eye, including retinitis and pars planitis. While symptoms such as photophobia, blurred vision, and increased tearing can occur, some asymptomatic patients still have active inflammation. Initially asymptomatic patients with ocular sarcoidosis can eventually develop blindness. Therefore, it is recommended that all patients with sarcoidosis receive a dedicated ophthalmologic examination. Sicca is seen in over one-half of the chronic sarcoidosis patients. Dry eyes appear to be a reflection of prior lacrimal gland disease. Although the patient may no longer have active inflammation, the dry eyes may require natural tears or other lubricants.

Liver

Using biopsies to detect granulomatous disease, liver involvement can be identified in over one-half of sarcoidosis patients. However, using liver function studies, only 20每30% of patients will have evidence of liver involvement. The most common abnormality of liver function is an elevation of the alkaline phosphatase level, consistent with an obstructive pattern. In addition, elevated transaminase levels can occur. An elevated bilirubin level is a marker for more advanced liver disease. Overall, only 5% of sarcoidosis patients have sufficient symptoms from their liver disease to require specific therapy. Although symptoms can be due to hepatomegaly, more frequently symptoms result from extensive intrahepatic cholestasis leading to portal hypertension. In this case, ascites and esophageal varices can occur. It is rare that a sarcoidosis patient will require a liver transplant, because even the patient with cirrhosis due to sarcoidosis can respond to systemic therapy. On a cautionary note, patients with both sarcoidosis and hepatitis C should avoid therapy with interferon  because of its association with the development or worsening of granulomatous disease.

Bone Marrow and Spleen

One or more bone marrow manifestations can be identified in many sarcoidosis patients. The most common hematologic problem is lymphopenia, which is a reflection of sequestration of the lymphocytes into the areas of inflammation. Anemia occurs in 20% of patients and leukopenia is less common. Bone marrow examination will reveal granulomas in about a third of patients. Splenomegaly can be detected in 5每10% of patients, but splenic biopsy reveals granulomas in 60% of patients. The CT scan can be relatively specific for sarcoidosis involvement of the spleen (Fig. 329-6). Both bone marrow and spleen involvement are more common in African Americans than whites. These manifestations alone are rarely an indication for therapy. On occasion, splenectomy may be indicated for massive symptomatic splenomegaly or profound pancytopenia.

Figure 329-6

 
 
 
CT scan of the abdomen after oral and intravenous contrast. The stomach is compressed by the enlarged spleen. Within the spleen, areas of hypo- and hyperdensity are identified.
 
 

Calcium Metabolism

Hypercalcemia and/or hypercalciuria occurs in about 10% of sarcoidosis patients. It is more common in whites than African Americans and in men. The mechanism of abnormal calcium metabolism is increased production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by the granuloma itself. The 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D causes increased intestinal absorption of calcium, leading to hypercalcemia with a suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) level (Chap. 353). Increased exogenous vitamin D from diet or sunlight exposure may exacerbate this problem. Serum calcium should be determined as part of the initial evaluation of all sarcoidosis patients, and a repeat determination may be useful during the summer months with increased sun exposure. In patients with a history of renal calculi, a 24-h urine calcium measurement should be obtained. If a sarcoidosis patient with a history of renal calculi is to be placed on calcium supplements, a follow-up 24-h urine calcium level should be measured.

Renal Disease

Direct kidney involvement occurs in <5% of sarcoidosis patients. It is associated with granulomas in the kidney itself and can lead to nephritis. However, hypercalcemia is the most likely cause of sarcoidosis-associated renal disease. In 1每2% of sarcoidosis patients, acute renal failure has been encountered as a result of hyper-calcemia. Treatment of the hypercalcemia with glucocorticoids and other therapies often improves, but does not totally resolve, the renal dysfunction.

Nervous System

Neurologic disease is reported in 5每10% of sarcoidosis patients and appears to be of equal frequency across all ethnic groups. Any part of the central or peripheral nervous system can be affected. The presence of granulomatous inflammation is often visible on MRI studies. The MRI with gadolinium enhancement may demonstrate space-occupying lesions, but the MRI can be negative due to small lesions or the effect of systemic therapy in reducing the inflammation. The cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) findings include lymphocytic meningitis with a mild increase in protein. The CSF glucose is usually normal but can be low. Certain areas of the nervous system are more commonly affected in neurosarcoidosis. These include cranial nerve involvement, basilar meningitis, myelopathy, and anterior hypothalamic disease with associated diabetes insipidus (Chap. 340). Seizures and cognitive changes also occur. Of the cranial nerves, seventh nerve paralysis can be transient and mistaken for Bell's palsy (idiopathic seventh nerve paralysis). Since this form of neurosarcoidosis often resolves within weeks and may not recur, it may have occurred prior to a definitive diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Optic neuritis is another cranial nerve manifestation of sarcoidosis. This manifestation is more chronic and usually requires long-term systemic therapy. It can be associated with both anterior and posterior uveitis. Differentiating between neurosarcoidosis and multiple sclerosis can be difficult at times. Optic neuritis can occur in both diseases. In some patients with sarcoidosis, multiple enhancing white matter abnormalities may be detected by MRI, suggesting multiple sclerosis. In such cases, the presence of meningeal enhancement or hypothalamic involvement suggests neurosarcoidosis, as does evidence of extraneurologic disease such as pulmonary or skin involvement, which also suggests sarcoidosis. Since the response of neurosarcoidosis to glucocorticoids and cytotoxic therapy is different from that of multiple sclerosis, differentiating between these disease entities is important.

Cardiac

The presence of cardiac involvement is influenced by race. Over a quarter of Japanese sarcoidosis patients develop cardiac disease, whereas only 5% of sarcoidosis patients in the United States and Europe develop cardiac disease. However, there is no apparent difference between whites and African Americans. Cardiac disease usually presents as either congestive heart failure or cardiac arrhythmias. Both manifestations result from infiltration of the heart muscle by granulomas. Diffuse granulomatous involvement of the heart muscle can lead to ejection fractions below 10%. Even in this situation, improvement in the ejection fraction can occur with systemic therapy. Arrhythmias can also occur with diffuse infiltration or with more patchy cardiac involvement. If the atrioventricular (AV) node is infiltrated, heart block can occur. This can be detected by routine electrocardiography. Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death due to ventricular tachycardia are common causes of death. Arrhythmias are best detected using 24-h ambulatory monitoring. Because ventricular arrhythmias are usually multifocal due to patchy multiple granulomas in the heart, ablation therapy is not useful. Patients with significant ventricular arrhythmias should be considered for an implanted defibrillator, which appears to have reduced the rate of death in cardiac sarcoidosis. While systemic therapy can be useful in treating the arrhythmias, patients may still have malignant arrhythmias up to 6 months after starting successful treatment, and the risk for recurrent arrhythmias occurs whenever medications are tapered.

Musculoskeletal System

Direct granulomatous bone and muscle involvement as documented by x-ray, MRI (Fig. 329-7), gallium scan, or biopsy can be seen in about 10% of sarcoidosis patients. However, a larger percentage of sarcoidosis patients complain of myalgias and arthralgias. These complaints are similar to those reported by patients with other inflammatory diseases, including chronic infections such as mononucleosis. Fatigue associated with sarcoidosis may be overwhelming for many patients. Recent studies have demonstrated a link between fatigue and small peripheral nerve fiber disease in sarcoidosis.

Figure 329-7

 
 
 
MRI of wrist demonstrating large cyst in a sarcoidosis patient (line).
 
 

Other Organ Involvement

Although sarcoidosis can affect any organ of the body, rarely does it involve the breast, testes, ovary, or stomach. Because of the rarity of involvement, a mass in one of these areas requires a biopsy to rule out other diseases including cancer. For example, in a study of breast problems in female sarcoidosis patients, a breast lesion was more likely to be granulomas from sarcoidosis than from breast cancer. However, findings on the physical examination or mammogram cannot reliably differentiate between these lesions. More importantly, as women with sarcoidosis age, breast cancer becomes more common. Therefore, it is recommended that routine screening including mammography be performed along with other imaging studies (ultrasound, MRI) or biopsy as clinically indicated.

Complications

Sarcoidosis is usually a self-limited, non-life-threatening disease. However, organ-threatening disease can occur. These complications can include blindness, paraplegia, or renal failure. Death from sarcoidosis occurs in about 5% of patients seen in sarcoidosis referral clinics. The usual causes of death related to sarcoidosis are from lung, cardiac, neurologic, or liver involvement. In respiratory failure, an elevation of the right atrial pressure is a poor prognostic finding. Lung complications can also include infections such as mycetoma, which can subsequently lead to massive bleeding. In addition, the use of immunosuppressive agents can increase the incidence of serious infections.
 
Laboratory Findings

The chest roentgenogram remains the most commonly used tool to assess lung involvement in sarcoidosis. As noted above, the chest roentgenogram classifies involvement into four stages, with stages 1 and 2 having hilar and paratracheal adenopathy. The CT scan has been used increasingly in evaluating interstitial lung disease. In sarcoidosis, the presence of adenopathy and a nodular infiltrate is not specific for sarcoidosis. Adenopathy up to 2 cm can be seen in other inflammatory lung diseases such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. However, adenopathy >2 cm in the short axis supports the diagnosis of sarcoidosis over other interstitial lung diseases.

The positive emission tomography (PET) scan has increasingly replaced gallium 67 scanning to identify areas of sarcoidosis in the chest and other parts of the body. Both tests can be used to identify potential areas for biopsy. Cardiac PET scanning has also proved useful in assessing cardiac sarcoidosis. A positive PET scan may be due to the granulomas from sarcoidosis and not to disseminated malignancy.

Serum levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) can be helpful in the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. However, the test has somewhat low sensitivity and specificity. Elevated levels of ACE are reported in 60% of patients with acute disease and only 20% of patients with chronic disease. Although there are several causes for mild elevation of ACE, including diabetes, elevations of >50% of the upper limit of normal are seen in only a few conditions including sarcoidosis, leprosy, Gaucher's disease, hyperthyroidism, and disseminated granulomatous infections such as miliary tuberculosis. There is an insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism of the ACE gene on what is felt to be in the noncritical part of the gene. There is a phenotypic difference for ACE levels, with II polymorphism having the lowest and DD polymorphism the highest levels of ACE for both sarcoidosis patients and healthy controls. There is no clear-cut association between ACE phenotype and clinical manifestation of disease. Because the ACE level is determined by a biologic assay, the concurrent use of an ACE inhibitor such as lisinopril will lead to a very low ACE level.
 
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of sarcoidosis requires both compatible clinical features and pathologic findings. Since the cause of sarcoidosis remains elusive, the diagnosis cannot be made with 100% certainty. Nevertheless, the diagnosis can be made with reasonable certainty based on history and physical features along with laboratory and pathologic findings.

Patients are usually evaluated for possible sarcoidosis based on two scenarios (Fig. 329-8). In the first scenario, a patient may undergo a biopsy revealing a noncaseating granuloma in either a pulmonary or an extrapulmonary organ. If the clinical presentation is consistent with sarcoidosis and there is no alternative cause for the granulomas identified, then the patient is felt to have sarcoidosis.

Figure 329-8

 
 
 
Proposed approach to management of patient with possible sarcoidosis. Presence of one or more of these features supports the diagnosis of sarcoidosis: uveitis, optic neuritis, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, seventh cranial nerve paralysis, diabetes insipidus.
 
 

In the second scenario, signs or symptoms suggesting sarcoidosis such as the presence of bilateral adenopathy may be present in an otherwise asymptomatic patient or a patient with uveitis or a rash consistent with sarcoidosis. At this point, a diagnostic procedure should be performed. For the patient with a compatible skin lesion, a skin biopsy should be considered. Other biopsies to consider could include liver, extrathoracic lymph node, or muscle. In some cases, a biopsy of the affected organ may not be easy to perform (such as a brain or spinal cord lesion). In other cases, such as an endomyocardial biopsy, the likelihood of a positive biopsy is low. Because of the high rate of pulmonary involvement in these cases, the lung may be easier to approach by bronchoscopy. During the bronchoscopy, a transbronchial biopsy, bronchial biopsy, or transbronchial needle aspirate of an enlarged mediastinal lymph node can be performed. The endobronchial ultrasonography-guided transbronchial needle aspirate may be particularly useful in the patient with stage 1 disease (i.e., adenopathy without infiltrates).

If the biopsy reveals granulomas, an alternative diagnosis such as infection or malignancy must be excluded. Bronchoscopic washings can be sent for cultures for fungi and tuberculosis. For the pathologist, the more tissue that is provided, the more comfortable is the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. A needle aspirate may be adequate in an otherwise classic case of sarcoidosis, but may be insufficient in a patient in whom lymphoma or fungal infection is a likely alternative diagnosis. Since granulomas can be seen on the edge of a lymphoma, the presence of a few granulomas from a needle aspirate may not be sufficient to clarify the diagnosis. Mediastinoscopy remains the procedure of choice to confirm the presence or absence of lymphoma in the mediastinum. Alternatively, for most patients, evidence of extrathoracic disease (e.g., eye involvement) may further support the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.

For patients with negative pathology, positive supportive tests may increase the likelihood of the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. These tests include an elevated ACE level, which can also be elevated in other granulomatous diseases but not in malignancy. A positive gallium scan can support the diagnosis if increased activity is noted in the parotids and lacrimal glands (panda sign) or in the right paratracheal and left hilar area (lambda sign). A BAL is often performed during the bronchoscopy. An increase in the percentage of lymphocytes supports the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. The use of the lymphocyte markers CD4 and CD8 can be used to determine the CD4/CD8 ratio of these increased lymphocytes in the BAL fluid. A ratio of >3.5 is strongly supportive of sarcoidosis but is less sensitive than an increase in lymphocytes alone. Although in general, an increase in BAL lymphocytes is supportive of the diagnosis, other conditions must be considered.

These supportive tests when combined with commonly associated clinical features of the disease, which are not diagnostic of sarcoidosis, can enhance the diagnostic probability. These nondiagnostic features include uveitis, renal stones, hypercalcemia, seventh cranial nerve paralysis, or erythema nodosum.

The Kviem-Siltzbach procedure is a specific diagnostic test for sarcoidosis. An intradermal injection of specially prepared tissue derived from the spleen of a known sarcoidosis patient is biopsied 4每6 weeks after injection. If noncaseating granulomas are seen, this is highly specific for the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Unfortunately, there is no commercially available Kviem-Siltzbach reagent, and some locally prepared batches have lower specificity. Thus, this test is of historic interest and is rarely used in current clinical practice.

Because the diagnosis of sarcoidosis can never be certain, over time other features may arise that lead to an alternative diagnosis. Conversely, evidence for new organ involvement may eventually confirm the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
 
Prognosis

The risk of death or loss of organ function remains low in sarcoidosis. Poor outcomes usually occur in patients who present with advanced disease in whom treatment seems to have little impact. In these cases, irreversible fibrotic changes have frequently occurred.

For the majority of patients, initial presentation occurs during the granulomatous phase of the disease as depicted in Fig. 329-1. It is clear that many patients resolve their disease within 2每5 years. These patients are felt to have acute, self-limiting sarcoidosis. However, there is a form of the disease that does not resolve within the first 2每5 years. These chronic patients can be identified at presentation by certain risk factors at presentation such as fibrosis on chest roentgenogram, presence of lupus pernio, bone cysts, cardiac or neurologic disease (except isolated seventh nerve paralysis), and presence of renal calculi due to hypercalciuria. Recent studies also indicate that patients who require glucocorticoids for any manifestation of their disease in the first 6 months of presentation have a >50% chance of having chronic disease. In contrast, <10% of patients who require no systemic therapy in the first 6 months will require chronic therapy.

Treatment: Sarcoidosis

The indications for therapy should be based on symptoms. The patient with elevated liver function tests or an abnormal chest roentgenogram probably does not benefit from treatment. However, these patients should be monitored for evidence of progressive, symptomatic disease.

One approach to therapy is summarized in Figs. 329-9 and 329-10. We have divided the approach into treating acute versus chronic disease. For acute disease, no therapy remains a viable option for patients with no or mild symptoms. For symptoms confined to only one organ, topical therapy is preferable. For multiorgan disease or disease too extensive for topical therapy, an approach to systemic therapy is outlined. Glucocorticoids remain the drugs of choice for this disease. However, the decision to continue to treat with glucocorticoids or to add steroid-sparing agents depends on the tolerability, duration, and dosage of glucocorticoids. Table 329-2 summarizes the dosage and monitoring of several commonly used drugs. According to the available trials, evidence-based recommendations are made. Most of these recommendations are for pulmonary disease because most of the trials were performed only in pulmonary disease. Treatment recommendations for extrapulmonary disease are usually similar with a few modifications. For example, the dosage of glucocorticoids is usually higher for neurosarcoidosis and lower for cutaneous disease. There was some suggestion that higher doses would be beneficial for cardiac sarcoidosis, but one study found that initial doses >40 mg/d prednisone were associated with a worse outcome because of toxicity.

Figure 329-9

 
 
 
The management of acute sarcoidosis is based on level of symptoms and extent of organ involvement. In patients with mild symptoms, no therapy may be needed unless specified manifestations are noted.
 
 

Figure 329-10

 
 
 
Approach to chronic disease is based on whether glucocorticoid therapy is tolerated or not.
 
 
Table 329-2 Commonly Used Drugs to Treat Sarcoidosis

 
 
Drug
 Initial Dose
 Maintenance Dose
 Monitoring
 Toxicity
 Support Therapya
 Support Monitoringa
 
Prednisone
 20每40 mg qd
 Taper to 5每10 mg
 Glucose, blood pressure, bone density
 Diabetes, osteoporosis
 A: Acute pulmonary

D: Extrapulmonary
   
Hydroxychloroquine
 200每400 mg qd
 400 mg qd
 Eye exam q6每12 mo
 Ocular
 B: Some forms of disease
 D: Routine eye exam
 
Methotrexate
 10 mg qw
 2.5每15 mg qw
 CBC, renal, hepatic q2mo
 Hematologic, nausea, hepatic, pulmonary
 B: Steroid sparing

C: Some forms chronic disease
 D: Routine hematologic, renal, and hepatic monitoring
 
Azathioprine
 50每150 mg qd
 50每200 mg qd
 CBC, renal q2mo
 Hematologic, nausea
 C: Some forms chronic disease
 D: Routine hematologic monitoring
 
Infliximab
 3每5 mg/kg q2wk for 2 doses
 3每10 mg/kg q4每8 wk
 Initial PPD
 Infections, allergic reaction, carcinogen
 A: Chronic pulmonary disease
 B: Caution in patients with latent tuberculosis or advanced congestive heart failure
 
 


aGrade A: supported by at least two double-blind randomized control trials; grade B: supported by prospective cohort studies; grade C: supported primarily by two or more retrospective studies; grade D: only one retrospective study or based on experience in other diseases.

Abbreviations: CBC, complete blood count; PPD, purified protein derivative test for tuberculosis.

Source: Adapted from Baughman and Selroos.
 

While most patients receive glucocorticoids as their initial systemic therapy, toxicity associated with prolonged therapy often leads to steroid-sparing alternatives. The antimalarial drugs such as hydroxychloroquine are more effective for skin than pulmonary disease. Minocycline may also be useful for cutaneoussarcoidosis. For pulmonary and other extra-pulmonary disease, cytotoxic agents are often employed. These include methotrexate, azathioprine, chlorambucil, and cyclophosphamide. The most widely studied cytotoxic agent has been methotrexate. This agent works in approximately two-thirds of sarcoidosis patients, regardless of the disease manifestation. As noted in Table 329-2, specific guidelines for monitoring therapy have been recommended. Cytokine modulators such as thalidomide and pentoxifylline have also been used in a limited number of cases.

The anti-TNF agents have recently been studied in sarcoidosis, with prospective randomized trials of both etanercept and infliximab completed. Etanercept has a limited role as a steroid-sparing agent. Conversely, infliximab significantly improved lung function when given to patients with chronic disease already on glucocorticoids and cytotoxic agents. The difference in response for these two agents is similar to that observed in Crohn's disease, where infliximab is effective and etanercept is not. In addition, there is a higher risk for reactivation of tuberculosis with infliximab compared to etanercept. The differential response rate could be explained by differences in mechanism of action since etanercept is a TNF receptor antagonist and infliximab is a monoclonal antibody against TNF. In contrast to etanercept, infliximab also binds to TNF on the surface of some cells that are releasing TNF and this can lead to cell lysis. This effect has been documented in Crohn's disease. There is currently limited information about the dose and effectiveness of adalimumab, another anti-TNF antibody, versus infliximab in sarcoidosis. The role of the newer therapeutic agents for sarcoidosis is still evolving. However, these targeted therapies confirm that TNF may be an important target, especially in the treatment of chronic disease. However, these agents are not a panacea, since sarcoidosis-like disease has occurred in patients treated with anti-TNF agents for non-sarcoidosis indications.
 
Further Readings

Baughman RP, Selroos O: Evidence-based approach to treatment of sarcoidosis, in PG Gibson et al (eds): Evidence-Based Respiratory Medicine. Oxford, BMJ Books Blackwell, 2005, pp 491每508 

 
de Kleijn WP et al: Fatigue in sarcoidosis: a systematic review. Curr Opin Pulm Med 15:499, 2009 

 
Drake WP et al: Cellular recognition of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ESAT-6 and KatG peptides in systemic sarcoidosis. Infect Immun 75:527, 2007[PMID: 17088357]  [Full Text]

 
Grunewald J, Eklund A: L?fgren's syndrome: Human leukocyte antigen strongly influences the disease course. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 179:307, 2009[PMID: 18996998]  [Full Text]

 
Hunninghake GW et al: ATS/ERS/WASOG statement on sarcoidosis. American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society/World Association of Sarcoidosis and other Granulomatous Disorders. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis 16:149, 1999[PMID: 10560120]  [Full Text]

 
Iannuzzi MC et al: Sarcoidosis. N Engl J Med 357:2153, 2007[PMID: 18032765]  [Full Text]

 
Judson MA et al: Efficacy of infliximab in extrapulmonary sarcoidosis: Results from a randomised trial. Eur Respir J 31:1189, 2008[PMID: 18256069]  [Full Text]

 
Newman LS et al: A case control etiologic study of sarcoidosis: Environmental and occupational risk factors. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 170:1324, 2004[PMID: 15347561]  [Full Text]

 
Rossman MD et al: HLA-DRB1*1101: A significant risk factor for sarcoidosis in blacks and whites. Am J Hum Genet 73:720, 2003[PMID: 14508706]  [Full Text]

 
Ziegenhagen MW et al: Exaggerated TNF-alpha release of alveolar macrophages in corticosteroid resistant sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis 19:185, 2002[PMID: 12405487]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
 Chapter 330. Familial Mediterranean Fever and Other Hereditary Recurrent Fevers >
 

Familial Mediterranean Fever and Other Hereditary Recurrent Fevers: Introduction

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the prototype of a group of inherited diseases (Table 330-1) that are characterized by recurrent episodes of fever with serosal, synovial, or cutaneous inflammation and, in some individuals, the eventual development of systemic AA amyloidosis (Chap. 112). Because of the relative infrequency of high-titer autoantibodies or antigen-specific T cells, the term autoinflammatory has been proposed to describe these disorders, rather than autoimmune. The innate immune system, with its myeloid effector cells and germline receptors for pathogen-associated molecular patterns and endogenous danger signals, plays a predominant role in the pathogenesis of the autoinflammatory diseases.

Table 330-1 The Hereditary Recurrent Fever Syndromes

 
 
  FMF
 TRAPS
 HIDS
 MWS
 FCAS
 NOMID
 
Ethnicity
 Jewish, Arab, Turkish, Armenian, Italian
 Any ethnic group
 Predominantly Dutch, northern European
 Any ethnic group
 Any ethnic group
 Any ethnic group
 
Inheritance
 Recessivea
 Dominant
 Recessive
 Dominant
 Dominant
 Usually de novo mutations
 
Gene/chromosome
 MEFV/16p13.3
 TNFRSF1A/12p13
 MVK/12q24
 NLRP3/1q44
 NLRP3/1q44
 NLRP3/1q44
 
Protein
 Pyrin
 p55 TNF receptor
 Mevalonate kinase
 Cryopyrin
 Cryopyrin
 Cryopyrin
 
Attack length
 1每3 days
 Often > 7 days
 3每7 days
 1每2 days
 Minutes每3 days
 Continuous, with flares
 
Serosa
 Pleurisy, peritonitis; asymptomatic pericardial effusions
 Pleurisy, peritonitis, pericarditis
 Abd pain, but seldom peritonitis; pleurisy, pericarditis uncommon
 Abd pain common; pleurisy, pericarditis rare
 Rare
 Rare
 
Skin
 Erysipeloid erythema
 Centrifugally migrating erythema
 Diffuse maculopapular rash; oral ulcers
 Diffuse urticaria-like rash
 Cold-induced urticaria-like rash
 Diffuse urticaria-like rash
 
Joints
 Acute monoarthritis; chronic hip arthritis (rare)
 Acute monoarthritis, arthralgia
 Arthralgia, oligoarthritis
 Arthralgia, large joint oligoarthritis
 Polyarthralgia
 Epiphyseal, patellar overgrowth, clubbing
 
Muscle
 Exercise-induced myalgia common; protracted febrile myalgia rare
 Migratory myalgia
 Uncommon
 Myalgia common
 Sometimes myalgia
 Sometimes myalgia
 
Eyes, ears
 Uncommon
 Periorbital edema, conjunctivitis, rarely uveitis
 Uncommon
 Conjunctivitis, episcleritis, optic disc edema; sensorineural hearing loss
 Conjunctivitis
 Conjunctivitis, uveitis, optic disc edema, blindness, sensorineural hearing loss
 
CNS
 Aseptic meningitis rare
 Headache
 Headache
 Headache
 Headache
 Aseptic meningitis, seizures
 
Amyloidosis
 Most common in M694V homozygotes
 15% of cases
 Uncommon
 25% of cases
 Uncommon
 Late complication
 
Treatment
 Oral colchicine prophylaxis
 Glucocorticoids, etanercept, anakinra (IL-1 receptor antagonist)
 NSAIDs for fever; IL-1 and TNF inhibitors investigational
 Anakinra, rilonacept, canakinumab
 Anakinra, rilonacept, canakinumab
 Anakinra
 
 


aA substantial percentage of patients with clinical FMF have only a single demonstrable MEFV mutation on DNA sequencing.

Abbreviations: FCAS, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome; FMF, familial Mediterranean fever; HIDS, hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever syndrome; IL, interleukin; MWS, Muckle-Wells syndrome; NOMID, neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TRAPS, TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome.
 
 
Background and Pathophysiology

FMF was first recognized among Armenians, Arabs, Turks, and non-Ashkenazi (primarily North African and Iraqi) Jews. With the advent of genetic testing, FMF has been documented with increasing frequency among Ashkenazi Jews, Italians, and other Mediterranean populations, and occasional cases have been confirmed even in the absence of known Mediterranean ancestry. FMF is recessively inherited, but, particularly in countries where families are small, a positive family history can only be elicited in 50% of cases. DNA testing demonstrates carrier frequencies as high as 1:3 among affected populations, suggesting a heterozygote advantage.

The FMF gene encodes a 781-amino acid, 95 kDa protein denoted pyrin (or marenostrin) that is expressed in granulocytes, eosinophils, monocytes, dendritic cells, and synovial and peritoneal fibroblasts. The N-terminal 92 amino acids of pyrin define a motif, the PYRIN domain, that is similar in structure to death domains, death effector domains, and caspase recruitment domains. PYRIN domains mediate homotypic protein-protein interactions and have been found in several other proteins, including cryopyrin, which is mutated in three other recurrent fever syndromes. Through a number of mechanisms, including the interaction of the PYRIN domain with an intermediary adaptor protein, pyrin regulates caspase-1 [interleukin (IL) 1-converting enzyme], and thereby IL-1 secretion. Mice bearing FMF-associated pyrin mutations exhibit inflammation and excessive IL-1 production.
 
Acute Attacks

Febrile episodes in FMF may begin even in early infancy; 90% of patients have had their first attack by age 20. Typical FMF episodes generally last 24每72 hours, with arthritic attacks tending to last somewhat longer. In some patients the episodes occur with great regularity, but more often the frequency of attacks varies over time, ranging from as often as once every few days to remissions lasting several years. Attacks are often unpredictable, although some patients relate them to physical exertion, emotional stress, or menses; pregnancy may be associated with remission.

If measured, fever is nearly always present throughout FMF attacks. Severe hyperpyrexia and even febrile seizures may be seen in infants, and fever is sometimes the only manifestation of FMF in young children.

Over 90% of FMF patients experience abdominal attacks at some time. Episodes range in severity from dull, aching pain and distention with mild tenderness on direct palpation to severe generalized pain with absent bowel sounds, rigidity, rebound tenderness, and air-fluid levels on upright radiographs. CT scanning may demonstrate a small amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity. If such patients undergo exploratory laparotomy, a sterile, neutrophil-rich peritoneal exudate is present, sometimes with adhesions from previous episodes. Ascites is rare.

Pleural attacks are usually manifested by unilateral, sharp, stabbing chest pain. Radiographs may show atelectasis and sometimes an effusion. If performed, thoracentesis demonstrates an exudative fluid rich in neutrophils. After repeated attacks, pleural thickening may develop.

FMF arthritis is most frequent among individuals homozygous for the M694V mutation, which is especially common in the non-Ashkenazi Jewish population. Acute arthritis in FMF is usually monoarticular, affecting the knee, ankle, or hip, although other patterns can be seen, particularly in children. Large sterile effusions rich in neutrophils are frequent, without commensurate erythema or warmth. Even after repeated arthritic attacks, radiographic changes are rare. Before the advent of colchicine prophylaxis, chronic arthritis of the knee or hip were seen in 5% of FMF patients with arthritis. Chronic sacroiliitis can occur in FMF irrespective of the HLA-B27 antigen, even in the face of colchicine therapy. In the United States, FMF patients are much more likely to have arthralgia than arthritis.

The most characteristic cutaneous manifestation of FMF is erysipelas-like erythema, a raised erythematous rash that most commonly occurs on the dorsum of the foot, ankle, or lower leg alone or in combination with abdominal pain, pleurisy, or arthritis. Biopsy demonstrates perivascular infiltrates of granulocytes and monocytes. This rash is seen most often in M694V homozygotes and is relatively rare in the United States.

Exercise-induced (nonfebrile) myalgia is common in FMF, and a small percentage of patients develop a protracted febrile myalgia that can last several weeks. Symptomatic pericardial disease is rare, although some patients have small pericardial effusions as an incidental echocardiographic finding. Unilateral acute scrotal inflammation may occur in prepubertal boys. Aseptic meningitis has been reported in FMF, but the causal connection is controversial. Vasculitis, including Henoch-Sch?nlein purpura and polyarteritis nodosum (Chap. 326) may be seen at increased frequency in FMF.

Laboratory features of FMF attacks are consistent with acute inflammation and include an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, leukocytosis, thrombocytosis (in children), and elevations in C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and serum immunoglobulins. Transient albuminuria and hematuria may also be seen.
 
Amyloidosis

Before the advent of colchicine prophylaxis, systemic amyloidosis was a common complication of FMF. It is caused by deposition of a fragment of serum amyloid A, an acute-phase reactant, in the kidneys, adrenals, intestine, spleen, lung, and testes (Chap. 112). Amyloidosis should be suspected in patients who have proteinuria between attacks; renal or rectal biopsy are used most often to establish the diagnosis. Risk factors include the M694V homozygousgenotype, positive family history (independent of FMF mutational status), the SAA 1 genotype, male gender, noncompliance with colchicine therapy, and having grown up in the Middle East.

Diagnosis

For typical cases, physicians experienced with FMF can often make the diagnosis on clinical grounds alone. Clinical criteria sets for FMF have been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity in parts of the world where the pretest probability of FMF is high. Genetic testing can provide a useful adjunct in ambiguous cases or for physicians not experienced in FMF. Most of the more severe disease-associated FMF mutations are in exon 10 of the gene, with a smaller group of milder variants in exon 2. An updated list of mutations for FMF and other hereditary recurrent fevers can be found online at http://fmf.igh.cnrs.fr/infevers/.

Genetic testing has permitted a broadening of the clinical spectrum and geographic distribution of FMF and may be of prognostic value. Most studies indicate that M694V homozygotes have an earlier age of onset and a higher frequency of arthritis, rash, and amyloidosis. In contrast, the E148Q variant is usually associated with milder disease. E148Q is sometimes found in cis with exon 10 mutations, which complicates the interpretation of genetic test results. Only 70% of patients with clinically typical FMF have two identifiable mutations in trans, suggesting either that current screening methods do not detect all of the relevant mutations or that one mutation may be sufficient to cause disease under some circumstances. In these cases clinical judgment is very important, and sometimes a therapeutic trial of colchicine may help to confirm the diagnosis. Genetic testing of unaffected individuals is usually inadvisable, because of the possibility of nonpenetrance and the potential impact of a positive test on future insurability.

If a patient is seen during his or her first attack, the differential diagnosis may be broad, although delimited by the specific organ involvement. After several attacks the differential diagnosis may include the other hereditary recurrent fever syndromes (Table 330-1); the syndrome of periodic fever with aphthous ulcers, pharyngitis, and cervical adenopathy (PFAPA); systemic-onset juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or adult Still's disease; porphyria; hereditary angioedema; inflammatory bowel disease; and, in women, gynecologic disorders.

Treatment: Familial Mediterranean Fever

The treatment of choice for FMF is daily oral colchicine, which decreases the frequency and intensity of attacks and prevents the development of amyloidosis in compliant patients. Intermittent dosing at the onset of attacks is not as effective as daily prophylaxis and is of unproven value in preventing amyloidosis. The usual adult dose of colchicine is 1.2每1.8 mg/d, which causes substantial reduction in symptoms in two-thirds of patients and some improvement in >90%. Children may require lower doses, although not proportionately to body weight.

Common side effects of colchicine include bloating, abdominal cramps, lactose intolerance, and diarrhea. They can be minimized by starting at a low dose and gradually advancing as tolerated, splitting the dose, use of simethecone for flatulence, and avoidance of dairy products. If taken by either parent at the time of conception, colchicine may cause a small increase in the risk of trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). In elderly patients with renal insufficiency, colchicine can cause a myoneuropathy characterized by proximal muscle weakness and elevation of the creatine kinase. Cyclosporine inhibits hepatic excretion of colchicine by its effects on the MDR-1 transport system, sometimes leading to colchicine toxicity in patients who have undergone renal transplantation for amyloidosis. Intravenous colchicine should generally not be administered to patients already taking oral colchicine, because severe, sometimes fatal, toxicity can occur in this setting.

There are no established alternatives for the small number of patients who do not respond to colchicine or cannot tolerate therapeutic dosages, although the IL-1 receptor antagonist and inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) are investigational. Bone marrow transplantation has been suggested for refractory FMF, but the risk-benefit ratio is currently regarded as unacceptable.
 
Other Hereditary Recurrent Fevers

Within 5 years of the discovery of the FMF gene, three additional genes causing five other hereditary recurrent fever syndromes were identified, catalyzing a paradigm shift in diagnosis and treatment of these disorders.

Tnf Receptor每Associated Periodic Syndrome (Traps)

TRAPS is caused by dominantly inherited mutations in the extracellular domains of the 55-kDa TNF receptor (TNFRSF1A, p55). Although originally described in a large Irish family (and hence the name familial Hibernian fever), TRAPS has a broad ethnic distribution. TRAPS episodes often begin in childhood. The duration of attacks ranges from 1每2 days to as long as several weeks, and in severe cases symptoms may be nearly continuous. In addition to peritoneal, pleural, and synovial attacks similar to FMF, TRAPS patients frequently have ocular inflammation (most often conjunctivitis and/or periorbital edema), and a distinctive migratory myalgia with overlying painful erythema may be present. TRAPS patients generally respond better to glucocorticoids than to prophylactic colchicine. About 15% develop amyloidosis. The diagnosis of TRAPS is based on the demonstration of TNFRSF1A mutations in the presence of characteristic symptoms. Leukocytes from patients with certain TRAPS mutations exhibit a defect in TNF receptor-shedding, possibly impairing normal homeostasis. However, a more complex picture is emerging, with a number of functional abnormalities, some of which are ligand-independent, contributing to the autoinflammatory phenotype. Etanercept, a TNF inhibitor, ameliorates TRAPS attacks, although its effect on amyloidosis is unproven. Perhaps because of the ligand-independent signaling abnormalities in TRAPS, IL-1 inhibition has been beneficial in some patients.

Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with Periodic Fever Syndrome (Hids)

HIDS is a recessively inherited recurrent fever syndrome found primarily in individuals of northern European ancestry. It is caused by mutations in mevalonate kinase (MVK), encoding an enzyme involved in the synthesis of cholesterol and nonsterol isoprenoids. Attacks usually begin in infancy, and last 3每5 days. Clinically distinctive features include painful cervical adenopathy, a diffuse maculopapular rash sometimes affecting the palms and soles, and aphthous ulcers; pleurisy is rare, as is amyloidosis. Although originally defined by the persistent elevation of serum IgD, disease activity is not related to IgD levels, and some patients with FMF or TRAPS may have modestly increased serum IgD. Moreover, occasional patients with MVK mutations and recurrent fever have normal IgD levels. All patients with mutations have markedly elevated urinary mevalonate levels during their febrile attacks, although the inflammatory manifestations are likely to be due to a deficiency of isoprenoids rather than an excess of mevalonate. There is currently no established treatment for HIDS, although intermittent or continuous IL-1 inhibition are investigational.

The Cryopyrinopathies, or Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes (Caps)

Three hereditary febrile syndromes, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS), Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS), and neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID), are all caused by mutations in NLRP3 (formerly known as CIAS1), the gene encoding cryopyrin (or NLRP3), and represent a clinical spectrum of disease. FCAS patients develop chills, fever, headache, arthralgia, conjunctivitis, and an urticaria-like rash in response to generalized cold exposure. In MWS, an urticarial rash is noted, but it is not usually induced by cold; MWS patients also develop fevers, abdominal pain, limb pain, arthritis, conjunctivitis, and, over time, sensorineural hearing loss. NOMID is the most severe of the three disorders, with chronic aseptic meningitis, a characteristic arthropathy, and rash. Like the FMF protein, pyrin, cryopyrin has an N-terminal PYRIN domain. Cryopyrin regulates IL-1 production through the formation of a macromolecular complex termed the inflammasome. Peripheral blood leukocytes from patients with FCAS, MWS, and NOMID release increased amounts of IL-1 upon in vitro stimulation, relative to healthy controls. Macrophages from cryopyrin-deficient mice exhibit decreased IL-1 production in response to certain gram-positive bacteria, bacterial RNA, and monosodium urate crystals. Patients with all three cryopyrino-pathies show a dramatic response to injections of IL-1 inhibitors. Increased IL-1 signaling is also a feature of the recently-described deficiency in the interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (DIRA), a recessively inherited disorder similarly responsive to anakinra treatment. In contrast to the cryopyrinopathies, DIRA presents with pustular skin lesions and multifocal sterile osteomyelitis, and fever is often not a prominent feature.
 
Further Readings

Aksentijevich I et al: An autoinflammatory disease with deficiency of the interleukin-1-receptor antagonist. N Engl J Med 360:2426, 2009[PMID: 19494218]  [Full Text]

 
Dinarello CA: Interleukin-1 and the autoinflammatory diseases. N Engl J Med 360:2467, 2009[PMID: 19494224]  [Full Text]

 
Goldbach-Manksy R et al: Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease responsive to interleukin-1 inhibition. N Engl J Med 355:581, 2006 

 
Hoffman HM et al: Prevention of cold-associated acute inflammation in familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome by interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Lancet 364:1779, 2004[PMID: 15541451]  [Full Text]

 
Hull KM et al: The TNF receptor每associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS). Emerging concepts of an autoinflammatory disorder. Medicine (Baltimore) 81:349, 2002[PMID: 12352631]  [Full Text]

 
Kastner DL et al: Autoinflammatory disease reloaded: a clinical perspective. Cell 140:784, 2010[PMID: 20303869]  [Full Text]

 
Kuijk LM et al: HMG-CoA reductase inhibition induces IL-1 release through Rac1/PI3K/PKB-dependent caspase-1 activation. Blood 112:3563, 2008[PMID: 18684863]  [Full Text]

 
Lachmann HJ et al: In vivo regulation of interleukin 1 in patients with cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes. J Exp Med 206:1029, 2009[PMID: 19364880]  [Full Text]

 
Masters SL et al: Horror autoinflammaticus: The molecular pathophysiology of autoinflammatory disease. Annu Rev Immunol 27:621, 2009[PMID: 19302049]  [Full Text]

 
Schroder K, Tschopp J: The inflammasomes. Cell 140: 140:821, 2010[PMID: 20303873]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
Chapter 331. Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders >
 

Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders: Introduction

Musculoskeletal complaints account for >315 million outpatient visits per year and nearly 20% of all outpatient visits in the United States. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate that 22% (46 million) of the U.S. population has physician-diagnosed arthritis and 19 million have significant functional limitation. While many patients will have self-limited conditions requiring minimal evaluation and only symptomatic therapy and reassurance, specific musculoskeletal presentations or their persistence may herald a more serious condition that requires further evaluation or laboratory testing to establish a diagnosis. The goal of the musculoskeletal evaluation is to formulate a differential diagnosis that leads to an accurate diagnosis and timely therapy, while avoiding excessive diagnostic testing and unnecessary treatment (Table 331-1). There are several urgent conditions that must be diagnosed promptly to avoid significant morbid or mortal sequelae. These "red flag" diagnoses include septic arthritis, acute crystal-induced arthritis (e.g., gout), and fracture. Each may be suspected by its acute onset and monarticular or focal musculoskeletal pain (see below).

Table 331-1 Evaluation of Patients with Musculoskeletal Complaints

 
 
Goals 
  Accurate diagnosis 
  Timely provision of therapy 
  Avoidance of unnecessary diagnostic testing 
Approach 
  Anatomic localization of complaint (articular vs. nonarticular) 
  Determination of the nature of the pathologic process(inflammatory vs. noninflammatory) 
  Determination of the extent of involvement (monarticular,polyarticular, focal, widespread) 
  Determination of chronology (acute vs. chronic) 
  Consider the most common disorders first 
  Formulation of a differential diagnosisentry 
 

 

Individuals with musculoskeletal complaints should be evaluated with a thorough history, a comprehensive physical and musculo-skeletal examination, and, if appropriate, laboratory testing. The initial encounter should determine whether the musculoskeletal complaint signals a red flag condition (septic arthritis, gout, or fracture) or not. The evaluation should proceed to ascertain if the complaint is (1) articular or nonarticular in origin, (2) inflammatory or noninflammatory in nature, (3) acute or chronic in duration, and (4) localized (monarticular) or widespread (polyarticular) in distribution.

With such an approach and an understanding of the pathophysiologic processes, the musculoskeletal complaint or presentation can be characterized (e.g., acute inflammatory monarthritis or a chronic noninflammatory, nonarticular widespread pain) to narrow the diagnostic possibilities. A diagnosis can be made in the vast majority of individuals. However, some patients will not fit immediately into an established diagnostic category. Many musculoskeletal disorders resemble each other at the outset, and some may take weeks or months to evolve into a readily recognizable diagnostic entity. This consideration should temper the desire to establish a definitive diagnosis at the first encounter.
 
Articular versus Nonarticular

The musculoskeletal evaluation must discriminate the anatomic origin(s) of the patient's complaint. For example, ankle pain can result from a variety of pathologic conditions involving disparate anatomic structures, including gonococcal arthritis, calcaneal fracture, Achilles tendinitis, plantar fasciitis, cellulitis, and peripheral or entrapment neuropathy. Distinguishing between articular and nonarticular conditions requires a careful and detailed examination. Articular structures include the synovium, synovial fluid, articular cartilage, intraarticular ligaments, joint capsule, and juxtaarticular bone. Nonarticular (or periarticular) structures, such as supportive extraarticular ligaments, tendons, bursae, muscle, fascia, bone, nerve, and overlying skin, may be involved in the pathologic process. Although musculoskeletal complaints are often ascribed to the joints, nonarticular disorders more frequently underlie such complaints. Distinguishing between these potential sources of pain may be challenging to the unskilled examiner. Articular disorders may be characterized by deep or diffuse pain, pain or limited range of motion on active and passive movement, and swelling (caused by synovial proliferation, effusion, or bony enlargement), crepitation, instability, "locking," or deformity. By contrast, nonarticular disorders tend to be painful on active, but not passive (or assisted), range of motion. Periarticular conditions often demonstrate point or focal tenderness in regions adjacent to articular structures, and have physical findings remote from the joint capsule. Moreover, nonarticular disorders seldom demonstrate swelling, crepitus, instability, or deformity of the joint itself.
 
Inflammatory versus Noninflammatory Disorders

In the course of a musculoskeletal evaluation, the examiner should determine the nature of the underlying pathologic process and whether inflammatory or noninflammatory findings exist. Inflammatory disorders may be infectious (infection with Neisseria gonorrhoea or Mycobacterium tuberculosis), crystal-induced (gout, pseudogout), immune-related [rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)], reactive (rheumatic fever, reactive arthritis), or idiopathic. Inflammatory disorders may be identified by any of the four cardinal signs of inflammation (erythema, warmth, pain, or swelling), systemic symptoms (fatigue, fever, rash, weight loss), or laboratory evidence of inflammation [elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP), thrombocytosis, anemia of chronic disease, or hypoalbuminemia]. Articular stiffness commonly accompanies chronic musculoskeletal disorders and can extend beyond the joint. However, the severity and duration of stiffness may be diagnostically important. Morning stiffness related to inflammatory disorders (such as RA or polymyalgia rheumatica) is precipitated by prolonged rest, is described as severe, lasts for hours, and may improve with activity or anti-inflammatory medications. By contrast, intermittent stiffness (also known as gel phenomenon), associated with noninflammatory conditions [such as osteoarthritis (OA)], is precipitated by brief periods of rest, usually lasts less than 60 minutes, and is exacerbated by activity. Fatigue may accompany inflammation (as seen in RA and polymyalgia rheumatica) but may also be a consequence of fibromyalgia (a noninflammatory disorder), anemia, cardiac failure, endocrinopathy, poor nutrition, chronic pain, poor sleep, or depression. Noninflammatory disorders may be related to trauma (rotator cuff tear), repetitive use (bursitis, tendinitis), degeneration or ineffective repair (OA), neoplasm (pigmented villonodular synovitis), or pain amplification (fibromyalgia). Noninflammatory disorders are often characterized by pain without synovial swelling or warmth, absence of inflammatory or systemic features, daytime gel phenomena rather than morning stiffness, and normal (for age) or negative laboratory investigations.

Identification of the nature of the underlying process and the site of the complaint will enable the examiner to characterize the musculoskeletal presentation (e.g., acute inflammatory monarthritis, chronic noninflammatory, nonarticular widespread pain), narrow the diagnostic considerations, and assess the need for immediate diagnostic or therapeutic intervention or for continued observation. Figure 331-1 presents an algorithmic approach to the evaluation of patients with musculoskeletal complaints. This approach is remarkably effective and relies on clinical and historic features, rather than laboratory testing, to diagnose many common rheumatic disorders.

Figure 331-1

 
 
 
Algorithm for the diagnosis of musculoskeletal complaints. An approach to formulating a differential diagnosis (shown in italics). CMC, carpometacarpal; CRP, C-reactive protein; DIP, distal interphalangeal; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; JA, juvenile arthritis; MCP, metacarpophalangeal; MTP, metatarsophalangeal; PIP, proximal interphalangeal; PMR, polymyalgia rheumatica; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
 
 


The algorithmic approach may be unnecessary in patients with the most commonly encountered ailments; as these can also be considered based on frequency and characteristic presentations. The most prevalent causes of musculoskeletal complaints are shown in Fig. 331-2. As trauma, fracture, overuse syndromes, and fibromyalgia are among the most common causes of presentation, these should be considered during the initial encounter. If these possibilities are excluded, other frequently occurring disorders should be considered according to the patient's age. Hence, those younger than 60 years are commonly affected by repetitive use/strain disorders, gout (men only), RA, spondyloarthritis, and uncommonly, infectious arthritis. Patients over age 60 years are frequently affected by OA, crystal (gout and pseudogout) arthritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, osteoporotic fracture, and uncommonly, septic arthritis. These conditions are between 10 and 100 times more prevalent than other serious autoimmune conditions, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, polymyositis, and vasculitis.

Figure 331-2

 
 
 
Algorithm for consideration of the most common musculoskeletal conditions. GC, gonococcal; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease.
 
 

Clinical History

Additional historic features may reveal important clues to the diagnosis. Aspects of the patient profile, complaint chronology, extent of joint involvement, and precipitating factors can provide important information. Certain diagnoses are more frequent in different age groups (Fig. 331-2). SLE and reactive arthritis occur more frequently in the young, whereas fibromyalgia and RA are frequent in middle age, and OA and polymyalgia rheumatica are more prevalent among the elderly. Diagnostic clustering is also evident when sex and race are considered. Gout and the spondyloarthropathies (e.g., ankylosing spondylitis) are more common in men, whereas RA, fibromyalgia, and lupus are more frequent in women. Racial predilections may be evident. Thus, polymyalgia rheumatica, giant cell arteritis, and Wegener's granulomatosis commonly affect whites, whereas sarcoidosis and SLE more commonly affect African Americans. Familial aggregation may be seen in disorders such as ankylosing spondylitis, gout, and Heberden's nodes of OA.

The chronology of the complaint is an important diagnostic feature and can be divided into the onset, evolution, and duration. The onset of disorders such as septic arthritis or gout tends to be abrupt, whereas OA, RA, and fibromyalgia may have more indolent presentations. The patients' complaints may evolve differently and be classified as chronic (OA), intermittent (crystal or Lyme arthritis), migratory (rheumatic fever, gonococcal or viral arthritis), or additive (RA, psoriatic arthritis). Musculoskeletal disorders are typically classified as acute or chronic based upon a symptom duration that is either less than or greater than 6 weeks, respectively. Acute arthropathies tend to be infectious, crystal-induced, or reactive. Chronic conditions include noninflammatory or immunologic arthritides (e.g., OA, RA) and nonarticular disorders (e.g., fibromyalgia).

The extent or distribution of articular involvement is often informative. Articular disorders are classified based on the number of joints involved, as either monarticular (one joint), oligoarticular or pauciarticular (two or three joints), or polyarticular (four or more joints). Although crystal and infectious arthritis are often mono- or oligoarticular, OA and RA are polyarticular disorders. Nonarticular disorders may be classified as either focal or widespread. Complaints secondary to tendinitis or carpal tunnel syndrome are typically focal, whereas weakness and myalgia, caused by polymyositis or fibromyalgia, are more diffuse in their presentation. Joint involvement in RA tends to be symmetric, whereas the spondyloarthropathies and gout are often asymmetric and oligoarticular. The upper extremities are frequently involved in RA and OA, whereas lower extremity arthritis is characteristic of reactive arthritis and gout at their onset. Involvement of the axial skeleton is common in OA and ankylosing spondylitis but is infrequent in RA, with the notable exception of the cervical spine.

The clinical history should also identify precipitating events, such as trauma (osteonecrosis, meniscal tear), drug administration (Table 331-2), or antecedent or intercurrent illnesses (rheumatic fever, reactive arthritis, hepatitis), that may have contributed to the patient's complaint. Certain comorbidities may predispose to musculoskeletal consequences. This is especially so for diabetes mellitus (carpal tunnel syndrome), renal insufficiency (gout), psoriasis (psoriatic arthritis), myeloma (low back pain), cancer (myositis), and osteoporosis (fracture) or when using certain drugs such as glucocorticoids (osteonecrosis, septic arthritis) and diuretics or chemotherapy (gout) (Table 331-2).

Table 331-2 Drug-Induced Musculoskeletal Conditions

 
 
Arthralgias  
  Quinidine, cimetidine, quinolones, chronic acyclovir, interferon, IL-2, nicardipine, vaccines, rifabutin, aromatase and HIVprotease inhibitors 
Myalgias/myopathy  
  Glucocorticoids, penicillamine, hydroxychloroquine, AZT, lovastatin, simvastatin, pravastatin, clofibrate, interferon, IL-2, alcohol, cocaine, taxol, docetaxel, colchicine, quinolones, cyclosporine, protease inhibitors 
Tendon rupture/tendinitis  
  Quinolones, glucocorticoids, isotretinoin 
Gout  
  Diuretics, aspirin, cytotoxics, cyclosporine, alcohol, moonshine, ethambutol 
Drug-induced lupus  
  Hydralazine, procainamide, quinidine, phenytoin, carbamazepine, methyldopa, isoniazid, chlorpromazine, lithium, penicillamine, tetracyclines, TNF inhibitors, ACE inhibitors, ticlopidine 
Osteonecrosis  
  Glucocorticoids, alcohol, radiation, bisphosphonates 
Osteopenia  
  Glucocorticoids, chronic heparin, phenytoin, methotrexate 
Scleroderma  
  Vinyl chloride, bleomycin, pentazocine, organic solvents, carbidopa, tryptophan, rapeseed oil 
Vasculitis  
  Allopurinol, amphetamines, cocaine, thiazides, penicillamine, propylthiouracil, montelukast, TNF inhibitors, hepatitis B vaccine, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 
 


Abbreviations:ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; IL-2, interleukin 2; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
 

Lastly, a thorough rheumatic review of systems may disclose useful diagnostic information. A variety of musculoskeletal disorders may be associated with systemic features such as fever (SLE, infection), rash (SLE, psoriatic arthritis), nail abnormalities (psoriatic or reactive arthritis), myalgias (fibromyalgia, statin- or drug-induced myopathy), or weakness (polymyositis, neuropathy). In addition, some conditions are associated with involvement of other organ systems including the eyes (Beh?et's disease, sarcoidosis, spondyloarthritis), gastrointestinal tract (scleroderma, inflammatory bowel disease), genitourinary tract (reactive arthritis, gonococcemia), or the nervous system (Lyme disease, vasculitis).
 
Rheumatologic Evaluation of the Elderly

The incidence of rheumatic diseases rises with age, such that 58% of those >65 years will have joint complaints. Musculoskeletal disorders in elderly patients are often not diagnosed because the signs and symptoms may be insidious, overlooked, or overshadowed by comorbidities. These difficulties are compounded by the diminished reliability of laboratory testing in the elderly, who often manifest nonpathologic abnormal results. For example, the ESR may be misleadingly elevated, and low-titer positive tests for rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) may be seen in up to 15% of elderly patients. Although nearly all rheumatic disorders afflict the elderly, certain diseases and drug-induced disorders (Table 331-2) are more common in this age group. The elderly should be approached in the same manner as other patients with musculoskeletal complaints, but with an emphasis on identifying the potential rheumatic consequences of medical comorbidities and therapies. OA, osteoporosis, gout, pseudogout, polymyalgia rheumatica, vasculitis, and drug-induced disorders are all more common in the elderly than in other individuals. The physical examination should identify the nature of the musculoskeletal complaint as well as coexisting diseases that may influence diagnosis and choice of treatment.
 
Rheumatologic Evaluation of the Hospitalized Patient

Inpatient and outpatient evaluations and diagnostic considerations may differ, owing to greater symptom severity, more acute presentations, and greater interplay of comorbidities with the hospitalized patient. Patients with rheumatic disorders tend to be admitted for one of several reasons: (1) acute onset of inflammatory arthritis; (2) undiagnosed systemic or febrile illness; (3) musculoskeletal trauma; or (4) exacerbation or deterioration of an existing autoimmune disorder (e.g., SLE); or (5) new medical comorbidities (e.g., thrombotic event, lymphoma, infection) arising in patients with articular or connective tissue disorders. Notably, in the United States, rheumatic patients are seldom if ever admitted because of widespread pain, serologic abnormalities, or for the initiation of new therapies, although this is routinely done in other parts of the world.

Acute monarticular inflammatory arthritis may be a "red flag condition" (e.g., septic arthritis, gout, pseudogout) that will require arthrocentesis. However, new-onset polyarticular inflammatory arthritis will have a wider differential diagnosis (e.g., RA, hepatitis-related arthritis, serum sickness, drug-induced lupus, polyarticular septic arthritis) and may require targeted laboratory investigations rather than synovial fluid analysis. Patients with febrile, multisystem disorders will require exclusion of infectious or neoplastic etiologies and an evaluation driven by dominant symptoms with the greatest specificity. Conditions worthy of consideration may include vasculitis (giant cell arteritis in the elderly or polyarteritis nodosa in younger patients), adult-onset Still's disease, SLE, anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome, and sarcoidosis. As misdiagnosis of connective tissue disorders is common, patients who present with a reported preexisting rheumatic condition (e.g., SLE, RA, ankylosing spondylitis) should have their diagnosis confirmed by careful history, physicial and musculoskeletal examination, and detailed review of their medical records. It is important to note that when rheumatic disease patients are admitted to the hospital, it is usually for medical problems unrelated to their autoimmune disease, but rather because of either a comorbid condition or complication of drug therapy. Patients with chronic inflammatory disorders (e.g., RA, SLE, psoriasis, etc.) have an augmented risk of infection, cardiovascular events, and neoplasia.

Certain conditions, such as acute gout, can be precipitated in hospitalized patients by surgery, dehydration, or other events and should be considered when hospitalized patients are evaluated for the acute onset of a musculoskeletal condition. It is also common for positive results obtained from overly aggressive and unfocused laboratory testing to generate the need for a full rheumatologic evaluation.
 
Physical Examination

The goal of the physical examination is to ascertain the structures involved, the nature of the underlying pathology, the functional consequences of the process, and the presence of systemic or extraarticular manifestations. A knowledge of topographic anatomy is necessary to identify the primary site(s) of involvement and differentiate articular from nonarticular disorders. The musculoskeletal examination depends largely on careful inspection, palpation, and a variety of specific physical maneuvers to elicit diagnostic signs (Table 331-3). Although most articulations of the appendicular skeleton can be examined in this manner, adequate inspection and palpation are not possible for many axial (e.g., zygapophyseal) and inaccessible (e.g., sacroiliac or hip) joints. For such joints, there is a greater reliance upon specific maneuvers and imaging for assessment.

Table 331-3 Glossary of Musculoskeletal Terms

 
 
Crepitus  
  A palpable (less commonly audible) vibratory or crackling sensation elicited with joint motion; fine joint crepitus is common and often insignificant in large joints; coarse joint crepitus indicates advanced cartilaginous and degenerative changes (as in osteoarthritis) 
Subluxation  
  Alteration of joint alignment such that articulating surfaces incompletely approximate each other 
Dislocation  
  Abnormal displacement of articulating surfaces such that the surfaces are not in contact 
Range of motion  
  For diarthrodial joints, the arc of measurable movement through which the joint moves in a single plane 
Contracture  
  Loss of full movement resulting from a fixed resistance caused either by tonic spasm of muscle (reversible) or by fibrosis of periarticular structures (permanent) 
Deformity  
  Abnormal shape or size of a structure; may result from bony hypertrophy, malalignment of articulating structures, or damage to periarticular supportive structures 
Enthesitis  
  Inflammation of the entheses (tendinous or ligamentous insertions on bone) 
Epicondylitis  
  Infection or inflammation involving an epicondyle 
 

 

Examination of involved and uninvolved joints will determine whether pain, warmth, erythema, or swelling is present. The locale and level of pain elicited by palpation or movement should be quantified. One example would be to count the number of tender joints on palpation of 28 easily examined joints [proximal interphalangeals (PIPs), metacarpophalangeals (MCPs), wrists, elbows, shoulders, and knees] (with a range of 0每28). Similarly, the number of swollen joints (0每28) can be counted and recorded. Careful examination should distinguish between true articular swelling (caused by synovial effusion or synovial proliferation) and nonarticular (or periarticular) involvement, which usually extends beyond the normal joint margins. Synovial effusion can be distinguished from synovial hypertrophy or bony hypertrophy by palpation or specific maneuvers. For example, small to moderate knee effusions may be identified by the "bulge sign" or "ballottement of the patellae." Bursal effusions (e.g., effusions of the olecranon or prepatellar bursa) are often focal, periarticular, overlie bony prominences, and are fluctuant with sharply defined borders. Joint stability can be assessed by palpation and by the application of manual stress. Subluxation or dislocation, which may be secondary to traumatic, mechanical, or inflammatory causes, can be assessed by inspection and palpation. Joint swelling orvolume can be assessed by palpation. Distention of the articular capsule usually causes pain and evident swelling. The patient will attempt to minimize the pain by maintaining the joint in the position of least intraarticular pressure and greatest volume, usually partial flexion. For this reason, inflammatory effusions may give rise to flexion contractures. Clinically, this may be detected as fluctuant or "squishy" swelling, with grapelike compressibility. Inflammation may result in fixed flexion deformities, or diminished range of motion〞especially on extension, when joint volumes are decreased. Active and passive range of motion should be assessed in all planes, with contralateral comparison. Serial evaluations of the joints should record the number of tender and swollen joints and loss of a normal range of motion, using a goniometer to quantify the arc of movement. Each joint should be passively manipulated through its full range of motion (including, as appropriate, flexion, extension, rotation, abduction, adduction, lateral bending, inversion, eversion, supination, pronation, medial/lateral deviation, plantar- or dorsiflexion). Limitation of motion is frequently caused by effusion, pain, deformity, or contracture. If passive motion exceeds active motion, a periarticular process (e.g., tendinitis, tendon rupture, or myopathy) should be considered. Contractures may reflect antecedent synovial inflammation or trauma. Minor joint crepitus is common during joint palpation and maneuvers, but may indicate significant cartilage degeneration as it becomes coarser (e.g., OA). Joint deformity usually indicates a long-standing or aggressive pathologic process. Deformities may result from ligamentous destruction, soft tissue contracture, bony enlargement, ankylosis, erosive disease, or subluxation. Examination of the musculature will document strength, atrophy, pain, or spasm. Appendicular muscle weakness should be characterized as proximal or distal. Muscle strength should be assessed by observing the patient's performance (e.g., walking, rising from a chair, grasping, writing). Strength may also be graded on a 5-point scale: 0 for no movement; 1 for trace movement or twitch; 2 for movement with gravity eliminated; 3 for movement against gravity only; 4 for movement against gravity and resistance; and 5 for normal strength. The examiner should assess for often-overlooked nonarticular or periarticular involvement, especially when articular complaints are not supported by objective findings referable to the joint capsule. The identification of soft tissue/nonarticular pain will prevent unwarranted and often expensive additional evaluations. Specific maneuvers may reveal common nonarticular abnormalities, such as a carpal tunnel syndrome (which can be identified by Tinel's or Phalen's sign). Other examples of soft tissue abnormalities include olecranon bursitis, epicondylitis (e.g., tennis elbow), enthesitis (e.g., Achilles tendinitis), and tender trigger points associated with fibromyalgia.
 
Approach to Regional Rheumatic Complaints

Although all patients should be evaluated in a logical and thorough manner, many cases with focal musculoskeletal complaints are caused by commonly encountered disorders that exhibit a predictable pattern of onset, evolution, and localization; they can often be diagnosed immediately on the basis of limited historic information and selected maneuvers or tests. Although nearly every joint could be approached in this manner, the evaluation of four common involved anatomic regions〞the hand, shoulder, hip, and knee〞are reviewed here.

Hand Pain

Focal or unilateral hand pain may result from trauma, overuse, infection, or a reactive or crystal-induced arthritis. By contrast, bilateral hand complaints commonly suggest a degenerative (e.g., OA), systemic, or inflammatory/immune (e.g., RA) etiology. The distribution or pattern of joint involvement is highly suggestive of certain disorders (Fig. 331-3). Thus, OA (or degenerative arthritis) may manifest as distal interphalangeal (DIP) and PIP joint pain with bony hypertrophy sufficient to produce Heberden's and Bouchard's nodes, respectively. Pain, with or without bony swelling, involving the base of the thumb (first carpometacarpal joint) is also highly suggestive of OA. By contrast, RA tends to involve the PIP, MCP, intercarpal, and carpometacarpal joints (wrist) with pain, prolonged stiffness, and palpable synovial tissue hypertrophy. Psoriatic arthritis may mimic the pattern of joint involvement seen in OA (DIP and PIP joints), but can be distinguished by the presence of inflammatory signs (erythema, warmth, synovial swelling), with or without carpal involvement, nail pitting, or onycholysis. Hemochromatosis should be considered when degenerative changes (bony hypertrophy) are seen at the second and third MCP joints with associated chondrocalcinosis or episodic, inflammatory wrist arthritis.

Figure 331-3

 
 
 
Sites of hand or wrist involvement and their potential disease associations. CMC, carpometacarpal; DIP, distal interphalangeal; MCP, metacarpophalangeal; OA, osteoarthritis; PIP, proximal interphalangeal; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus. (From Cush et al, with permission.)
 
 

Soft tissue swelling over the dorsum of the hand and wrist may suggest an inflammatory extensor tendon tenosynovitis possibly caused by gonococcal infection, gout, or inflammatory arthritis (e.g., RA). Tenosynovitis is suggested by localized warmth, swelling, or pitting edema and may be confirmed when the soft tissue swelling tracks with tendon movement, such as flexion and extension of fingers or when pain is induced while stretching the extensor tendon sheaths (flexing the digits distal to the MCP joints and maintaining the wrist in a fixed, neutral position).

Focal wrist pain localized to the radial aspect may be caused by de Quervain's tenosynovitis resulting from inflammation of the tendon sheath(s) involving the abductor pollicis longus or extensor pollicis brevis (Fig. 331-3). This commonly results from overuse or follows pregnancy and may be diagnosed with Finkelstein's test. A positive result is present when radial wrist pain is induced after the thumb is flexed and placed inside a clenched fist and the patient actively deviates the hand downward with ulnar deviation at the wrist. Carpal tunnel syndrome is another common disorder of the upper extremity and results from compression of the median nerve within the carpal tunnel. Manifestations include pain in the wrist that may radiate with paresthesia to the thumb, second and third fingers, and radial half of the fourth finger and, at times, atrophy of thenar musculature. Carpal tunnel syndrome is commonly associated with pregnancy, edema, trauma, OA, inflammatory arthritis, and infiltrative disorders (e.g., amyloidosis). The diagnosis may be suggested by a positive Tinel's or Phalen's sign. With each test, paresthesia in a median nerve distribution is induced or increased by either "thumping" the volar aspect of the wrist (Tinel's sign) or pressing the extensor surfaces of both flexed wrists against each other (Phalen's sign). The variable sensitivity of these tests may require nerve conduction velocity testing to confirm a suspected diagnosis.

Shoulder Pain

During the evaluation of shoulder disorders, the examiner should carefully note any history of trauma, fibromyalgia, infection, inflammatory disease, occupational hazards, or previous cervical disease. In addition, the patient should be questioned as to the activities or movement(s) that elicit shoulder pain. While arthritis is suggested by pain on movement in all planes, pain with specific active motion suggests a periarticular (nonarticular) process. Shoulder pain may originate in the glenohumeral or acromioclavicular joints, subacromial (subdeltoid) bursa, periarticular soft tissues (e.g., fibromyalgia, rotator cuff tear/tendinitis), or cervical spine (Fig. 331-4). Shoulder pain is referred frequently from the cervical spine but may also be referred from intrathoracic lesions (e.g., a Pancoast tumor) or from gall bladder, hepatic, or diaphragmatic disease. Fibromyalgia should be suspected when glenohumeral pain is accompanied by diffuse periarticular (i.e., subacromial, bicipital) pain and tender points (i.e., trapezius or supraspinatus). The shoulder should be put through its full range of motion both actively and passively (with examiner assistance): forward flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation. Manual inspection of the periarticular structures will often provide important diagnostic information. Glenohumeral involvement is best detected by placing the thumb over the glenohumeral joint and applying pressure anteriorly while internally and externally rotating the humeral head. The examiner should apply direct manual pressure over the subacromial bursa that lies lateral to and immediately beneath the acromion (Fig. 331-4). Subacromial bursitis is a frequent cause of shoulder pain. Anterior to the subacromial bursa, the bicipital tendon traverses the bicipital groove. This tendon is best identified by palpating it in its groove as the patient rotates the humerus internally and externally. Direct pressure over the tendon may reveal pain indicative of bicipital tendinitis. Palpation of the acromioclavicular joint may disclose local pain, bony hypertrophy, or, uncommonly, synovial swelling. Whereas OA and RA commonly affect the acromioclavicular joint, OA seldom involves the glenohumeral joint, unless there is a traumatic or occupational cause. The glenohumeral joint is best palpated anteriorly by placing the thumb over the humeral head (just medial and inferior to the coracoid process) and having the patient rotate the humerus internally and externally. Pain localized to this region is indicative of glenohumeral pathology. Synovial effusion or tissue is seldom palpable but, if present, may suggest infection, RA, or an acute tear of the rotator cuff.

Figure 331-4

 
 
 
Origins of shoulder pain. The schematic diagram of the shoulder indicates with arrows the most common causes and locations of shoulder pain.
 
 

Rotator cuff tendinitis or tear is a very common cause of shoulder pain. The rotator cuff is formed by the tendons of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis muscles. Rotator cuff tendinitis is suggested by pain on active abduction (but not passive abduction), pain over the lateral deltoid muscle, night pain, and evidence of the impingement sign. This maneuver is performed by the examiner raising the patient's arm into forced flexion while stabilizing and preventing rotation of the scapula. A positive sign is present if pain develops before 180∼ of forward flexion. A complete tear of the rotator cuff is more common in the elderly and often results from trauma; it may manifest in the same manner as tendinitis but is less common. The diagnosis is also suggested by the drop arm test in which the patient is unable to maintain his or her arm outstretched once it is passively abducted. If the patient is unable to hold the arm up once 90∼ of abduction is reached, the test is positive. Tendinitis or tear of the rotator cuff can be confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or ultrasound.

Knee Pain

Knee pain may result from intraarticular (OA, RA) or periarticular (anserine bursitis, collateral ligament strain) processes or be referred from hip pathology. A careful history should delineate the chronology of the knee complaint and whether there are predisposing conditions, trauma, or medications that might underlie the complaint. For example, patellofemoral disease (e.g., OA) may cause anterior knee pain that worsens with climbing stairs. Observation of the patient's gait is also important. The knee should be carefully inspected in the upright (weight-bearing) and prone positions for swelling, erythema, malalignment, visible trauma (contusion, laceration), or muscle wasting. The most common form of malalignment in the knee is genu varum (bowlegs) or genu valgum (knock-knees). Bony swelling of the knee joint commonly results from hypertrophic osseous changes seen with disorders such as OA and neuropathic arthropathy. Swelling caused by hypertrophy of the synovium or synovial effusion may manifest as a fluctuant, ballotable, or soft tissue enlargement in the suprapatellar pouch (suprapatellar reflection of the synovial cavity) or regions lateral and medial to the patella. Synovial effusions may also be detected by balloting the patella downward toward the femoral groove or by eliciting a "bulge sign." With the knee extended the examiner should manually compress, or "milk," synovial fluid down from the suprapatellar pouch and lateral to the patellae. The application of manual pressure lateral to the patella may cause an observable shift in synovial fluid (bulge) to the medial aspect. The examiner should note that this maneuver is only effective in detecting small to moderate effusions (<100 mL). Inflammatory disorders such as RA, gout, pseudogout, and reactive arthritis may involve the knee joint and produce significant pain, stiffness, swelling, or warmth. A popliteal or Baker's cyst is best palpated with the knee partially flexed and is best viewed posteriorly with the patient standing and knees fully extended to visualize isolated or unilateral popliteal swelling or fullness.

Anserine bursitis is an often missed periarticular cause of knee pain in adults. The pes anserine bursa underlies the insertion of the conjoined tendons (sartorius, gracilis, semitendinosis) on the anteromedial proximal tibia and may be painful following trauma, overuse, or inflammation. It is often tender in patients with fibromyalgia, obesity, and knee osteoarthritis. Other forms of bursitis may also present as knee pain. The prepatellar bursa is superficial and is located over the inferior portion of the patella. The infrapatellar bursa is deeper and lies beneath the patellar ligament before its insertion on the tibial tubercle.

Internal derangement of the knee may result from trauma or degenerative processes. Damage to the meniscal cartilage (medial or lateral) frequently presents as chronic or intermittent knee pain. Such an injury should be suspected when there is a history of trauma, athletic activity, or chronic knee arthritis, and when the patient relates symptoms of "locking," clicking, or "giving way" of the joint. With the knee flexed 90∼ and the patient's foot on the table, pain elicited during palpation over the joint line or when the knee is stressed laterally or medially may suggest a meniscal tear. A positive McMurray test may also indicate a meniscal tear. To perform this test, the knee is first flexed at 90∼, and the leg is then extended while the lower extremity is simultaneously torqued medially or laterally. A painful click during inward rotation may indicate a lateral meniscus tear, and pain during outward rotation may indicate a tear in the medial meniscus. Lastly, damage to the cruciate ligaments should be suspected with acute onset of pain, possibly with swelling, a history of trauma, or a synovial fluid aspirate that is grossly bloody. Examination of the cruciate ligaments is best accomplished by eliciting a drawer sign. With the patient recumbent, the knee should be partially flexed and the foot stabilized on the examining surface. The examiner should manually attempt to displace the tibia anteriorly or posteriorly with respect to the femur. If anterior movement is detected, then anterior cruciate ligament damage is likely. Conversely, significant posterior movement may indicate posterior cruciate damage. Contralateral comparison will assist the examiner in detecting significant anterior or posterior movement.

Hip Pain

The hip is best evaluated by observing the patient's gait and assessing range of motion. The vast majority of patients reporting "hip pain" localize their pain unilaterally to the posterior gluteal musculature (Fig. 331-5). Such pain tends to radiate down the posterolateral aspect of the thigh and may or may not be associated with complaints of low back pain. This presentation frequently results from degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine or disks and commonly follows a dermatomal distribution with involvement of nerve roots between L4 and S1. Sciatica is caused by impingement of the L4, L5, or S1 nerve (i.e., from a herniated disk) and manifests as unilateralneuropathic pain extending from the gluteal region down the posterolateral leg to the foot. Some individuals instead localize their "hip pain" laterally to the area overlying the trochanteric bursa. Because of the depth of this bursa, swelling and warmth are usually absent. Diagnosis of trochanteric bursitis can be confirmed by inducing point tenderness over the trochanteric bursa. Gluteal and trochanteric pain may also indicate underlying fibromyalgia. Range of movement may be limited by pain. Pain in the hip joint is less common and tends to be located anteriorly, over the inguinal ligament; it may radiate medially to the groin. Uncommonly, ilio-psoas bursitis may mimic true hip joint pain. Diagnosis of iliopsoas bursitis may be suggested by a history of trauma or inflammatory arthritis. Pain associated with iliopsoas bursitis is localized to the groin or anterior thigh and tends to worsen with hyperextension of the hip; many patients prefer to flex and externally rotate the hip to reduce the pain from a distended bursa.

Figure 331-5

 
 
 
Origins of hip pain and dysesthesias. (From Cush et al, with permission.)
 
 
 
Laboratory Investigations

The vast majority of musculoskeletal disorders can be easily diagnosed by a complete history and physical examination. An additional objective of the initial encounter is to determine whether additional investigations or immediate therapy is required. A number of features indicate the need for additional evaluation. Monarticular conditions require additional evaluation, as do traumatic or inflammatory conditions and conditions accompanied by neurologic changes or systemic manifestations of serious disease. Finally, individuals with chronic symptoms (>6 weeks), especially when there has been a lack of response to symptomatic measures, are candidates for additional evaluation. The extent and nature of the additional investigation should be dictated by the clinical features and suspected pathologic process. Laboratory tests should be used to confirm a specific clinical diagnosis and not be used to screen or evaluate patients with vague rheumatic complaints. Indiscriminate use of broad batteries of diagnostic tests and radiographic procedures is rarely a useful or cost-effective means to establish a diagnosis.

Besides a complete blood count, including a white blood cell (WBC) and differential count, the routine evaluation should include a determination of an acute-phase reactant such as the ESR or CRP, which can be useful in discriminating inflammatory from noninflammatory disorders. Both are inexpensive, easily obtained, and may be elevated with infection, inflammation, autoimmune disorders, neoplasia, pregnancy, renal insufficiency, advanced age, and hyperlipidemia. Extreme elevation of the acute-phase reactants (CRP, ESR) is seldom seen without evidence of serious illness (e.g., sepsis, pleuropericarditis, polymyalgia rheumatica, giant cell arteritis, adult Still's disease).

Serum uric acid determinations are useful in the diagnosis of gout and in monitoring the response to urate-lowering therapy. Uric acid, the end product of purine metabolism, is primarily excreted in the urine. Serum values range from 238 to 516 mol/L (4.0每8.6 mg/dL) in men; the lower values [178每351 mol/L (3.0每5.9 mg/dL)] seen in women are caused by the uricosuric effects of estrogen. Urinary uric acid levels are normally <750 mg per 24 h. Although hyperuricemia [especially levels >535 mol/L (9 mg/dL)] is associated with an increased incidence of gout and nephrolithiasis, levels may not correlate with the severity of articular disease. Uric acid levels (and the risk of gout) may be increased by inborn errors of metabolism (Lesch-Nyhan syndrome), disease states (renal insufficiency, myeloproliferative disease, psoriasis), or drugs (alcohol, cytotoxic therapy, thiazides). Although nearly all patients with gout will demonstrate hyperuricemia at some time during their illness, up to 5% of patients with an acute gouty attack will have normal serum uric acid levels, presumably from acute inflammation augmented excretion of uric acid. Monitoring serum uric acid may be useful in assessing the response to hypouricemic therapy or chemotherapy as the goal of therapy is to lower serum urate below 6 mg/dL.

Serologic tests for rheumatoid factor (RF), cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), complement levels, Lyme and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), or antistreptolysin O (ASO) titer should be carried out only when there is clinical evidence to suggest an associated diagnosis, as these have poor predictive value when used for screening, especially when the pretest probability is low. Although 4每5% of a healthy population will have positive tests for RF and ANAs, only 1% and <0.4% of the population will have RA or SLE, respectively. IgM RF (autoantibodies against the Fc portion of IgG) is found in 80% of patients with RA and may also be seen in low titers in patients with chronic infections (tuberculosis, leprosy, hepatitis); other autoimmune diseases (SLE, Sj?gren's syndrome); and chronic pulmonary, hepatic, or renal diseases. When considering RA, both serum RF and anti-CCP antibodies should be obtained as these are complementary. Both are comparably sensitive but CCP antibodies are more specific than RF. In RA, the presence of anti-CCP and rheumatoid factor antibodies may indicate a greater risk for more severe, erosive polyarthritis. ANAs are found in nearly all patients with SLE and may also be seen in patients with other autoimmune diseases (polymyositis, scleroderma, antiphospholipid syndrome, Sjogren's syndrome), drug-induced lupus (resulting from hydralazine, procainamide, quinidine, tetracyclines, tumor necrosis factor inhibitors), chronic liver or renal disorders, and advanced age. Positive ANAs are found in 5% of adults and in up to 14% of elderly or chronically ill individuals. The ANA test is very sensitive but poorly specific for lupus, as <5% of all positive results will be caused by lupus alone. The interpretation of a positive ANA test may depend on the magnitude of the titer and the pattern observed by immunofluorescence microscopy (Table 331-4). Diffuse and speckled patterns are least specific, whereas a peripheral, or rim, pattern [related to autoantibodies against double-strand (native) DNA] is highly specific and suggestive of lupus. Centromeric patterns are seen in patients with limited scleroderma [calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal involvement, sclerodactyly, telangiectasia (CREST) syndrome] or primary biliary sclerosis, and nucleolar patterns may be seen in patients with diffuse systemic sclerosis or inflammatory myositis.

Table 331-4 Antinuclear Antibody (Ana) Patterns and Clinical Associations

 
 
ANA Pattern Antigen Identified Clinical Correlate 
Diffuse Deoxyribonucl eoprotein Histones Nonspecific Drug-induced lupus, lupus 
Peripheral(rim) ds-DNA 50% of SLE (specific) 
Speckled U1-RNP 90% of MCTD 
  Sm 30% of SLE (specific) 
  Ro (SS-A) Sj?grens 60%, SCLE, neonatal lupus, ANA(-) lupus 
  La (SS-B) 50% of Sj?grens, 15% lupus 
  Scl-70 40% of diffuse scleroderma 
  PM-1 Polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis 
  Jo-1 PM w/pneumonitis + arthritis 
Nucleolar RNA polymerase I, others 40% of PSS 
Centromere Kinetochore 75% CREST (limited scleroderma) 
 

 

Aspiration and analysis of synovial fluid are always indicated in acute monarthritis or when an infectious or crystal-induced arthropathy is suspected. Synovial fluid may distinguish between noninflammatory and inflammatory processes by analysis of the appearance, viscosity, and cell count. Tests for synovial fluid glucose, protein, lactate dehydrogenase, lactic acid, or autoantibodies are not recommended as they have no diagnostic value. Normal synovial fluid is clear or a pale straw color and is viscous, primarily because of the high levels of hyaluronate. Noninflammatory syno-vial fluid is clear, viscous, and amber-colored, with a white blood cell count of <2000/L and a predominance of mononuclear cells. The viscosity of synovial fluid is assessed by expressing fluid from the syringe one drop at a time. Normally, there is a stringing effect, with a long tail behind each synovial drop. Effusions caused by OA or trauma will have normal viscosity. Inflammatory fluid is turbid and yellow, with an increased white cell count (2000每50,000/L) and a polymorphonuclear leukocyte predominance. Inflammatory fluid has reduced viscosity, diminished hyaluronate, and little or no tail following each drop of synovial fluid. Such effusions are found in RA, gout, and other inflammatory arthritides. Septic fluid is opaque and purulent, with a WBC count usually >50,000/L, a predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (>75%), and low viscosity. Such effusions are typical of septic arthritis but may occur with RA or gout. In addition, hemorrhagic synovial fluid may be seen with trauma, hemarthrosis, or neuropathic arthritis. An algorithm for synovial fluid aspiration and analysis is shown in Fig. 331-6. Synovial fluid should be analyzed immediately for appearance, viscosity, and cell count. Monosodium urate crystals (observed in gout) are seen by polarized microscopy and are long, needle-shaped, negatively birefringent, and usually intracellular. In chondrocalcinosis and pseudogout, calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals are usually short, rhomboid-shaped, and positively birefringent. Whenever infection is suspected, synovial fluid should be Gram-stained and cultured appropriately. If gonococcal arthritis is suspected, immediate plating of the fluid on appropriate culture medium is indicated. Synovial fluid from patients with chronic monarthritis should also be cultured for M. tuberculosis and fungi. Last, it should be noted that crystal-induced and septic arthritis occasionally occur together in the same joint.

Figure 331-6

 
 
 
Algorithmic approach to the use and interpretation of synovial fluid aspiration and analysis. PMNs, polymorphonuclear (leukocytes); WBC, white blood cell (count).
 
 
 
Diagnostic Imaging in Joint Diseases

Conventional radiography has been a valuable tool in the diagnosis and staging of articular disorders. Plain x-rays are most appropriate when there is a history of trauma, suspected chronic infection, progressive disability, or monarticular involvement; when therapeutic alterations are considered; or when a baseline assessment is desired for what appears to be a chronic process. However, in acute inflammatory arthritis, early radiography is rarely helpful in establishing a diagnosis and may only reveal soft tissue swelling or juxtaarticular demineralization. As the disease progresses, calcification (of soft tissues, cartilage, or bone), joint space narrowing, erosions, bony ankylosis, new bone formation (sclerosis, osteophytes, or periostitis), or subchondral cysts may develop and suggest specific clinical entities. Consultation with a radiologist will help define the optimal imaging modality, technique, or positioning and prevent the need for further studies.

Additional imaging techniques may possess greater diagnostic sensitivity and facilitate early diagnosis in a limited number of articular disorders and in selected circumstances and are indicated when conventional radiography is inadequate or nondiagnostic (Table 331-5). Ultrasonography is useful in the detection of soft tissue abnormalities, such as tenosynovitis, that cannot be fully appreciated by clinical examination. Owing to low cost, portability, and wider use, ultrasound use has grown and is the preferred method for the evaluation of synovial (Baker's) cysts, rotator cuff tears, tendinitis and tendon injury, and suspected early synovitis. Its utility is enhanced by operator experience. Radionuclide scintigraphy provides useful information regarding the metabolic status of bone and, along with radiography, is well suited for total-body assessment of the extent and distribution of skeletal involvement. Radionuclide imaging is a very sensitive, but poorly specific, means of detecting inflammatory or metabolic alterations in bone or periarticular soft tissue structures. The limited tissue contrast resolution of scintigraphy may obscure the distinction between a bony or periarticular process and may necessitate the additional use of MRI. Scintigraphy, using 99mTc, 67Ga, or 111In-labeled WBCs has been applied to a variety of articular disorders with variable success (Table 331-5). Although [99mTc] pertechnate or diphosphate scintigraphy (Fig. 331-7) may be useful in identifying osseous infection, neoplasia, inflammation, increased blood flow, bone remodeling, heterotopic bone formation, or avascular necrosis, MRI is preferred in most instances. The poor specificity of 99mTc scanning has largely limited its use to surveys for bone metastases and Paget's disease of bone. Gallium scanning utilizes 67Ga, which binds serum and cellular transferrin and lactoferrin, and is preferentially taken up by neutrophils, macrophages, bacteria, and tumor tissue (e.g., lymphoma). As such, it is primarily used in the identification of occult infection or malignancy. Scanning with 111In-labeled WBCs has been used to detect osteomyelitis and infectious or inflammatory arthritis. Nevertheless, the use of 111In-labeled WBC or 67Ga scanning has largely been replaced by MRI, except when there is a suspicion of prosthetic joint infections.

Table 331-5 Diagnostic Imaging Techniques for Musculoskeletal Disorders

 
 
Method Imaging Time, h Costa
  Current Indications 
Ultrasoundb 1 ++ Synovial cysts Rotator cuff tears Tendon injury 
Radionuclide scintigraphy       
  99mTc
  1每4 ++ Metastatic bone survey Evaluation of Paget's disease Acute and chronic osteomyelitis 
  111In-WBC
  24 +++ Acute infection Prosthetic infection Acute osteomyelitis 
  67Ga
  24每48 ++++ Acute and chronic infection Acute osteomyelitis 
Computed tomography 1 +++ Herniated intervertebral disk Sacroiliitis Spinal stenosis Spinal trauma Osteoid osteoma Stress fracture 
Magnetic resonance imaging 1/2每2 ++++ Avascular necrosis Osteomyelitis Intraarticular derangement and soft tissue injury Derangements of axial skeleton and spinal cord Herniated intervertebral disk Pigmented villonodular synovitis Inflammatory and metabolic muscle pathology 
 


aRelative cost for imaging study. bResults depend on operator. 
 
Figure 331-7

 
 
 
[99mTc]Diphosphonate scintigraphy of the feet of a 33-year-old African-American male with reactive arthritis, manifested by sacroiliitis, urethritis, uveitis, asymmetric oligoarthritis, and enthesitis. This bone scan demonstrates increased uptake indicative of enthesitis involving the insertions of the left Achilles tendon, plantar aponeurosis, and right tibialis posterior tendon as well as arthritis of the right first interphalangeal joint.
 
 


CT provides detailed visualization of the axial skeleton. Articulations previously considered difficult to visualize by radiography (e.g., zygapophyseal, sacroiliac, sternoclavicular, hip joints) can be effectively evaluated using CT. CT has been demonstrated to be useful in the diagnosis of low back pain syndromes (e.g., spinal stenosis vs. herniated disk), sacroiliitis, osteoid osteoma, and stress fractures. Helical or spiral CT (with or without contrast angiography) is a novel technique that is rapid, cost-effective, and sensitive in diagnosing pulmonary embolism or obscure fractures, often in the setting of initially equivocal findings. High-resolution CT can be advocated in the evaluation of suspected or established infiltrative lung disease (e.g., scleroderma or rheumatoid lung). The recent use of hybrid [positron emission tomography (PET)/CT or single-photon emission CT (SPECT)] scans in metastatic evaluations have incorporated CT to provide better anatomic localization of scintigraphic abnormalities.

MRI has significantly advanced the ability to image musculoskeletal structures. MRI has the advantages of providing multiplanar images with fine anatomic detail and contrast resolution (Fig. 331-8) that allows for the superior ability to visualize bone marrow and soft tissue periarticular structures. Although more costly with a longer procedural time than CT, the MRI has become the preferred technique when evaluating complex musculoskeletal disorders.

Figure 331-8

 
 
 
Superior sensitivity of MRI in the diagnosis of osteonecrosis of the femoral head. A 45-year-old woman receiving highdose glucocorticoids developed right hip pain. Conventional x-rays (top) demonstrated only mild sclerosis of the right femoral head. T1-weighted MRI (bottom) demonstrated low-density signal in the right femoral head, diagnostic of osteonecrosis.
 
 

MRI can image fascia, vessels, nerve, muscle, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, pannus, synovial effusions, and bone marrow. Visualization of particular structures can be enhanced by altering the pulse sequence to produce either T1- or T2-weighted spin echo, gradient echo, or inversion recovery [including short tau inversion recovery (STIR)] images. Because of its sensitivity to changes in marrow fat, MRI is a sensitive but nonspecific means of detecting osteonecrosis, osteomyelitis, and marrow inflammation indicating overlying synovitis or osteitis (Fig. 331-8). Because of its enhanced soft tissue resolution, MRI is more sensitive than arthrography or CT in the diagnosis of soft tissue injuries (e.g., meniscal and rotator cuff tears); intraarticular derangements; marrow abnormalities (osteonecrosis, myeloma); and spinal cord or nerve root damage or synovitis.
 
Further Readings

American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Clinical Guidelines: Guidelines for the initial evaluation of the adult patient with acute musculoskeletal symptoms. Arthritis Rheum 39:1, 1996 

 
Avouac J et al: Diagnostic and predictive value of anti-cyclic citrullinated protein antibodies in rheumatoid arthritis: A systematic literature review. Ann Rheum Dis 65:845, 2006[PMID: 16606649]  [Full Text]

 
Cush JJ et al: Evaluation of musculoskeletal complaints, in Rheumatology: Diagnosis and Therapeutics, 2nd ed, JJ Cush et al (eds). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp 3每20 

 
Hootman JM, Helmick CG: Projections of US prevalence of arthritis and associated activity limitations. Arthritis Rheum 54:226, 2006[PMID: 16385518]  [Full Text]

 
Kavanaugh A: The utility of immunologic laboratory tests in patients with rheumatic diseases. Arthritis Rheum 44:2221, 2001[PMID: 11665961]  [Full Text]

 
Ory PA: Radiography in the assessment of musculoskeletal conditions. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 17:495, 2003[PMID: 12787514]  [Full Text]

 
Rudwaleit M et al: How to diagnose axial spondyloarthritis early. Ann Rheum Dis 63:535, 2004[PMID: 15082484]  [Full Text]

 
Shmerling RH et al: Synovial fluid tests: What should be ordered? JAMA 264:1009, 1990[PMID: 2198352]  [Full Text]
 
 

^^
 Chapter 332. Osteoarthritis >
 

Osteoarthritis: Introduction

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common type of arthritis. Its high prevalence, especially in the elderly, and the high rate of disability related to disease make it a leading cause of disability in the elderly. Because of the aging of Western populations and because obesity, a major risk factor, is increasing in prevalence, the occurrence of osteoarthritis is on the rise. In the United States, osteoarthritis prevalence will increase by 66每100% by 2020.

OA affects certain joints, yet spares others (Fig. 332-1). Commonly affected joints include the cervical and lumbosacral spine, hip, knee, and first metatarsal phalangeal joint (MTP). In the hands, the distal and proximal interphalangeal joints and the base of the thumb are often affected. Usually spared are the wrist, elbow, and ankle. Our joints were designed, in an evolutionary sense, for brachiating apes, animals that still walked on four limbs. We thus develop OA in joints that were ill designed for human tasks such as pincer grip (OA in the thumb base) and walking upright (OA in knees and hips) Some joints, like the ankles, may be spared because their articular cartilage may be uniquely resistant to loading stresses.

Figure 332-1

 
 
 
Joints affected by osteoarthritis.
 
 


OA can be diagnosed based on structural abnormalities or on the symptoms these abnormalities evoke. According to cadaveric studies, by elderly years, structural changes of OA are nearly universal. These include cartilage loss (seen as joint space loss on x-rays) and osteophytes. Many persons with x-ray evidence of OA have no joint symptoms and, while the prevalence of structural abnormalities is of interest in understanding disease pathogenesis, what matters more from a clinical perspective is the prevalence of symptomatic OA. Symptoms, usually joint pain, determine disability, visits to clinicians, and disease costs.

Symptomatic OA of the knee (pain on most days of a recent month in a knee plus x-ray evidence of OA in that knee) occurs in 12% of persons age 60 in the United States and 6% of all adults age 30. Symptomatic hip OA is roughly one-third as common as disease in the knee. While radiographically evident hand OA and the appearance of bony enlargement in affected hand joints (Fig. 332-2) are extremely common in older persons, most cases are often not symptomatic. Even so, symptomatic hand OA occurs in 10% of elderly individuals and often produces measurable limitation in function.

Figure 332-2

 
 
 
Severe osteoarthritis of the hands affecting the distal interphalangeal joints (Heberden's nodes) and the proximal interphalangeal joints (Bouchard's nodes). There is no clear bony enlargement of the other common site in the hands, the thumb base.
 
 

The prevalence of OA rises strikingly with age. Regardless of how it is defined, OA is uncommon in adults under age 40 and highly prevalent in those over age 60. It is also a disease that, at least in middle-aged and elderly persons, is much more common in women than in men, and sex differences in prevalence increase with age.

X-ray evidence of OA is common in the lower back and neck, but back pain and neck pain have not been tied to findings of OA on x-ray. Thus, back pain and neck pain are treated separately (Chap. 15).
 
Definition

OA is joint failure, a disease in which all structures of the joint have undergone pathologic change, often in concert. The pathologic sine qua non of disease is hyaline articular cartilage loss, present in a focal and, initially, nonuniform manner. This is accompanied by increasing thickness and sclerosis of the subchondral bony plate, by outgrowth of osteophytes at the joint margin, by stretching of the articular capsule, by mild synovitis in many affected joints, and by weakness of muscles bridging the joint. In knees, meniscal degeneration is part of the disease. There are numerous pathways that lead to joint failure, but the initial step is often joint injury in the setting of a failure of protective mechanisms.
 
Joint Protective Mechanisms and Their Failure

Joint protectors include: joint capsule and ligaments, muscle, sensory afferents, and underlying bone. Joint capsule and ligaments serve as joint protectors by providing a limit to excursion, thereby fixing the range of joint motion.

Synovial fluid reduces friction between articulating cartilage surfaces, thereby serving as a major protector against friction-induced cartilage wear. This lubrication function depends on the molecule lubricin, a mucinous glycoprotein secreted by synovial fibroblasts whose concentration diminishes after joint injury and in the face of synovial inflammation.

The ligaments, along with overlying skin and tendons, contain mechanoreceptor sensory afferent nerves. These mechanoreceptors fire at different frequencies throughout a joint's range of motion, providing feedback by way of the spinal cord to muscles and tendons. As a consequence, these muscles and tendons can assume the right tension at appropriate points in joint excursion to act as optimal joint protectors, anticipating joint loading.

Muscles and tendons that bridge the joint are key joint protectors. Their contractions at the appropriate time in joint movement provide the appropriate power and acceleration for the limb to accomplish its tasks. Focal stress across the joint is minimized by muscle contraction that decelerates the joint before impact and assures that when joint impact arrives, it is distributed broadly across the joint surface.

Failure of these joint protectors increases the risk of joint injury and OA. For example, in animals, OA develops rapidly when a sensory nerve to the joint is sectioned and joint injury induced. Similarly, in humans, Charcot arthropathy, a severe and rapidly progressive OA, develops when minor joint injury occurs in the presence of posterior column peripheral neuropathy. Another example of joint protector failure is rupture of ligaments, a well-known cause of the early development of OA.

Cartilage and Its Role in Joint Failure

In addition to being a primary target tissue for disease, cartilage also functions as a joint protector. A thin rim of tissue at the ends of two opposing bones, cartilage is lubricated by synovial fluid to provide an almost frictionless surface across which these two bones move. The compressible stiffness of cartilage compared to bone provides the joint with impact-absorbing capacity.

Since the earliest changes of OA may occur in cartilage and abnormalities there can accelerate disease development, understanding the structure and physiology of cartilage is critical to an appreciation of disease pathogenesis. The two major macromolecules in cartilage are type 2 collagen, which provides cartilage its tensile strength, and aggrecan, a proteoglycan macromolecule linked with hyaluronic acid, which consists of highly negatively charged glycosaminoglycans. In normal cartilage, type 2 collagen is woven tightly, constraining the aggrecan molecules in the interstices between collagen strands, forcing these highly negatively charged molecules into close proximity with one another. The aggrecan molecule, through electrostatic repulsion of its negative charges, gives cartilage its compressive stiffness. Chondrocytes, the cells within this avascular tissue, synthesize all elements of the matrix. In addition, they produce enzymes that break down the matrix and cytokines and growth factors, which in turn provide autocrine/paracrine feedback that modulates synthesis of matrix molecules (Fig. 332-3). Cartilage matrix synthesis and catabolism are in a dynamic equilibrium influenced by the cytokine and growth factor environment. Mechanical and osmotic stress on chondrocytes induces these cells to alter gene expression and increase production of inflammatory cytokines and matrix-degrading enzymes. While chondrocytes synthesize numerous enzymes, especially matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), only a few of these enzymes are critical in regulating cartilage breakdown. Type 2 cartilage is degraded primarily by MMP-13 (collagenase 3), with other collagenases playing a minor role. Aggrecan degradation is a consequence, in part, of activation of two aggrecanases (ADAMTS-4 and ADAMTS-5) and perhaps of MMPs. Both collagenase and aggrecanases act primarily in the territorial matrix surrounding chondrocytes; however, as the osteoarthritic process develops, their activities and effects spread throughout the matrix, especially in the superficial layers of cartilage.

Figure 332-3

 
 
 
The chondrocyte and its products, type II collagen, aggrecan, and enzymes, which degrade these structures along with molecules stimulating chondrocytes. IL, interleukin; NO, nitric oxide; OA, osteoarthritis; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. (From AR Poole et al: Ann Rheum Dis 61(S):ii78, 2002.)
 
 

The synovium and chondrocytes synthesize numerous growth factors and cytokines. Chief among them is interleukin (IL) 1, which exerts transcriptional effects on chondrocytes, stimulating production of proteinases and suppressing cartilage matrix synthesis. In animal models of OA, IL-1 blockade prevents cartilage loss. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)  may play a similar role to that of IL-1. These cytokines also induce chondrocytes to synthesize prostaglandin E2, nitric oxide, and bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP-2), which together have complex effects on matrix synthesis and degradation. Nitric oxide inhibits aggrecan synthesis and enhances proteinase activity, whereas BMP-2 stimulates anabolic activity. At early stages in the matrix response to injury and in the healthy response to loading, the net effect of cytokine stimulation may be matrix synthesis but, ultimately, excess IL-1 triggers matrix degradation. Enzymes in the matrix are held in check by activation inhibitors, including tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP). Growth factors are also part of this complex network, with insulin-like growth factor type 1 and transforming growth factor  playing prominent roles in stimulating anabolism by chondrocytes.

Whereas healthy cartilage is metabolically sluggish, with slow matrix turnover and synthesis and degradation in balance, cartilage in early OA or after an injury is highly metabolically active. In the latter situation, stimulated chondrocytes synthesize enzymes and new matrix molecules, with those enzymes becoming activated in the matrix, causing release of degraded aggrecan and type 2 collagen into cartilage and into the synovial fluid. OA cartilage is characterized by gradual depletion of aggrecan, an unfurling of the tightly woven collagen matrix, and loss of type 2 collagen. With these changes comes increasing vulnerability of cartilage, which loses its compressive stiffness.
 
Risk Factors

Joint vulnerability and joint loading are the two major factors contributing to the development of OA. On the one hand, a vulnerable joint whose protectors are dysfunctional can develop OA with minimal levels of loading, perhaps even levels encountered during every- day activities. On the other hand, in a young joint with competent protectors, a major acute injury or long-term overloading is necessary to precipitate disease. Risk factors for OA can be understood in terms of their effect either on joint vulnerability or on loading (Fig. 332-4).

Figure 332-4

 
 
 
Risk factors for osteoarthritis either contribute to the susceptibility of the joint (systemic factors or factors in the local joint environment) or increase risk by the load they put on the joint. Usually a combination of loading and susceptibility factors is required to cause disease or its progression.
 
 

Systemic Risk Factors

Age is the most potent risk factor for OA. Radiographic evidence of OA is rare in individuals under age 40; however, in some joints, such as the hands, OA occurs in >50% of persons over age 70. Aging increases joint vulnerability through several mechanisms. Whereas dynamic loading of joints stimulates cartilage matrix synthesis by chondrocytes in young cartilage, aged cartilage is less responsive to these stimuli. Indeed, because of the poor responsiveness of older cartilage to such stimulation, cartilage transplant operations are far more challenging in older than in younger persons. Partly because of this failure to synthesize matrix with loading, cartilage thins with age, and thinner cartilage experiences higher shear stress at basal layers and is at greater risk of cartilage damage. Also, joint protectors fail more often with age. Muscles that bridge the joint become weaker with age and also respond less quickly to oncoming impulses. Sensory nerve input slows with age, retarding the feedback loop of mechanoreceptors to muscles and tendons related to their tension and position. Ligaments stretch with age, making them less able to absorb impulses. These factors work in concert to increase the vulnerability of older joints to OA.

Older women are at high risk of OA in all joints, a risk that emerges as women reach their sixth decade. While hormone loss with menopause may contribute to this risk, there is little understanding of the unique vulnerability of older women vs. men to OA.

Heritability and Genetics

OA is a highly heritable disease, but its heritability varies by joint. Fifty percent of the hand and hip OA in the community is attributable to inheritance, i.e., to disease present in other members of the family. However, the heritable proportion of knee OA is at most 30%, with some studies suggesting no heritability at all. Whereas many people with OA have disease in multiple joints, this "generalized OA" phenotype is rarely inherited and is more often a consequence of aging.

Emerging evidence has identified genetic mutations that confer a high risk of OA, one of which is a polymorphism within the growth differentiation factor 5 gene. This polymorphism diminishes the quantity of GDF5, which normally has anabolic effects on the synthesis of cartilage matrix.

Global Considerations

Hip OA is rare in China and in immigrants from China to the United States. However, OA in the knees is at least as common, if not more so, in Chinese than in whites from the United States, and knee OA represents a major cause of disability in China, especially in rural areas. Anatomic differences between Chinese and white hips may account for much of the difference in hip OA prevalence, with white hips having a higher prevalence of anatomic predispositions to the development of OA. Persons from Africa, but not African Americans, may also have a very low rate of hip OA.

Risk Factors in the Joint Environment

Some risk factors increase vulnerability of the joint through local effects on the joint environment. With changes in joint anatomy, for example, load across the joint is no longer distributed evenly across the joint surface, but rather shows an increase in focal stress. In the hip, three uncommon developmental abnormalities occurring in utero or childhood, congenital dysplasia, Legg-Perthes disease, and slipped capital femoral epiphysis, leave a child with distortions of hip joint anatomy that often lead to OA later in life. Girls are predominantly affected by acetabular dysplasia, a mild form of congenital dislocation, whereas the other abnormalities more often affect boys. Depending on the severity of the anatomic abnormalities, hip OA occurs either in young adulthood (severe abnormalities) or middle age (mild abnormalities).

Major injuries to a joint also can produce anatomic abnormalities that leave the joint susceptible to OA. For example, a fracture through the joint surface often causes OA in joints in which the disease is otherwise rare such as the ankle and the wrist. Avascular necrosis can lead to collapse of dead bone at the articular surface, producing anatomic irregularities and subsequent OA.

Tears of ligamentous and fibrocartilaginous structures that protect the joints, such as the anterior cruciate ligament and the meniscus in the knee and the labrum in the hip, increase joint susceptibility and can lead to premature OA. Meniscal tears increase with age and when chronic are often asymptomatic but lead to adjacent cartilage damage and accelerated osteoarthritis. Even injuries that do not produce diagnosed joint injuries may increase risk of OA, perhaps because the structural injury was not detected at the time. For example, in the Framingham study subjects, men with a history of major knee injury, but no surgery, had a 3.5-fold increased risk for subsequent knee OA.

Another source of anatomic abnormality is malalignment across the joint (Fig. 332-5). This factor has been best studied in the knee, which is the fulcrum of the longest lever arm in the body. Varus (bowlegged) knees with OA are at exceedingly high risk of cartilage loss in the medial or inner compartment of the knee, whereas valgus (knock-kneed) malalignment predisposes to rapid cartilage loss in the lateral compartment. Malalignment causes this effect by decreasing contact area during loading, increasing stress on a focal area of cartilage, which then breaks down. There is evidence that malalignment in the knee not only causes cartilage loss but leads to underlying bone damage, producing bone marrow lesions seen on MRI. Malalignment in the knee often produces such a substantial increase in focal stress within the knee (as evidenced by its destructive effects on subchondral bone) that severely malaligned knees may be destined to progress regardless of the status of other risk factors.

Figure 332-5

 
 
 
The two types of limb malalignment in the frontal plane: varus, in which the stress is placed across the medial compartment of the knee joint, and valgus, which places excess stress across the lateral compartment of the knee.
 
 

Weakness in the quadriceps muscles bridging the knee increases the risk of the development of painful OA in the knee.

Patients with knee OA have impaired proprioception across their knees, and this may predispose them to further disease progression. The role of bone in serving as a shock absorber for impact load is not well understood, but persons with increased bone density are at high risk of OA, suggesting that the resistance of bone to impact during joint use may play a role in disease development.

Loading Factors

Obesity

Three to six times body weight is transmitted across the knee during single-leg stance. Any increase in weight may be multiplied by this factor to reveal the excess force across the knee in overweight persons during walking. Obesity is a well-recognized and potent risk factor for the development of knee OA and, less so, for hip OA. Obesity precedes the development of disease and is not just a consequence of the inactivity present in those with disease. It is a stronger risk factor for disease in women than in men, and in women, the relationship of weight to the risk of disease is linear, so that with each increase in weight, there is a commensurate increase in risk. Weight loss in women lowers the risk of developing symptomatic disease. Not only is obesity a risk factor for OA in weight-bearing joints, but obese persons have more severe symptoms from the disease.

Obesity's effect on the development and progression of disease is mediated mostly through the increased loading in weight-bearing joints that occurs in overweight persons. However, a modest association of obesity with an increased risk of hand OA suggests that there may be a systemic metabolic factor circulating in obese persons that affects disease risk also.

Repeated Use of Joint

There are two categories of repetitive joint use, occupational use and leisure time physical activities. Workers performing repetitive tasks as part of their occupations for many years are at high risk of developing OA in the joints they use repeatedly. For example, farmers are at high risk for hip OA, and miners have high rates of OA in knees and spine, Even within a textile mill, women whose jobs required fine pincer grip [increasing the stress across the interphalangeal (IP) joints] had much more distal IP (DIP) joint OA than women whose jobs required repeated power grip, a motion that does not stress the DIP joints. Workers whose jobs require regular knee bending or lifting or carrying heavy loads have a high rate of knee OA. One reason why workers may get disease is that during long days at work, their muscles may gradually become exhausted, no longer serving as effective joint protectors.

While exercise is a major element of the treatment of OA, certain types of exercise may paradoxically increase the risk of disease. While recreational runners are not at increased risk of knee OA, studies suggest that they have a modest increased risk of disease in the hip. However, persons who have already sustained major knee injuries are at increased risk of progressive knee OA as a consequence of running. Compared to nonrunners, elite runners (professional runners and those on Olympic teams) have high risks of both knee and hip OA. Given the widespread recommendation to adopt a healthier, more exercise-filled lifestyle; longitudinal epidemiologic studies of exercise contain cautionary notes. For example, women with increased levels of physical activity, either as teenagers or at age 50, had a higher risk of developing symptomatic hip disease later in life than women who were sedentary. Other athletic activities that pose high risks of joint injury, such as football, may thereby predispose to OA.
 
Pathology

The pathology of OA provides evidence of the involvement of many joint structures in disease. Cartilage initially shows surface fibrillation and irregularity. As disease progresses, focal erosions develop there, and these eventually extend down to the subjacent bone. With further progression, cartilage erosion down to bone expands to involve a larger proportion of the joint surface, even though OA remains a focal disease with nonuniform loss of cartilage (Fig. 332-6).

Figure 332-6

 
 
 
Pathologic changes of osteoarthritis in a toe joint. Note the nonuniform loss of cartilage (arrowhead vs. solid arrow), the increased thickness of the subchondral bone envelope (solid arrow), and the osteophyte (open arrow). (From the American College of Rheumatology slide collection.)
 
 

After an injury to cartilage, chondrocytes undergo mitosis and clustering. While the metabolic activity of these chondrocyte clusters is high, the net effect of this activity is to promote proteoglycan depletion in the matrix surrounding the chondrocytes. This is because the catabolic is greater than the synthetic activity. As disease develops, collagen matrix becomes damaged, the negative charges of proteoglycans get exposed, and cartilage swells from ionic attraction to water molecules. Because in damaged cartilage proteoglycans are no longer forced into close proximity, cartilage does not bounce back after loading as it did when healthy, and cartilage becomes vulnerable to further injury. Chondrocytes at the basal level of cartilage undergo apoptosis.

With loss of cartilage come alterations in subchondral bone. Stimulated by growth factors and cytokines, osteoclasts and osteoblasts in the subchondral bony plate, just underneath cartilage, become activated. Bone formation produces a thickening and stiffness of the subchondral plate that occurs even before cartilage ulcerates. Trauma to bone during joint loading may be the primary factor driving this bone response, with healing from injury (including microcracks) producing stiffness. Small areas of osteonecrosis usually exist in joints with advanced disease. Bone death may also be caused by bone trauma with shearing of microvasculature, leading to a cutoff of vascular supply to some bone areas.

At the margin of the joint, near areas of cartilage loss, osteophytes form. These start as outgrowths of new cartilage and, with neurovascular invasion from the bone, this cartilage ossifies. Osteophytes are an important radiographic hallmark of OA. In malaligned joints, osteophytes grow larger on the side of the joint subject to most loading stress (e.g., in varus knees, osteophytes grow larger on the medial side).

The synovium produces lubricating fluids that minimize shear stress during motion. In healthy joints, the synovium consists of a single discontinuous layer filled with fat and containing two types of cells, macrophages and fibroblasts, but in OA, it can sometimes become edematous and inflamed. There is a migration of macrophages from the periphery into the tissue, and cells lining the synovium proliferate. Enzymes secreted by the synovium digest cartilage matrix that has been sheared from the surface of the cartilage.

Additional pathologic changes occur in the capsule, which stretches, becomes edematous, and can become fibrotic.

The pathology of OA is not identical across joints. In hand joints with severe OA, for example, there are often cartilage erosions in the center of the joint probably produced by bony pressure from the opposite side of the joint. In hand OA, pathology has also been noted in ligament site insertions, which may help propagate disease.

Basic calcium phosphate and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals are present microscopically in most joints with end-stage OA. Their role in osteoarthritic cartilage is unclear, but their release from cartilage into the joint space and joint fluid likely triggers synovial inflammation, which can, in turn, produce release of enzymes and trigger nociceptive stimulation.
 
Sources of Pain

Because cartilage is aneural, cartilage loss in a joint is not accompanied by pain. Thus, pain in OA likely arises from structures outside the cartilage. Innervated structures in the joint include the synovium, ligaments, joint capsule, muscles, and subchondral bone. Most of these are not visualized by the x-ray, and the severity of x-ray changes in OA correlates poorly with pain severity.

Based on MRI studies in osteoarthritic knees comparing those with and without pain and on studies mapping tenderness in unanesthetized joints, likely sources of pain include synovial inflammation, joint effusions, and bone marrow edema. Modest synovitis develops in many but not all osteoarthritic joints. Some diseased joints have no synovitis, whereas others have synovial inflammation that approaches the severity of joints with rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 321). The presence of synovitis on MRI is correlated with the presence and severity of knee pain. Capsular stretching from fluid in the joint stimulates nociceptive fibers there, inducing pain. Increased focal loading as part of the disease not only damages cartilage but probably also injures the underlying bone. As a consequence, bone marrow edema appears on the MRI; histologically, this edema signals the presence of microcracks and scar, which are the consequences of trauma. These lesions may stimulate bone nociceptive fibers. Also, hemostatic pressure within bone rises in OA, and the increased pressure itself may stimulate nociceptive fibers, causing pain. Lastly, osteophytes themselves may be a source of pain. When osteophytes grow, neurovascular innervation penetrates through the base of the bone into the cartilage and into the developing osteophyte.

Pain may arise from outside the joint also, including bursae near the joints. Common sources of pain near the knee are anserine bursitis and iliotibial band syndrome.
 
Clinical Features

Joint pain from OA is activity-related. Pain comes on either during or just after joint use and then gradually resolves. Examples include knee or hip pain with going up or down stairs, pain in weight-bearing joints when walking, and, for hand OA, pain when cooking. Early in disease, pain is episodic, triggered often by a day or two of overactive use of a diseased joint, such as a person with knee OA taking a long run and noticing a few days of pain thereafter. As disease progresses, the pain becomes continuous and even begins to be bothersome at night. Stiffness of the affected joint may be prominent, but morning stiffness is usually brief (<30 min).

In knees, buckling may occur, in part, due to weakness of muscles crossing the joint. Mechanical symptoms, such as buckling, catching, or locking, could also signify internal derangement, such as meniscal tears, and need to be evaluated. In the knee, pain with activities requiring knee flexion, such as stair climbing and arising from a chair, often emanates from the patellofemoral compartment of the knee, which does not actively articulate until the knee is bent 35∼.

OA is the most common cause of chronic knee pain in persons over age 45, but the differential diagnosis is long. Inflammatory arthritis is likely if there is prominent morning stiffness and many other joints are affected. Bursitis occurs commonly around knees and hips. A physical examination should focus on whether tenderness is over the joint line (at the junction of the two bones around which the joint is articulating) or is outside of it. Anserine bursitis, medial and distal to the knee, is an extremely common cause of chronic knee pain that may respond to a glucocorticoid injection. Prominent nocturnal pain in the absence of end-stage OA merits a distinct workup. For hip pain, OA can be detected by loss of internal rotation on passive movement, and pain isolated to an area lateral to the hip joint usually reflects the presence of trochanteric bursitis.

No blood tests are routinely indicated for workup of patients with OA unless symptoms and signs suggest inflammatory arthritis. Examination of the synovial fluid is often more helpful diagnostically than an x-ray. If the synovial fluid white count is >1000 per L, inflammatory arthritis or gout or pseudogout are likely, the latter two being also identified by the presence of crystals.

X-rays are indicated to evaluate chronic hand pain and hip pain thought to be due to OA, as the diagnosis is often unclear without confirming radiographs. For knee pain, x-rays should be obtained if symptoms or signs are not typical of OA or if knee pain persists after inauguration of effective treatment. In OA, radiographic findings (Fig. 332-7) correlate poorly with the presence and severity of pain. Further, radiographs may be normal in early disease as they are insensitive to cartilage loss and other early findings.

Figure 332-7

 
 
 
X-ray of knee with medial osteoarthritis. Note the narrowed joint space on medial side of the joint only (white arrow), the sclerosis of the bone in the medial compartment providing evidence of cortical thickening (black arrow), and the osteophytes in the medial femur (white wedge).
 
 

While MRI may reveal the extent of pathology in an osteoarthritic joint, it is not indicated as part of the diagnostic workup. Findings such as meniscal tears in cartilage and bone lesions occur in most patients with OA in the knee, but almost never warrant a change in therapy.

Treatment: Osteoarthritis

The goals of the treatment of OA are to alleviate pain and minimize loss of physical function. To the extent that pain and loss of function are consequences of inflammation, of weakness across the joint, and of laxity and instability, the treatment of OA involves addressing each of these impairments. Comprehensive therapy consists of a multimodality approach including nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic elements.

Patients with mild and intermittent symptoms may need only reassurance or nonpharmacologic treatments. Patients with ongoing, disabling pain are likely to need both nonpharmaco- and pharmacotherapy.

Treatments for knee OA have been more completely evaluated than those for hip and hand OA or for disease in other joints. Thus, while the principles of treatment are identical for OA in all joints, we shall focus below on the treatment of knee OA, noting specific recommendations for disease in other joints, especially when they differ from those for disease in the knee.

Nonpharmacotherapy

Since OA is a mechanically driven disease, the mainstay of treatment involves altering loading across the painful joint and improving the function of joint protectors, so they can better distribute load across the joint. Ways of lessening focal load across the joint include

(1) avoiding activities that overload the joint, as evidenced by their causing pain;

(2) improving the strength and conditioning of muscles that bridge the joint, so as to optimize their function; and

(3) unloading the joint, either by redistributing load within the joint with a brace or a splint or by unloading the joint during weight bearing with a cane or a crutch.

The simplest effective treatment for many patients is to avoid activities that precipitate pain. For example, for the middle-aged patient whose long-distance running brings on symptoms of knee OA, a less demanding form of weight-bearing activity may alleviate all symptoms. For an older person whose daily constitutionals up and down hills bring on knee pain, routing the constitutional away from hills might eliminate symptoms.

Each pound of weight increases the loading across the knee three- to sixfold. Weight loss may have a commensurate multiplier effect, unloading both knees and hips. Thus, weight loss, especially if substantial, may lessen symptoms of knee and hip OA.

In hand joints affected by OA, splinting, by limiting motion, often minimizes pain for patients with involvement either in the base of the thumb or in the DIP or proximal IP joints. With an appropriate splint, function can often be preserved. Weight-bearing joints such as knees and hips can be unloaded by using a cane in the hand opposite to the affected joint for partial weight bearing. A physical therapist can help teach the patient how to use the cane optimally, including ensuring that its height is optimal for unloading. Crutches or walkers can serve a similar beneficial function.

Exercise

Osteoarthritic pain in knees or hips during weight bearing results in lack of activity and poor mobility and, because OA is so common, the inactivity that results represents a public health concern, increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease and of obesity. Aerobic capacity is poor in most elders with symptomatic knee OA, worse than others of the same age.

The development of weakness in muscles that bridge osteoarthritic joints is multifactorial in etiology. First, there is a decline in strength with age. Second, with limited mobility comes disuse muscle atrophy. Third, patients with painful knee or hip OA alter their gait so as to lessen loading across the affected joint, and this further diminishes muscle use. Fourth, "arthrogenous inhibition" may occur, whereby contraction of muscles bridging the joint is inhibited by a nerve afferent feedback loop emanating in a swollen and stretched joint capsule; this prevents maximal attainment of voluntary maximal strength. Since adequate muscle strength and conditioning are critical to joint protection, weakness in a muscle that bridges a diseased joint makes the joint more susceptible to further damage and pain. The degree of weakness correlates strongly with the severity of joint pain and the degree of physical limitation. One of the cardinal elements of the treatment of OA is to improve the functioning of muscles surrounding the joint.

For knee and hip OA, trials have shown that exercise lessens pain and improves physical function. Most effective exercise regimens consist of aerobic and/or resistance training, the latter of which focuses on strengthening muscles across the joint. Exercises are likely to be effective, especially if they train muscles for the activities a person performs daily. Some exercises may actually increase pain in the joint; these should be avoided, and the regimen needs to be individualized to optimize effectiveness and minimize discomfort. Range-of-motion exercises, which do not strengthen muscles, and isometric exercises that strengthen muscles, but not through range of motion, are unlikely to be effective by themselves. Isokinetic and isotonic strengthening (strengthening that occurs when a person flexes or extends the knees against resistance) have been shown consistently to be efficacious. Low-impact exercises, including water aerobics and water resistance training, are often better tolerated by patients than exercises involving impact loading, such as running or treadmill exercises. A patient should be referred to an exercise class or to a therapist who can create an individualized regimen, and then an individualized home-based regimen can be crafted.

There is no strong evidence that patients with hand OA benefit from therapeutic exercise, although for any patient with OA, individualized exercise programs should be tried. Adherence to exercise over the long term is the major challenge to an exercise prescription. In trials involving patients with knee OA, who are interested in exercise treatment, a third to over a half of patients stopped exercising by 6 months. Less than 50% continued regular exercise at 1 year. The strongest predictor of continued exercise in a patient is a previous personal history of successful exercise. Physicians should reinforce the exercise prescription at each clinic visit, help the patient recognize barriers to ongoing exercise, and identify convenient times for exercise to be done routinely. The combination of exercise with calorie restriction is especially effective in lessening pain.

One clinical trial has suggested that, among those with very early OA, participating in a strengthening and multimodality exercise program led to improvement in cartilage biochemistry, as evidenced by MRI imaging. There is little other evidence, however, that strengthening or other exercise has an effect on joint structure.

Correction of Malalignment

Malalignment in the frontal plane (varus-valgus) markedly increases the stress across the joint, which can lead to progression of disease and to pain and disability (Fig. 332-5). Correcting malalignment, either surgically or with bracing, may relieve pain in persons whose knees are maligned. Malalignment develops over years as a consequence of gradual anatomic alterations of the joint and bone, and correcting it is often very challenging. One way is with a fitted brace, which takes an often varus osteoarthritic knee and straightens it by putting valgus stress across the knee. Unfortunately, many patients are unwilling to wear a realigning knee brace, plus in patients with obese legs, braces may slip with usage and lose their realigning effect. They are indicated for willing patients who can learn to put them on correctly and on whom they do not slip.

Other ways of correcting malalignment across the knee include the use of orthotics in footwear. Unfortunately, while they may have modest effects on knee alignment, trials have heretofore not demonstrated efficacy of a lateral wedge orthotic vs. placebo wedges.

Pain from the patellofemoral compartment of the knee can be caused by tilting of the patella or patellar malalignment with the patella riding laterally (or less often, medially) in the femoral trochlear groove. Using a brace to realign the patella, or tape to pull the patella back into the trochlear sulcus or reduce its tilt, has been shown, when compared to placebo taping in clinical trials, to lessen patellofemoral pain. However, patients may find it difficult to apply tape, and skin irritation from the tape is common. Commercial patellar braces may be a solution, but they have not been tested.

While their effect on malalignment is questionable, neoprene sleeves pulled to cover the knee lessen pain and are easy to use and popular among patients. The explanation for their therapeutic effect on pain is unclear.

In patients with knee OA, acupuncture produces modest pain relief compared to placebo needles and may be an adjunctive treatment.

Pharmacotherapy

While nonpharmacologic approaches to therapy constitute its mainstay, pharmacotherapy serves an important adjunctive role in OA treatment. Available drugs are administered using oral, topical, and intraarticular routes.

Acetaminophen, Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs), and COX-2 Inhibitors

Acetaminophen (paracetamol) is the initial analgesic of choice for patients with OA in knee, hip, or hands. For some patients, it is adequate to control symptoms, in which case more toxic drugs such as NSAIDs can be avoided. Doses up to 1 g 4 times daily can be used (Table 332-1).

Table 332-1 Pharmacologic Treatment for Osteoarthritis

 
 
Treatment Dosage Comments 
Acetaminophen Up to 1 g qid Prolongs half-life of warfarin 
Oral NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitorsa
    Take with food. Increased risk of myocardial infarction and stroke for some NSAIDs and especially COX-2 inhibitors. High rates of gastrointestinal side effects, including ulcers and bleeding, occur. Patients at high risk for gastrointestinal side effects should also take either a proton pump inhibitor or misoprostol.b There is an increased gastrointestinal side effects or bleeding when taken with acetylsalicylic acid. Can also cause edema and renal insufficiency. 
  Naproxen 375每500 mg bid 
  Salsalate 1500 mg bid 
  Ibuprofen 600每800 mg 3每4 times a day 
Topical NSAIDs   Rub onto joint. Few systemic side effects. Skin irritation common. 
  Diclofenac Na 1% gel 4gm qid (for knees) 
Opiates Various Common side effects include dizziness, sedation, nausea or vomiting, dry mouth, constipation, urinary retention, and pruritis. Respiratory and central nervous system depression can occur. 
Capsaicin 0.025每0.075% cream 3每4 times a day Can irritate mucous membranes. 
Intraarticular injections     
  Steroids     
  Hyaluronans Varies from 3每5 weekly injections depending on preparation Mild to moderate pain at injection site. Controversy exists re: efficacy. 
 


aCOX-2, cyclooxygenase 2; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

bPatients at high risk include those with previous gastrointestinal events, persons 60 years, and persons taking glucocorticoids. Trials have shown the efficacy of proton pump inhibitors and misoprostol in the prevention of ulcers and bleeding. Misoprostol is associated with a high rate of diarrhea and cramping; therefore, proton pump inhibitors are more widely used to reduce NSAID-related gastrointestinal symptoms.

Source: Adapted from Felson 2006.
 

NSAIDs are the most popular drugs to treat osteoarthritic pain. They can be administered either topically or orally. In clinical trials, oral NSAIDs produce 30% greater improvement in pain than high-dose acetaminophen. Occasional patients treated with NSAIDs experience dramatic pain relief, whereas others experience little improvement. Initially, NSAIDs should be administered topically or taken orally on an "as needed" basis because side effects are less frequent with low intermittent doses, which may be highly efficacious. If occasional medication use is insufficiently effective, then daily treatment may be indicated, with an anti-inflammatory dose selected (Table 332-1). Patients should be reminded to take low-dose aspirin and ibuprofen at different times to eliminate a drug interaction.

NSAIDs taken orally have substantial and frequent side effects, the most common of which is upper gastrointestinal toxicity, including dyspepsia, nausea, bloating, gastrointestinal bleeding, and ulcer disease. Some 30每40% of patients experience upper gastrointestinal (GI) side effects so severe as to require discontinuation of medication. To minimize the risk of nonsteroidal-related GI side effects, patients should not take two NSAIDs, and should take medications after food; if risk is high, patients should take a gastroprotective agent, such as a proton pump inhibitor. Certain oral agents are safer to the stomach than others including nonacetylated salicylates and nabumetone. Major NSAID-related GI side effects can occur in patients who do not complain of upper GI symptoms. In one study of patients hospitalized for GI bleeding, 81% had no premonitory symptoms.

Because of the increased rates of cardiovascular events associated with cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors and with some conventional NSAIDs such as diclofenac, many of these drugs are not appropriate long-term treatment choices for older persons with osteoarthritis, especially those at high risk of heart disease or stroke. The American Heart Association has identified rofecoxib and all other COX-2 inhibitors as putting patients at high risk, although low doses of celecoxib, such as 200 mg/d, may not be associated with an elevation of risk. The only conventional NSAID that appears safe from a cardiovascular perspective is naproxen, but it does have gastrointestinal toxicity.

There are other common side effects of NSAIDs, including the tendency to develop edema, because of prostaglandin inhibition of afferent blood supply to glomeruli in the kidneys and, for similar reasons, a predilection toward reversible renal insufficiency. Blood pressure may increase modestly in some NSAID-treated patients.

With the approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration of topical diclofenac and the availability of these agents in Europe, clinicians have a choice of administration modality for anti-inflammatory drugs. NSAIDs can be placed into a gel or topical solution with another chemical modality that enhances penetration of the skin barrier. When absorbed through the skin, plasma concentrations are an order of magnitude lower than with the same amount of drug administered orally or parenterally. However, when these drugs are administered topically in proximity to a superficial joint, (knees, hands, but not hips), the drug can be found in joint tissues such as the synovium and cartilage. Trial results have varied but generally have found that topical NSAIDs are slightly less efficacious than oral agents, but have far fewer gastrointestinal and systemic side effects. Unfortunately, topical NSAIDs often cause local skin irritation where the medication is applied, inducing redness, burning or itching in up to 40 percent of patients (see Table 332-1).

Intraarticular Injections: Glucocorticoids and Hyaluronic Acid

Since synovial inflammation is likely to be a major cause of pain in patients with OA, local anti-inflammatory treatments administered intraarticularly may be effective in ameliorating pain, at least temporarily. Glucocorticoid injections provide such efficacy, but work better than placebo injections for only 1 or 2 weeks. This may be because the disease remains mechanically driven and, when a person begins to use the joint, the loading factors that induce pain return. Glucocorticoid injections are useful to get patients over acute flares of pain and may be especially indicated if the patient has coexistent OA and crystal deposition disease, especially from calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals (Chap. 333). There is no evidence that repeated glucocorticoid injections into the joint are dangerous.

Hyaluronic acid injections can be given for treatment of symptoms in knee and hip OA, but there is controversy as to whether they have efficacy vs. placebo (Table 332-1).

Optimal therapy for OA is often achieved by trial and error, with each patient having idiosyncratic responses to specific treatments. When medical therapies have failed and the patient has an unacceptable reduction in their quality of life and ongoing pain and disability, then at least for knee and hip OA, total joint arthroplasty is indicated.

Surgery

For knee OA, several operations are available. Among the most popular surgeries, at least in the United States, is arthroscopic debridement and lavage. Randomized trials evaluating this operation have showed that its efficacy is no greater than that of sham surgery or no treatment for relief of pain or disability. Even mechanical symptoms such as buckling, which are extremely common in patients with knee OA, do not respond to arthroscopic debridement. Arthroscopic meniscectomy is indicated for acute meniscal tears in which symptoms such as locking and acute pain are clearly related temporally to a knee injury that produced the tear.

For patients with knee OA isolated to the medial compartment, operations to realign the knee to lessen medial loading can relieve pain. These include a high tibial osteotomy, in which the tibia is broken just below the tibial plateau and realigned so as to load the lateral, nondiseased compartment, or a unicompartmental replacement with realignment. Each surgery may provide the patient with years of pain relief before they require a total knee replacement.

Ultimately, when the patient with knee or hip OA has failed medical treatment modalities and remains in pain, with limitations of physical function that compromise the quality of life, the patient should be referred for total knee or hip arthroplasty. These are highly efficacious operations that relieve pain and improve function in the vast majority of patients. Currently failure rates are 1% per year, although these rates are higher in obese patients. The chance of surgical success is greater in centers where at least 25 such operations are performed yearly or with surgeons who perform multiple operations annually. The timing of knee or hip replacement is critical. If the patient suffers for many years until their functional status has declined substantially, with considerable muscle weakness, postoperative functional status may not improve to a level achieved by others who underwent operation earlier in their disease course.

Cartilage Regeneration

Chondrocyte transplantation has not been found to be efficacious in OA, perhaps because OA includes pathology of joint mechanics, which is not corrected by chondrocyte transplants. Similarly, abrasion arthroplasty (chondroplasty) has not been well studied for efficacy in OA, but it produces fibrocartilage in place of damaged hyaline cartilage. Both of these surgical attempts to regenerate and reconstitute articular cartilage may be more likely to be efficacious early in disease when joint malalignment and many of the other noncartilage abnormalities that characterize OA have not yet developed.
 
Further Readings

Abramson SB, Attur M: Developments in the scientific understanding of osteoarthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 11:227, 2009[PMID: 19519925]  [Full Text]

 
Bennell K, Hinman R: Exercise as a treatment for osteoarthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 17:634, 2005[PMID: 16093845]  [Full Text]

 
Felson DT: Osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl J Med 354:841, 2006[PMID: 16495396]  [Full Text]

 
   : Developments in the clinical understanding of osteoarthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 11:203, 2009 

 
Krohn K: Footwear alterations and bracing as treatments for knee osteoarthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 17:653, 2005[PMID: 16093848]  [Full Text]

 
 

^^
 Chapter 333. Gout and Other Crystal-Associated Arthropathies >
 

Gout and Othercrystal-Associated Arthropathies: Introduction

The use of polarizing light microscopy during synovial fluid analysis in 1961 by McCarty and Hollander and the subsequent application of other crystallographic techniques, such as electron microscopy, energy-dispersive elemental analysis, and x-ray diffraction, have allowed investigators to identify the roles of different microcrystals, including monosodium urate (MSU), calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD), calcium apatite (apatite), and calcium oxalate (CaOx), in inducing acute or chronic arthritis or periarthritis. The clinical events that result from deposition of MSU, CPPD, apatite, and CaOx have many similarities but also have important differences. Before the use of crystallographic techniques in rheumatology, much of what was considered to be gouty arthritis in fact was not. Because of often similar clinical presentations, the need to perform synovial fluid analysis to distinguish the type of crystal involved must be emphasized. Polarized light microscopy alone can identify most typical crystals; apatite, however, is an exception. Aspiration and analysis of effusions are also important to assess the possibility of infection. Apart from the identification of specific microcrystalline materials or organisms, synovial fluid characteristics in crystal-associated diseases are nonspecific, and synovial fluid can be inflammatory or noninflammatory. A list of possible musculoskeletal manifestations of crystal-associated arthritis is shown in Table 333-1.

Table 333-1 Musculoskeletal Manifestations of Crystal-Induced Arthritis

 
 
Acute mono- or polyarthritis Destructive arthropathies 
Bursitis Pseudo-rheumatoid arthritis 
Tendinitis Pseudo-ankylosing spondylitis 
Enthesitis Spinal stenosis 
Tophaceous deposits Crowned dens syndrome 
Peculiar type of osteoarthritis Carpal tunnel syndrome 
Synovial osteochondromatosis Tendon rupture 
 

 
 
Gout

Gout is a metabolic disease that most often affects middle-aged to elderly men and postmenopausal women. It results from an increased body pool of urate with hyperuricemia. It typically is characterized by episodic acute and chronic arthritis caused by deposition of MSU crystals in joints and connective tissue tophi and the risk for deposition in kidney interstitium or uric acid nephrolithiasis (Chap. 359).

Acute and Chronic Arthritis

Acute arthritis is the most common early clinical manifestation of gout. Usually, only one joint is affected initially, but polyarticular acute gout can occur in subsequent episodes. The metatarsophalangeal joint of the first toe often is involved, but tarsal joints, ankles, and knees also are affected commonly. Especially in elderly patients or in advanced disease, finger joints may be involved. Inflamed Heberden's or Bouchard's nodes may be a first manifestation of gouty arthritis. The first episode of acute gouty arthritis frequently begins at night with dramatic joint pain and swelling. Joints rapidly become warm, red, and tender, with a clinical appearance that often mimics that of cellulitis. Early attacks tend to subside spontaneously within 3每10 days, and most patients have intervals of varying length with no residual symptoms until the next episode. Several events may precipitate acute gouty arthritis: dietary excess, trauma, surgery, excessive ethanol ingestion, hypouricemic therapy, and serious medical illnesses such as myocardial infarction and stroke.

After many acute mono- or oligoarticular attacks, a proportion of gouty patients may present with a chronic nonsymmetric synovitis, causing potential confusion with rheumatoid arthritis (Chap. 321). Less commonly, chronic gouty arthritis will be the only manifestation, and, more rarely, the disease will manifest only as periarticular tophaceous deposits in the absence of synovitis. Women represent only 5每20% of all patients with gout. Premenopausal gout is rare; it is seen mostly in individuals with a strong family history of gout. Kindreds of precocious gout in young females caused by decreased renal urate clearance and renal insufficiency have been described. Most women with gouty arthritis are postmenopausal and elderly, have osteoarthritis and arterial hypertension that cause mild renal insufficiency, and usually are receiving diuretics.

Laboratory Diagnosis

Even if the clinical appearance strongly suggests gout, the presumptive diagnosis ideally should be confirmed by needle aspiration of acutely or chronically involved joints or tophaceous deposits. Acute septic arthritis, several of the other crystalline-associated arthropathies, palindromic rheumatism, and psoriatic arthritis may present with similar clinical features. During acute gouty attacks, needle-shaped MSU crystals typically are seen both intracellularly and extracellularly (Fig. 333-1). With compensated polarized light these crystals are brightly birefringent with negative elongation. Synovial fluid leukocyte counts are elevated from 2000 to 60,000/L. Effusions appear cloudy due to the increased numbers of leukocytes. Large amounts of crystals occasionally produce a thick pasty or chalky joint fluid. Bacterial infection can coexist with urate crystals in synovial fluid; if there is any suspicion of septic arthritis, joint fluid must be cultured.

Figure 333-1

 
 
 
Extracellular and intracellular monosodium urate crystals, as seen in a fresh preparation of synovial fluid, illustrate needle- and rod-shaped crystals. These crystals are strongly negative birefringent crystals under compensated polarized light microscopy; 400x.
 
 

MSU crystals also can often be demonstrated in the first metatarsophalangeal joint and in knees not acutely involved with gout. Arthrocentesis of these joints is a useful technique to establish the diagnosis of gout between attacks.

Serum uric acid levels can be normal or low at the time of an acute attack, as inflammatory cytokines can be uricosuric and effective initiation of hypouricemic therapy can precipitate attacks. This limits the value of serum uric acid determinations for the diagnosis of gout. Nevertheless, serum urate levels are almost always elevated at some time and are important to use to follow the course of hypouricemic therapy. A 24-h urine collection for uric acid can, in some cases, be useful in assessing the risk of stones, elucidating overproduction or underexcretion of uric acid, and deciding whether it may be appropriate to use a uricosuric therapy (Chap. 359). Excretion of >800 mg of uric acid per 24 h on a regular diet suggests that causes of overproduction of purine should be considered. Urinalysis, serum creatinine, hemoglobin, white blood cell (WBC) count, liver function tests, and serum lipids should be obtained because of possible pathologic sequelae of gout and other associated diseases requiring treatment and as baselines because of possible adverse effects of gout treatment.

Radiographic Features

Early in the disease radiographic studies may only confirm clinically evident swelling. Cystic changes, well-defined erosions with sclerotic margins (often with overhanging bony edges), and soft tissue masses are characteristic features of advanced chronic tophaceous gout. Ultrasound, CT and MRI are being studied and are likely to become more sensitive for early changes.

Treatment: Gout

Acute Gouty Arthritis

The mainstay of treatment during an acute attack is the administration of anti-inflammatory drugs such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine, or glucocorticoids. NSAIDs are used most often in individuals without complicating comorbid conditions. Both colchicine and NSAIDs may be poorly tolerated and dangerous in the elderly and in the presence of renal insufficiency and gastrointestinal disorders. This was repeated later. Ice pack applications and rest of the involved joints can be helpful. Colchicine given orally is a traditional and effective treatment if used early in an attack. One useful regimen is one 0.6-mg tablet given every 8 h with subsequent tapering. This is generally better tolerated than the formerly advised hourly regimen. The drug must be stopped promptly at the first sign of loose stools, and symptomatic treatment must be given for the diarrhea. Intravenous colchicine has been taken off the market. NSAIDs given in full anti-inflammatory doses are effective in 90% of patients, and the resolution of signs and symptoms usually occurs in 5每8 days. The most effective drugs are any of those with a short half-life and include indomethacin, 25每50 mg tid; naproxen, 500 mg bid; ibuprofen, 800 mg tid; and diclofenac, 50 mg tid. Glucocorticoids given IM or orally, for example, prednisone, 30每50 mg/d as the initial dose and gradually tapered with the resolution of the attack, can be effective in polyarticular gout. For a single joint or a few involved joints intraarticular triamcinolone acetonide, 20每40 mg, or methylprednisolone, 25每50 mg, have been effective and well tolerated. Based on recent evidence on the essential role of the inflammasome and interleukin 1  (IL-1) in acute gout, anakinra has been used and other inhibitors of IL-1 are under investigation.

Hypouricemic Therapy

Ultimate control of gout requires correction of the basic underlying defect: the hyperuricemia. Attempts to normalize serum uric acid to <300每360 mol/L (5.0每6.0 mg/dL) to prevent recurrent gouty attacks and eliminate tophaceous deposits entail a commitment to long-term hypouricemic regimens and medications that generally are required for life. Hypouricemic therapy should be considered when, as in most patients, the hyperuricemia cannot be corrected by simple means (control of body weight, low-purine diet, increase in liquid intake, limitation of ethanol use, decreased use of fructose-containing foods and beverages, and avoidance of diuretics). The decision to initiate hypouricemic therapy usually is made taking into consideration the number of acute attacks (urate lowering may be cost-effective after two attacks), serum uric acid levels [progression is more rapid in patients with serum uric acid >535 mol/L (>9.0 mg/dL)], the patient's willingness to commit to lifelong therapy, or the presence of uric acid stones. Urate-lowering therapy should be initiated in any patient who already has tophi or chronic gouty arthritis. Uricosuric agents such as probenecid can be used in patients with good renal function who underexcrete uric acid, with <600 mg in a 24-h urine sample. Urine volume must be maintained by ingestion of 1500 mL of water every day. Probenecid can be started at a dose of 250 mg twice daily and increased gradually as needed up to 3 g per day to maintain a serum uric acid level <360 mol/L (6 mg/dL). Probenecid is generally not effective in patients with serum creatinine levels >177 mol/L (2 mg/dL). These patients may require allopurinol or benzbromarone (not available in the United States). Benzbromarone is another uricosuric drug that is more effective in patients with renal failure. Some agents used to treat common comorbidities, including losartan, fenofibrate, and amlodipine, have some mild uricosuric effects.

The xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol is by far the most commonly used hypouricemic agent and is the best drug to lower serum urate in overproducers, urate stone formers, and patients with renal disease. It can be given in a single morning dose, 100每300 mg initially and increasing up to 800 mg if needed. In patients with chronic renal disease, the initial allopurinol dose should be lower and adjusted depending on the serum creatinine concentration; for example, with a creatinine clearance of 10 mL/min, one generally would use 100 mg every other day. Doses can be increased gradually to reach the target urate level of 6 mg/dL; however, more studies are needed to provide exact guidance. Toxicity of allopurinol has been recognized increasingly in patients who use thiazide diuretics and patients allergic to penicillin and ampicillin. The most serious side effects include life-threatening toxic epidermal necrolysis, systemic vasculitis, bone marrow suppression, granulomatous hepatitis, and renal failure. Patients with mild cutaneous reactions to allopurinol can reconsider the use of a uricosuric agent, undergo an attempt at desensitization to allopurinol, or take febuxostat, a new, chemically unrelated specific xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat is approved at 40 or 80 mg once a day and does not require dose adjustment in mild to moderate renal disease. Patients can also pay increased attention to diet and should be aware of new alternative agents (see below). Urate-lowering drugs are generally not initiated during acute attacks but after the patient is stable and low-dose colchicine has been initiated to decrease the risk of the flares that often occur with urate lowering. Colchicine anti-inflammatory prophylaxis in doses of 0.6 mg one to two times daily should be given along with the hypouricemic therapy until the patient is normouricemic and without gouty attacks for 6 months or as long as tophi are present. Colchicine should not be used in dialysis patients and is given in lower doses in patients with renal disease or with P gylcoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitors such as clarithromycin that can increase toxicity or colchicine. Pegloticase is a new urate-lowering biologic agent that can be effective in patients allergic to or failing xanthine oxidase inhibitors. New uricosurics are undergoing investigation.
 
Cppd Deposition Disease

Pathogenesis

The deposition of CPPD crystals in articular tissues is most common in the elderly, occurring in 10每15% of persons age 65每75 years and 30每50% of those >85 years. In most cases, this process is asymptomatic and the cause of CPPD deposition is uncertain. Because >80% of patients are >60 years and 70% have preexisting joint damage from other conditions, it is likely that biochemical changes in aging or diseased cartilage favors crystal nucleation. In patients with CPPD arthritis there is increased production of inorganic pyrophosphate and decreased levels of pyrophosphatases in cartilage extracts. Mutations in the ANKH gene, as described in both familial and sporadic cases, can increase elaboration and extracellular transport of pyrophosphate. The increase in pyrophosphate production appears to be related to enhanced activity of ATP pyrophosphohydrolase and 5'-nucleotidase, which catalyze the reaction of ATP to adenosine and pyrophosphate. This pyrophosphate could combine with calcium to form CPPD crystals in matrix vesicles or on collagen fibers. There are decreased levels of cartilage glycosaminoglycans that normally inhibit and regulate crystal nucleation. High activities of transglutaminase enzymes also may contribute to the deposition of CPPD crystals.

Release of CPPD crystals into the joint space is followed by the phagocytosis of those crystals by monocyte-macrophages and neutrophils, which respond by releasing chemotactic and inflammatory substances and, as with MSU crystals, activate the inflammasome.

A minority of patients with CPPD arthropathy have metabolic abnormalities or hereditary CPPD disease (Table 333-2). These associations suggest that a variety of different metabolic products may enhance CPPD deposition either by directly altering cartilage or by inhibiting inorganic pyrophosphatases. Included among these conditions are hyperparathyroidism, hemochromatosis, hypophosphatasia, hypomagnesemia, and possibly myxedema. The presence of CPPD arthritis in individuals <50 years old should lead to consideration of these metabolic disorders (Table 333-2) and inherited forms of disease, including those identified in a variety of ethnic groups. Genomic DNA studies performed on different kindreds have shown a possible location of genetic defects on chromosome 8q or on chromosome 5p in a region that expresses the gene of the membrane pyrophosphate channel (ANKH gene). As noted above, mutations described in the ANKH gene in kindreds with CPPD arthritis can increase extracellular pyrophosphate and induce CPPD crystal formation. Investigation of younger patients with CPPD deposition should include inquiry for evidence of familial aggregation and evaluation of serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, magnesium, serum iron, and transferrin.

Table 333-2 Conditions Associated with Calcium Pyrophosphate Dihydrate Disease

 
 
Aging

Disease-associated

    Primary hyperparathyroidism

    Hemochromatosis

    Hypophosphatasia

    Hypomagnesemia

    Chronic gout

    Postmeniscectomy

    Gitelman's syndrome

    Epiphyseal dysplasias
 
 

 

Clinical Manifestations

CPPD arthropathy may be asymptomatic, acute, subacute, or chronic or may cause acute synovitis superimposed on chronically involved joints. Acute CPPD arthritis originally was termed pseudogout by McCarty and co-workers because of its striking similarity to gout. Other clinical manifestations of CPPD deposition include (1) induction or enhancement of peculiar forms of osteoarthritis, (2) induction of severe destructive disease that may radiographically mimic neuropathic arthritis, (3) production of symmetric synovitis that is clinically similar to rheumatoid arthritis and sometimes seen in familial forms with early onset, (4) intervertebral disk and ligament calcification with restriction of spine mobility that mimics ankylosing spondylitis (also seen in hereditary forms), (5) spinal stenosis (most commonly seen in the elderly), and (6) rarely periarticular tophus-like nodules.

The knee is the joint most frequently affected in CPPD arthropathy. Other sites include the wrist, shoulder, ankle, elbow, and hands. The temporomandibular joint and ligamentum flavum of the spinal canal may be involved. Clinical and radiographic evidence indicates that CPPD deposition is polyarticular in at least two-thirds of patients. When the clinical picture resembles that of slowly progressive osteoarthritis, diagnosis may be difficult. Joint distribution may provide important clues suggesting CPPD disease. For example, primary osteoarthritis less often involves a metacarpophalangeal, wrist, elbow, shoulder, or ankle joints. If radiographs reveal punctate and/or linear radiodense deposits in fibrocartilaginous joint menisci or articular hyaline cartilage (chondrocalcinosis), the diagnostic likelihood of CPPD disease is further increased. Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of typical rhomboid or rodlike crystals in synovial fluid or articular tissue (Fig. 333-2). In the absence of joint effusion or indications to obtain a synovial biopsy, chondrocalcinosis is presumptive of CPPD deposition. One exception is chondrocalcinosis due to CaOx in some patients with chronic renal failure.

Figure 333-2

 
 
 
Intracellular and extracellular calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals, as seen in a fresh preparation of synovial fluid, illustrate rectangular, rod-shaped, and rhomboid crystals that are weakly positive birefringent crystals (compensated polarized light microscopy; 400x).
 
 

Acute attacks of CPPD arthritis may be precipitated by trauma. Rapid diminution of serum calcium concentration, as may occur in severe medical illness or after surgery (especially parathyroidectomy), can also lead to pseudogout attacks.

In as many as 50% of cases, episodes of CPPD-induced inflammation are associated with low-grade fever and, on occasion, temperatures as high as 40∼C (104∼F). Whether or not radiographic proof of chondrocalcinosis is evident in the involved joint(s), synovial fluid analysis with microbial cultures is essential to rule out the possibility of infection. In fact, infection in a joint with any microcrystalline deposition process can lead to crystal shedding and subsequent synovitis from both crystals and microorganisms. Synovial fluid in acute CPPD disease has inflammatory characteristics. The leukocyte count can range from several thousand cells to 100,000 cells/L, with the mean being about 24,000 cells/L and the predominant cell being the neutrophil. Polarized light microscopy usually reveals rhomboid, square, or rodlike crystals with weak positive birefringence inside tissue fragments and fibrin clots and in neutrophils (Fig. 333-2). CPPD crystals may coexist with MSU and apatite in some cases.

Treatment: Cppd Deposition Disease

Untreated acute attacks may last a few days to as long as a month. Treatment by joint aspiration and NSAIDs or by intraarticular glucocorticoid injection may result in return to prior status in 10 days. For patients with frequent recurrent attacks of pseudogout, daily prophylactic treatment with low doses of colchicine may be helpful in decreasing the frequency of the attacks. Severe polyarticular attacks usually require short courses of glucocorticoids or, as recently reported, an IL-1 antagonist, anakinra. Unfortunately, there is no effective way to remove CPPD deposits from cartilage and synovium. Uncontrolled studies suggest that the administration of antimalarial agents or even methotrexate may be helpful in controlling persistent synovitis. Patients with progressive destructive large-joint arthropathy may require joint replacement.
 
Calcium Apatite Deposition Disease

Pathogenesis

Apatite is the primary mineral of normal bone and teeth. Abnormal accumulation of basic calcium phosphates, largely carbonate substituted apatite, can occur in areas of tissue damage (dystrophic calcification), hypercalcemic or hyperparathyroid states (metastatic calcification), and certain conditions of unknown cause (Table 333-3). In chronic renal failure, hyperphosphatemia can contribute to extensive apatite deposition both in and around joints. Familial aggregation is rarely seen; no association with ANKH mutations has been described thus far. Apatite crystals are deposited primarily on matrix vessels. Incompletely understood alterations in matrix proteoglycans, phosphatases, hormones, and cytokines probably can influence crystal formation.

Table 333-3 Conditions Associated with Apatite Deposition Disease

 
 
Aging

Osteoarthritis

Hemorrhagic shoulder effusions in the elderly (Milwaukee shoulder)

Destructive arthropathy

Tendinitis, bursitis

Tumoral calcinosis (sporadic cases)

Disease-associated

    Hyperparathyroidism

    Milk-alkali syndrome

    Renal failure/long-term dialysis

    Connective tissue diseases (e.g., systemic sclerosis, idiopathicmyositis, SLE)

    Heterotopic calcification after neurologic catastrophes (e.g., stroke, spinal cord injury)

Heredity

    Bursitis, arthritis

    Tumoral calcinosis

    Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
 
 


Abbreviation:SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
 

Apatite aggregates are commonly present in synovial fluid in an extremely destructive chronic arthropathy of the elderly that occurs most often in the shoulders (Milwaukee shoulder) and in a similar process in hips, knees, and erosive osteoarthritis of fingers. Joint destruction is associated with damage to cartilage and supporting structures, leading to instability and deformity. Progression tends to be indolent, and synovial fluid leukocyte counts are usually <2000/L. Symptoms range from minimal to severe pain and disability that may lead to joint replacement surgery. Whether severely affected patients merely represent an extreme synovial tissue response to the apatite crystals that are so common in osteoarthritis is uncertain. Synovial lining cell or fibroblast cultures exposed to apatite (or CPPD) crystals can undergo mitosis and markedly increase the release of prostaglandin E2 and cytokines and also collagenases and neutral proteases, underscoring the destructive potential of abnormally stimulated synovial lining cells.

Clinical Manifestations

Periarticular or articular deposits may occur and may be associated with acute reversible inflammation and/or chronic damage to the joint capsule, tendons, bursa, or articular surfaces. The most common sites of apatite deposition include bursae and tendons in and/or around the knees, shoulders, hips, and fingers. Clinical manifestations include asymptomatic radiographic abnormalities, acute synovitis, bursitis, tendinitis, and chronic destructive arthropathy. Although the true incidence of apatite arthritis is not known, 30每50% of patients with osteoarthritis have apatite microcrystals in their synovial fluid. Such crystals frequently can be identified in clinically stable osteoarthritic joints, but they are more likely to come to attention in persons experiencing acute or subacute worsening of joint pain and swelling. The synovial fluid leukocyte count in apatite arthritis is usually low (<2000/L) despite dramatic symptoms, with predominance of mononuclear cells.

Diagnosis

Intra- and/or periarticular calcifications with or without erosive, destructive, or hypertrophic changes may be seen on radiographs (Fig. 333-3). They should be distinguished from the linear calcifications typical of CPPD deposition disease.

Figure 333-3

 
 
 
 
A. Radiograph showing calcification due to apatite crystals surrounding an eroded joint. B. An electron micrograph demonstrates dark needle-shaped apatite crystals within a vacuole of a synovial fluid mononuclear cell (30,000x).
 
 

Definitive diagnosis of apatite arthropathy, also called basic calcium phosphate disease, depends on identification of crystals from synovial fluid or tissue (Fig. 333-3). Individual crystals are very small and can be seen only by electron microscopy. Clumps of crystals may appear as 1- to 20-m shiny intra- or extracellular nonbirefringent globules or aggregates that stain purplish with Wright's stain and bright red with alizarin red S. Tetracycline binding is under investigation as a labeling alternative. Absolute identification depends on electron microscopy with energy-dispersive elemental analysis, x-ray diffraction, infrared spectroscopy, or Raman microspectroscopy, but they usually are not required in clinical diagnosis.

Treatment: Calcium Apatite Deposition Disease

Treatment of apatite arthritis or periarthritis is nonspecific. Acute attacks of bursitis or synovitis may be self-limiting, resolving in days to several weeks. Aspiration of effusions and the use of either NSAIDs or oral colchicine for 2 weeks or intra- or periarticular injection of a depot glucocorticoid appear to shorten the duration and intensity of symptoms. Local injection of disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was effective in one study of calcific tendinitis at the shoulder. Periarticular apatite deposits may be resorbed with resolution of attacks. Agents to lower serum phosphate levels may lead to resorption of deposits in renal failure patients receiving hemodialysis. In patients with underlying severe destructive articular changes, response to medical therapy is usually less rewarding.
 
Caox Deposition Disease

Pathogenesis

Primary oxalosis is a rare hereditary metabolic disorder (Chap. 364). Enhanced production of oxalic acid may result from at least two different enzyme defects, leading to hyperoxalemia and deposition of calcium oxalate crystals in tissues. Nephrocalcinosis, renal failure, and death usually occur before age 20. Acute and/or chronic CaOx arthritis and periarthritis may complicate primary oxalosis during later years of illness.

Secondary oxalosis is more common than the primary disorder. It is one of the many metabolic abnormalities that complicate end-stage renal disease. In chronic renal disease, calcium oxalate deposits have long been recognized in visceral organs, blood vessels, bones, and cartilage and are now known to be one of the causes of arthritis in chronic renal failure. Thus far, reported patients have been dependent on long-term hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis (Chap. 281), and many had received ascorbic acid supplements. Ascorbic acid is metabolized to oxalate, which is inadequately cleared in uremia and by dialysis. Such supplements usually are avoided in dialysis programs because of the risk of enhancing hyperoxalosis and its sequelae.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

CaOx aggregates can be found in bone, articular cartilage, synovium, and periarticular tissues. From these sites, crystals may be shed, causing acute synovitis. Persistent aggregates of CaOx can, like apatite and CPPD, stimulate synovial cell proliferation and enzyme release, resulting in progressive articular destruction. Deposits have been documented in fingers, wrists, elbows, knees, ankles, and feet.

Clinical features of acute CaOx arthritis may not be distinguishable from those due to sodium urate, CPPD, or apatite. Radiographs may reveal chondrocalcinosis or soft tissue calcifications. CaOx-induced synovial effusions are usually noninflammatory, with <2000 leukocytes/L, or mildly inflammatory. Neutrophils or mononuclear cells can predominate. CaOx crystals have a variable shape and variable birefringence to polarized light. The most easily recognized forms are bipyramidal, have strong birefringence (Fig. 333-4), and stain with alizarin red S.

Figure 333-4

 
 
 
Bipyramidal and small polymorphic calcium oxalate crystals from synovial fluid are a classic finding in CaOx arthropathy (ordinary light microscopy; 400x).
 
 

Treatment: Calcium Oxalate Deposition Disease

Treatment of CaOx arthropathy with NSAIDs, colchicine, intraarticular glucocorticoids, and/or an increased frequency of dialysis has produced only slight improvement. In primary oxalosis, liver transplantation has induced a significant reduction in crystal deposits (Chap. 364).
 
Acknowledgment

This chapter has been revised for the previous edition and this edition from an original version written by Antonio Reginato, MD, in earlier editions ofHarrison's Principles of Internal Medicine.
 
Further Readings

Maldonado I et al: Oxalate crystal deposition disease. Curr Rheumatol Rep 4:257, 2002[PMID: 12010612]  [Full Text]

 
Molloy ES, McCarthy GM: Basic calcium phosphate crystals: Pathways to joint destruction. Curr Opinion Rheumatol 18:187, 2006[PMID: 16462527]  [Full Text]

 
Reiders MK et al: A randomised controlled trial on the efficacy and tolerability with dose escalation of allopurinol 300每600 mg/day versus benzbromarone 100每200 mg/day in patients with gout. Ann Rheum Dis 68:892, 2009 

 
Richette P et al: An update on the epidemiology of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease. Rheumatology (Oxford) 48:711, 2009[PMID: 19398486]  [Full Text]

 
Thouverey C et al: Inorganic pyrophosphate as a regulator of hydroxyapatite or calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate mineral deposition by matrix vesicles. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 17:64, 2009[PMID: 18603452]  [Full Text]

 
Wortmann RL et al (eds): Crystal-Induced Arthropathies: Gout, Pseudogout and Apatite-Associated Syndromes. New York, Taylor & Francis, 2006 
 
 

^^
Chapter 334. Infectious Arthritis >
 

Infectious Arthritis: Introduction

Although Staphylococcus aureus, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and other bacteria are the most common causes of infectious arthritis, various mycobacteria, spirochetes, fungi, and viruses also infect joints (Table 334-1). Since acute bacterial infection can destroy articular cartilage rapidly, all inflamed joints must be evaluated without delay to exclude noninfectious processes and determine appropriate antimicrobial therapy and drainage procedures. For more detailed information on infectious arthritis caused by specific organisms, the reader is referred to the chapters on those organisms.

Table 334-1 Differential Diagnosis of Arthritis Syndromes

 
 
Acute Monarticular Arthritis Chronic Monarticular Arthritis Polyarticular Arthritis 
Staphylococcus aureus  Mycobacterium tuberculosis  Neisseria meningitidis  
Streptococcus pneumoniae  Nontuberculous mycobacteria N. gonorrhoeae  
-Hemolytic streptococci Borrelia burgdorferi  Nongonococcal bacterial arthritis 
Gram-negative bacilli Treponema pallidum  Bacterial endocarditis 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae  Candida species  Candida species  
Candida species  Sporothrix schenckii  Poncet's disease (tuberculous rheumatism) 
Crystal-induced arthritis Coccidioides immitis  Hepatitis B virus 
Fracture Blastomyces dermatitidis  Parvovirus B19 
Hemarthrosis Aspergillus species  HIV 
Foreign body Cryptococcus neoformans  Human T-lymphotropic virus type I 
Osteoarthritis Nocardia species  Rubella virus 
Ischemic necrosis Brucella species  Arthropod-borne viruses 
Monarticular rheumatoid arthritis Legg-Calv谷-Perthes disease Sickle cell disease flare 
  Osteoarthritis Reactive arthritis 
    Serum sickness 
    Acute rheumatic fever 
    Inflammatory bowel disease 
    Systemic lupus erythematosus 
    Rheumatoid arthritis/Still's disease 
    Other vasculitides 
    Sarcoidosis 
 

 

Acute bacterial infection typically involves a single joint or a few joints. Subacute or chronic monarthritis or oligoarthritis suggests mycobacterial or fungal infection; episodic inflammation is seen in syphilis, Lyme disease, and the reactive arthritis that follows enteric infections and chlamydial urethritis. Acute polyarticular inflammation occurs as an immunologic reaction during the course of endocarditis, rheumatic fever, disseminated neisserial infection, and acute hepatitis B. Bacteria and viruses occasionally infect multiple joints, the former most commonly in persons with rheumatoid arthritis.

Approach to the Patient: Infectious Arthritis

Aspiration of synovial fluid an essential element in the evaluation of potentially infected joints can be performed without difficulty in most cases by the insertion of a large-bore needle into the site of maximal fluctuance or tenderness or by the route of easiest access. Ultrasonography or fluoroscopy may be used to guide aspiration of difficult-to-localize effusions of the hip and, occasionally, the shoulder and other joints. Normal synovial fluid contains <180 cells (predominantly mononuclear cells) per microliter. Synovial cell counts averaging 100,000/L (range, 25,000每250,000/L), with >90% neutrophils, are characteristic of acute bacterial infections. Crystal-induced, rheumatoid, and other noninfectious inflammatory arthritides usually are associated with <30,000每50,000 cells/L; cell counts of 10,000每30,000/L, with 50每70% neutrophils and the remainder lymphocytes, are common in mycobacterial and fungal infections. Definitive diagnosis of an infectious process relies on identification of the pathogen in stained smears of synovial fluid, isolation of the pathogen from cultures of synovial fluid and blood, or detection of microbial nucleic acids and proteins by nucleic acid amplification (NAA)每based assays and immunologic techniques.
 
Acute Bacterial Arthritis

Pathogenesis

Bacteria enter the joint from the bloodstream; from a contiguous site of infection in bone or soft tissue; or by direct inoculation during surgery, injection, animal or human bite, or trauma. In hematogenous infection, bacteria escape from synovial capillaries, which have no limiting basement membrane, and within hours provoke neutrophilic infiltration of the synovium. Neutrophils and bacteria enter the joint space; later, bacteria adhere to articular cartilage. Degradation of cartilage begins within 48 h as a result of increased intraarticular pressure, release of proteases and cytokines from chondrocytes and synovial macrophages, and invasion of the cartilage by bacteria and inflammatory cells. Histologic studies reveal bacteria lining the synovium and cartilage as well as abscessesextending into the synovium, cartilage, and'in severe cases'subchondral bone. Synovial proliferation results in the formation of a pannus over the cartilage, and thrombosis of inflamed synovial vessels develops. Bacterial factors that appear important in the pathogenesis of infective arthritis include various surface-associated adhesins in S. aureus that permit adherence to cartilage and endotoxins that promote chondrocyte-mediated breakdown of cartilage.

Microbiology

The hematogenous route of infection is the most common route in all age groups, and nearly every bacterial pathogen is capable of causing septic arthritis. In infants, group B streptococci, gram-negative enteric bacilli, and S. aureus are the most common pathogens. Since the advent of the Haemophilus influenzae vaccine, the predominant causes among children <5 years of age have been S. aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus), and (in some centers) Kingella kingae. Among young adults and adolescents, N. gonorrhoeae is the most commonly implicated organism. S. aureus accounts for most nongonococcal isolates in adults of all ages; gram-negative bacilli, pneumococci, and -hemolytic streptococci'particularly groups A and B but also groups C, G, and F'are involved in up to one-third of cases in older adults, especially those with underlying comorbid illnesses.

Infections after surgical procedures or penetrating injuries are due most often to S. aureus and occasionally to other gram-positive bacteria or gram-negative bacilli. Infections with coagulase-negative staphylococci are unusual except after the implantation of prosthetic joints or arthroscopy. Anaerobic organisms, often in association with aerobic or facultative bacteria, are found after human bites and when decubitus ulcers or intraabdominal abscesses spread into adjacent joints. Polymicrobial infections complicate traumatic injuries with extensive contamination. Bites and scratches from cats and other animals may introduce Pasteurella multocida into joints, and bites from humans may introduce Eikenella corrodens or other components of the oral flora.

Nongonococcal Bacterial Arthritis

Epidemiology

Although hematogenous infections with virulent organisms such as S. aureus, H. influenzae, and pyogenic streptococci occur in healthy persons, there is an underlying host predisposition in many cases of septic arthritis. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis have the highest incidence of infective arthritis (most often secondary to S. aureus) because of chronically inflamed joints; glucocorticoid therapy; and frequent breakdown of rheumatoid nodules, vasculitic ulcers, and skin overlying deformed joints. Diabetes mellitus, glucocorticoid therapy, hemodialysis, and malignancy all carry an increased risk of infection with S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors (etanercept and infliximab), which increasingly are used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, predispose to mycobacterial infections and possibly to other pyogenic bacterial infections and could be associated with septic arthritis in this population. Pneumococcal infections complicate alcoholism, deficiencies of humoral immunity, and hemoglobinopathies. Pneumococci, Salmonella species, and H. influenzae cause septic arthritis in persons infected with HIV. Persons with primary immunoglobulin deficiency are at risk for mycoplasmal arthritis, which results in permanent joint damage if tetracycline and replacement therapy with IV immunoglobulin are not administered promptly. IV drug users acquire staphylococcal and streptococcal infections from their own flora and acquire pseudomonal and other gram-negative infections from drugs and injection paraphernalia.

Clinical Manifestations

Some 90% of patients present with involvement of a single joint'most commonly the knee; less frequently the hip; and still less often the shoulder, wrist, or elbow. Small joints of the hands and feet are more likely to be affected after direct inoculation or a bite. Among IV drug users, infections of the spine, sacroiliac joints, and sternoclavicular joints (Fig. 334-1) are more common than infections of the appendicular skeleton. Polyarticular infection is most common among patients with rheumatoid arthritis and may resemble a flare of the underlying disease.

Figure 334-1

 
 
 
Acute septic arthritis of the sternoclavicular joint. A man in his forties with a history of cirrhosis presented with a new onset of fever and lower neck pain. He had no history of IV drug use or previous catheter placement. Jaundice and a painful swollen area over his left sternoclavicular joint were evident on physical examination. Cultures of blood drawn at admission grew group B Streptococcus. The patient recovered after treatment with IV penicillin. (Courtesy of Francisco M. Marty, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston; with permission.)
 
 

The usual presentation consists of moderate to severe pain that is uniform around the joint, effusion, muscle spasm, and decreased range of motion. Fever in the range of 38.3∼每38.9∼C (101∼每102∼F) and sometimes higher is common but may not be present, especially in persons with rheumatoid arthritis, renal or hepatic insufficiency, or conditions requiring immunosuppressive therapy. The inflamed, swollen joint is usually evident on examination except in the case of a deeply situated joint such as the hip, shoulder, or sacroiliac joint. Cellulitis, bursitis, and acute osteomyelitis, which may produce a similar clinical picture, should be distinguished from septic arthritis by their greater range of motion and less than circumferential swelling. A focus of extraarticular infection such as a boil or pneumonia should be sought. Peripheral-blood leukocytosis with a left shift and elevation of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein level are common.

Plain radiographs show evidence of soft tissue swelling, joint-space widening, and displacement of tissue planes by the distended capsule. Narrowing of the joint space and bony erosions indicate advanced infection and a poor prognosis. Ultrasound is useful for detecting effusions in the hip, and CT or MRI can demonstrate infections of the sacroiliac joint, the sternoclavicular joint, and the spine very well.

Laboratory Findings

Specimens of peripheral blood and synovial fluid should be obtained before antibiotics are administered. Blood cultures are positive in up to 50每70% of S. aureus infections but are less frequently positive in infections due to other organisms. The synovial fluid is turbid, serosanguineous, or frankly purulent. Gram-stained smears confirm the presence of large numbers of neutrophils. Levels of total protein and lactate dehydrogenase in synovial fluid are elevated, and the glucose level is depressed; however, these findings are not specific for infection, and measurement of these levels is not necessary for diagnosis. The synovial fluid should be examined for crystals, because gout and pseudogout can resemble septic arthritis clinically, and infection and crystal-induced disease occasionally occur together. Organisms are seen on synovial fluid smears in nearly three-quarters of infections with S. aureus and streptococci and in 30每50% of infections due to gram-negative and other bacteria. Cultures of synovial fluid are positive in >90% of cases. Inoculation of synovial fluid into bottles containing liquid media for blood cultures increases the yield of a culture, especially if the pathogen is a fastidious organism or the patient is taking an antibiotic. Although not yet widely available, NAA-based assays for bacterial DNA will be useful for the diagnosis of partially treated or culture-negative bacterial arthritis.

Treatment: Nongonococcal Bacterial Arthritis

Prompt administration of systemic antibiotics and drainage of the involved joint can prevent destruction of cartilage, postinfectious degenerative arthritis, joint instability, or deformity. Once samples of blood and synovial fluid have been obtained for culture, empirical antibiotics should be given that are directed against the bacteria visualized on smears or the pathogens that are likely in light of the patient's age and risk factors. Initial therapy should consist of IV administration of bactericidal agents; direct instillation of antibiotics into the joint is not necessary to achieve adequate levels in synovial fluid and tissue. An IV third-generation cephalosporin such as cefotaxime (1 g every 8 h) or ceftriaxone (1每2 g every 24 h) provides adequate empirical coverage for most community-acquired infections in adults when smears show no organisms. IV vancomycin (1 g every 12 h) is used if there are gram-positive cocci on the smear. If methicillin-resistant S. aureus is an unlikely pathogen (e.g., when it is not widespread in the community), either oxacillin or nafcillin (2 g every 4 h) should be given. In addition, an aminoglycoside or third-generation cephalosporin should be given to IV drug users or other patients in whom Pseudomonas aeruginosa may be the responsible agent.

Definitive therapy is based on the identity and antibiotic susceptibility of the bacteria isolated in culture. Infections due to staphylococci are treated with oxacillin, nafcillin, or vancomycin for 4 weeks. Pneumococcal and streptococcal infections due to penicillin-susceptible organisms respond to 2 weeks of therapy with penicillin G (2 million units IV every 4 h); infections caused by H. influenzae and by strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae that are resistant to penicillin are treated with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone for 2 weeks. Most enteric gram-negative infections can be cured in 3每4 weeks by a second- or third-generation cephalosporin given IV or by a fluoroquinolone such as levofloxacin (500 mg IV or PO every 24 h). P. aeruginosa infection should be treated for at least 2 weeks with a combination regimen of an aminoglycoside plus either an extended-spectrum penicillin such as mezlocillin (3 g IV every 4 h) or an antipseudomonal cephalosporin such as ceftazidime (1 g IV every 8 h). If tolerated, this regimen is continued for an additional 2 weeks; alternatively, a fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin (750 mg PO twice daily) is given by itself or with the penicillin or cephalosporin in place of the aminoglycoside.

Timely drainage of pus and necrotic debris from the infected joint is required for a favorable outcome. Needle aspiration of readily accessible joints such as the knee may be adequate if loculations or particulate matter in the joint does not prevent its thorough decompression. Arthroscopic drainage and lavage may be employed initially or within several days if repeated needle aspiration fails to relieve symptoms, decrease the volume of the effusion and the synovial white cell count, and clear bacteria from smears and cultures. In some cases, arthrotomy is necessary to remove loculations and debride infected synovium, cartilage, or bone. Septic arthritis of the hip is best managed with arthrotomy, particularly in young children, in whom infection threatens the viability of the femoral head. Septic joints do not require immobilization except for pain control before symptoms are alleviated by treatment. Weight bearing should be avoided until signs of inflammation have subsided, but frequent passive motion of the joint is indicated to maintain full mobility. Although addition of glucocorticoids to antibiotic treatment improves the outcome of S. aureus arthritis in experimental animals, no clinical trials have evaluated this approach in humans.

Gonococcal Arthritis

Epidemiology

Although its incidence has declined in recent years, gonococcal arthritis (Chap. 144) has accounted for up to 70% of episodes of infectious arthritis in persons <40 years of age in the United States. Arthritis due to N. gonorrhoeae is a consequence of bacteremia arising from gonococcal infection or, more frequently, from asymptomatic gonococcal mucosal colonization of the urethra, cervix, or pharynx. Women are at greatest risk during menses and during pregnancy and overall are two to three times more likely than men to develop disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) and arthritis. Persons with complement deficiencies, especially of the terminal components, are prone to recurrent episodes of gonococcemia. Strains of gonococci that are most likely to cause DGI include those which produce transparent colonies in culture, have the type IA outer-membrane protein, or are of the AUH-auxotroph type.

Clinical Manifestations and Laboratory Findings

The most common manifestation of DGI is a syndrome of fever, chills, rash, and articular symptoms. Small numbers of papules that progress to hemorrhagic pustules develop on the trunk and the extensor surfaces of the distal extremities. Migratory arthritis and tenosynovitis of the knees, hands, wrists, feet, and ankles are prominent. The cutaneous lesions and articular findings are believed to be the consequence of an immune reaction to circulating gonococci and immune-complex deposition in tissues. Thus, cultures of synovial fluid are consistently negative, and blood cultures are positive in <45% of patients. Synovial fluid may be difficult to obtain from inflamed joints and usually contains only 10,000每20,000 leukocytes/L.

True gonococcal septic arthritis is less common than the DGI syndrome and always follows DGI, which is unrecognized in one-third of patients. A single joint such as the hip, knee, ankle, or wrist is usually involved. Synovial fluid, which contains >50,000 leukocytes/L, can be obtained with ease; the gonococcus is only occasionally evident in gram-stained smears, and cultures of synovial fluid are positive in <40% of cases. Blood cultures are almost always negative.

Because it is difficult to isolate gonococci from synovial fluid and blood, specimens for culture should be obtained from potentially infected mucosal sites. Cultures and gram-stained smears of skin lesions are occasionally positive. All specimens for culture should be plated onto Thayer-Martin agar directly or in special transport media at the bedside and transferred promptly to the microbiology laboratory in an atmosphere of 5% CO2, as generated in a candle jar. NAA-based assays are extremely sensitive in detecting gonococcal DNA in synovial fluid. A dramatic alleviation of symptoms within 12每24 h after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy supports a clinical diagnosis of the DGI syndrome if cultures are negative.

Treatment: Gonococcal Arthritis

Initial treatment consists of ceftriaxone (1 g IV or IM every 24 h) to cover possible penicillin-resistant organisms. Once local and systemic signs are clearly resolving and if the sensitivity of the isolate permits, the 7-day course of therapy can be completed with an oral agent such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily). If penicillin-susceptible organisms are isolated, amoxicillin (500 mg three times daily) may be used. Suppurative arthritis usually responds to needle aspiration of involved joints and 7每14 days of antibiotic treatment. Arthroscopic lavage or arthrotomy is rarely required. Patients with DGI should be treated for Chlamydia trachomatis infection unless this infection is ruled out by appropriate testing.

It is noteworthy that arthritis symptoms similar to those seen in DGI occur in meningococcemia. A dermatitis-arthritis syndrome, purulent monarthritis, and reactive polyarthritis have been described. All respond to treatment with IV penicillin.
 
Spirochetal Arthritis

Lyme Disease

Lyme disease (Chap. 173) due to infection with the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi causes arthritis in up to 70% of persons who are not treated. Intermittent arthralgias and myalgias'but not arthritis'occur within days or weeks of inoculation of the spirochete by the Ixodes tick. Later, there are three patterns of joint disease: (1) Fifty percent of untreated persons experience intermittent episodes of monarthritis or oligoarthritis involving the knee and/or other large joints. The symptoms wax and wane without treatment over months, and each year 10每20% of patients report loss of joint symptoms. (2) Twenty percent of untreated persons develop a pattern of waxing and waning arthralgias. (3) Ten percent of untreated patients develop chronic inflammatory synovitis that results in erosive lesions and destruction of the joint. Serologic tests for IgG antibodies to B. burgdorferi are positive in >90% of persons with Lyme arthritis, and an NAA-based assay detects Borrelia DNA in 85%.

Treatment: Lyme Arthritis

Lyme arthritis generally responds well to therapy. A regimen of oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 30 days), oral amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily for 30 days), or parenteral ceftriaxone (2 g/d for 2每4 weeks) is recommended. Patients who do not respond to a total of 2 months of oral therapy or 1 month of parenteral therapy are unlikely to benefit from additional antibiotic therapy and are treated with anti-inflammatory agents or synovectomy. Failure of therapy is associated with host features such as the human leukocyte antigen DR4 (HLA-DR4) genotype, persistent reactivity to OspA (outer-surface protein A), and the presence of hLFA-1 (human leukocyte function每associated antigen 1), which cross-reacts with OspA.

Syphilitic Arthritis

Articular manifestations occur in different stages of syphilis (Chap. 169). In early congenital syphilis, periarticular swelling and immobilization of the involved limbs (Parrot's pseudoparalysis) complicate osteochondritis of long bones. Clutton's joint, a late manifestation of congenital syphilis that typically develops between ages 8 and 15 years, is caused by chronic painless synovitis with effusions of large joints, particularly the knees and elbows. Secondary syphilis may be associated with arthralgias, with symmetric arthritis of the knees and ankles and occasionally of the shoulders and wrists, and with sacroiliitis. The arthritis follows a subacute to chronic course with a mixed mononuclear and neutrophilic synovial-fluid pleocytosis (typical cell counts, 5000每15,000/L). Immunologic mechanisms may contribute to the arthritis, and symptoms usually improve rapidly with penicillin therapy. In tertiary syphilis, Charcot's joint results from sensory loss due to tabes dorsalis. Penicillin is not helpful in this setting.
 
Mycobacterial Arthritis

Tuberculous arthritis (Chap. 165) accounts for 1% of all cases of tuberculosis and 10% of extrapulmonary cases. The most common presentation is chronic granulomatous monarthritis. An unusual syndrome, Poncet's disease, is a reactive symmetric form of polyarthritis that affects persons with visceral or disseminated tuberculosis. No mycobacteria are found in the joints, and symptoms resolve with antituberculous therapy.

Unlike tuberculous osteomyelitis (Chap. 126), which typically involves the thoracic and lumbar spine (50% of cases), tuberculous arthritis primarily involves the large weight-bearing joints, in particular the hips, knees, and ankles, and only occasionally involves smaller non-weight-bearing joints. Progressive monarticular swelling and pain develop over months or years, and systemic symptoms are seen in only half of all cases. Tuberculous arthritis occurs as part of a disseminated primary infection or through late reactivation, often in persons with HIV infection or other immunocompromised hosts. Coexistent active pulmonary tuberculosis is unusual.

Aspiration of the involved joint yields fluid with an average cell count of 20,000/L, with 50% neutrophils. Acid-fast staining of the fluid yields positive results in fewer than one-third of cases, and cultures are positive in 80%. Culture of synovial tissue taken at biopsy is positive in 90% of cases and shows granulomatous inflammation in most. NAA methods can shorten the time to diagnosis to 1 or 2 days. Radiographs reveal peripheral erosions at the points of synovial attachment, periarticular osteopenia, and eventually joint-space narrowing. Therapy for tuberculous arthritis is the same as that for tuberculous pulmonary disease, requiring the administration of multiple agents for 6每9 months. Therapy is more prolonged in immunosuppressed individuals such as those infected with HIV.

Various atypical mycobacteria (Chap. 167) found in water and soil may cause chronic indolent arthritis. Such disease results from trauma and direct inoculation associated with farming, gardening, or aquatic activities. Smaller joints, such as the digits, wrists, and knees, are usually involved. Involvement of tendon sheaths and bursae is typical. The mycobacterial species involved include Mycobacterium marinum, M. avium-intracellulare, M. terrae, M. kansasii, M. fortuitum, and M. chelonae. In persons who have HIV infection or are receiving immunosuppressive therapy, hematogenous spread to the joints has been reported for M. kansasii, M. avium-intracellulare, and M. haemophilum. Diagnosis usually requires biopsy and culture, and therapy is based on antimicrobial susceptibility patterns.
 
Fungal Arthritis

Fungi are an unusual cause of chronic monarticular arthritis. Granulomatous articular infection with the endemic dimorphic fungi Coccidioides immitis, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and (less commonly) Histoplasma capsulatum(Fig. 334-2) results from hematogenous seeding or direct extension from bony lesions in persons with disseminated disease. Joint involvement is an unusual complication of sporotrichosis (infection with Sporothrix schenckii) among gardeners and other persons who work with soil or sphagnum moss. Articular sporotrichosis is six times more common among men than among women, and alcoholics and other debilitated hosts are at risk for polyarticular infection.

Figure 334-2

 
 
 
 
 
Chronic arthritis caused byHistoplasma capsulatum in the left knee. A. A man in his sixties from El Salvador presented with a history of progressive knee pain and difficulty walking for several years. He had undergone arthroscopy for a meniscal tear 7 years before presentation (without relief) and had received several intraarticular glucocorticoid injections. The patient developed significant deformity of the knee over time, including a large effusion in the lateral aspect. B. An x-ray of the knee showed multiple abnormalities, including severe medial femorotibial joint-space narrowing, several large subchondral cysts within the tibia and the patellofemoral compartment, a large suprapatellar joint effusion, and a large soft tissue mass projecting laterally over the knee. C. MRI further defined these abnormalities and demonstrated the cystic nature of the lateral knee abnormality. Synovial biopsies demonstrated chronic inflammation with giant cells, and cultures grew H. capsulatum after 3 weeks of incubation. All clinical cystic lesions and the effusion resolved after 1 year of treatment with itraconazole. The patient underwent a left total knee replacement for definitive treatment. (Courtesy of Francisco M. Marty, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston; with permission.)
 
 

Candida infection involving a single joint'usually the knee, hip, or shoulder'results from surgical procedures, intraarticular injections, or (among critically ill patients with debilitating illnesses such as diabetes mellitus or hepatic or renal insufficiency and patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy) hematogenous spread. Candida infections in IV drug users typically involve the spine, sacroiliac joints, or other fibrocartilaginous joints. Unusual cases of arthritis due to Aspergillus species, Cryptococcus neoformans, Pseudallescheria boydii, and the dematiaceous fungi also have resulted from direct inoculation or disseminated hematogenous infection in immunocompromised persons.

The synovial fluid in fungal arthritis usually contains 10,000每40,000 cells/L, with 70% neutrophils. Stained specimens and cultures of synovial tissue often confirm the diagnosis of fungal arthritis when studies of synovial fluid give negative results. Treatment consists of drainage and lavage of the joint and systemic administration of an antifungal agent directed at a specific pathogen. The doses and duration of therapy are the same as for disseminated disease (see Part 8, Section 16). Intraarticular instillation of amphotericin B has been used in addition to IV therapy.
 
Viral Arthritis

Viruses produce arthritis by infecting synovial tissue during systemic infection or by provoking an immunologic reaction that involves joints. As many as 50% of women report persistent arthralgias, and 10% report frank arthritis within 3 days of the rash that follows natural infection with rubella virus and within 2每6 weeks after receipt of live-virus vaccine. Episodes of symmetric inflammation of fingers, wrists, and knees uncommonly recur for >1 year, but a syndrome of chronic fatigue, low-grade fever, headaches, and myalgias can persist for months or years. IV immunoglobulin has been helpful in selected cases. Self-limited monarticular or migratory polyarthritis may develop within 2 weeks of the parotitis of mumps; this sequela is more common among men than among women. Approximately 10% of children and 60% of women develop arthritis after infection with parvovirus B19. In adults, arthropathy sometimes occurs without fever or rash. Pain and stiffness, with less prominent swelling (primarily of the hands but also of the knees, wrists, and ankles), usually resolve within weeks, although a small proportion of patients develop chronic arthropathy.

About 2 weeks before the onset of jaundice, up to 10% of persons with acute hepatitis B develop an immune complex每mediated, serum sickness每like reaction with maculopapular rash, urticaria, fever, and arthralgias. Less common developments include symmetric arthritis involving the hands, wrists, elbows, or ankles and morning stiffness that resembles a flare of rheumatoid arthritis. Symptoms resolve at the time jaundice develops. Many persons with chronic hepatitis C infection report persistent arthralgia or arthritis, both in the presence and in the absence of cryoglobulinemia.

Painful arthritis involving larger joints often accompanies the fever and rash of several arthropod-borne viral infections, including those caused by chikungunya, O'nyong-nyong, Ross River, Mayaro, and Barmah Forest viruses (Chap. 196).Symmetric arthritis involving the hands and wrists may occur during the convalescent phase of infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Patients infected with an enterovirus frequently report arthralgias, and echovirus has been isolated from patients with acute polyarthritis.

Several arthritis syndromes are associated with HIV infection. Reactive arthritis (Reiter's syndrome) with painful lower-extremity oligoarthritis often follows an episode of urethritis in HIV-infected persons. HIV-associated reactive arthritis appears to be extremely common among persons with the HLA-B27 haplotype, but sacroiliac joint disease is unusual and is seen mostly in the absence of HLA-B27. Up to one-third of HIV-infected persons with psoriasis develop psoriatic arthritis. Painless monarthropathy and persistent symmetric polyarthropathy occasionally complicate HIV infection. Chronic persistent oligoarthritis of the shoulders, wrists, hands, and knees occurs in women infected with human T cell lymphotropic virus type I. Synovial thickening, destruction of articular cartilage, and leukemic-appearing atypical lymphocytes in synovial fluid are characteristic, but progression to T cell leukemia is unusual.
 
Parasitic Arthritis

Arthritis due to parasitic infection is rare. The guinea worm Dracunculus medinensis may cause destructive joint lesions in the lower extremities as migrating gravid female worms invade joints or cause ulcers in adjacent soft tissues that become secondarily infected. Hydatid cysts infect bones in 1每2% of cases of infection with Echinococcus granulosus. The expanding destructive cystic lesions may spread to and destroy adjacent joints, particularly the hip and pelvis. In rare cases, chronic synovitis has been associated with the presence of schistosomal eggs in synovial biopsies. Monarticular arthritis in children with lymphatic filariasis appears to respond to therapy with diethylcarbamazine even in the absence of microfilariae in synovial fluid. Reactive arthritis has been attributed to hookworm, Strongyloides, Cryptosporidium, and Giardia infection in case reports, but confirmation is required.
 
Postinfectious or Reactive Arthritis

Reactive polyarthritis develops several weeks after 1% of cases of nongonococcal urethritis and 2% of enteric infections, particularly those due to Yersinia enterocolitica, Shigella flexneri, Campylobacter jejuni, and Salmonella species. Only a minority of these patients have the other findings of classic reactive arthritis, including urethritis, conjunctivitis, uveitis, oral ulcers, and rash. Studies have identified microbial DNA or antigen in synovial fluid or blood, but the pathogenesis of this condition is poorly understood.

Reactive arthritis is most common among young men (except after Yersinia infection) and has been linked to the HLA-B27 locus as a potential genetic predisposing factor. Patients report painful, asymmetric oligoarthritis that affects mainly the knees, ankles, and feet. Low-back pain is common, and radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis is found in patients with long-standing disease. Most patients recover within 6 months, but prolonged recurrent disease is more common in cases that follow chlamydial urethritis. Anti-inflammatory agents help relieve symptoms, but the role of prolonged antibiotic therapy in eliminating microbial antigen from the synovium is controversial.

Migratory polyarthritis and fever constitute the usual presentation of acute rheumatic fever in adults (Chap. 322). This presentation is distinct from that of poststreptococcal reactive arthritis, which also follows infections with group A Streptococcus but is not migratory, lasts beyond the typical 3-week maximum of acute rheumatic fever, and responds poorly to aspirin.
 
Infections in Prosthetic Joints

Infection complicates 1每4% of total joint replacements. The majority of infections are acquired intraoperatively or immediately postoperatively as a result of wound breakdown or infection; less commonly, these joint infections develop later after joint replacement and are the result of hematogenous spread or direct inoculation. The presentation may be acute, with fever, pain, and local signs of inflammation, especially in infections due to S. aureus, pyogenic streptococci, and enteric bacilli. Alternatively, infection may persist for months or years without causing constitutional symptoms when less virulent organisms, such as coagulase-negative staphylococci or diphtheroids, are involved. Such indolent infections usually are acquired during joint implantation and are discovered during evaluation of chronic unexplained pain or after a radiograph shows loosening of the prosthesis; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level are usually elevated in such cases.

The diagnosis is best made by needle aspiration of the joint; accidental introduction of organisms during aspiration must be avoided meticulously. Synovial fluid pleocytosis with a predominance of polymorphonuclear leukocytes is highly suggestive of infection, since other inflammatory processes uncommonly affect prosthetic joints. Culture and Gram's stain usually yield the responsible pathogen. Sonication of explanted prosthetic material can improve the yield of culture, presumably by breaking up bacterial biofilms on the surfaces of prostheses. Use of special media for unusual pathogens such as fungi, atypical mycobacteria, and Mycoplasma may be necessary if routine and anaerobic cultures are negative.

Treatment: Prosthetic Joint Infections

Treatment includes surgery and high doses of parenteral antibiotics, which are given for 4每6 weeks because bone is usually involved. In most cases, the prosthesis must be replaced to cure the infection. Implantation of a new prosthesis is best delayed for several weeks or months because relapses of infection occur most commonly within this time frame. In some cases, reimplantation is not possible, and the patient must manage without a joint, with a fused joint, or even with amputation. Cure of infection without removal of the prosthesis is occasionally possible in cases that are due to streptococci or pneumococci and that lack radiologic evidence of loosening of the prosthesis. In these cases, antibiotic therapy must be initiated within several days of the onset of infection, and the joint should be drained vigorously by open arthrotomy or arthroscopically. In selected patients who prefer to avoid the high morbidity rate associated with joint removal and reimplantation, suppression of the infection with antibiotics may be a reasonable goal. A high cure rate with retention of the prosthesis has been reported when the combination of oral rifampin and ciprofloxacin is given for 3每6 months to persons with staphylococcal prosthetic joint infection of short duration. This approach, which is based on the ability of rifampin to kill organisms adherent to foreign material and in the stationary growth phase, requires confirmation in prospective trials.

Prevention

To avoid the disastrous consequences of infection, candidates for joint replacement should be selected with care. Rates of infection are particularly high among patients with rheumatoid arthritis, persons who have undergone previous surgery on the joint, and persons with medical conditions requiring immunosuppressive therapy. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis, usually with cefazolin, and measures to decrease intraoperative contamination, such as laminar flow, have lowered the rates of perioperative infection to <1% in many centers. After implantation, measures should be taken to prevent or rapidly treat extraarticular infections that might give rise to hematogenous spread to the prosthesis. The effectiveness of prophylactic antibiotics for the prevention of hematogenous infection after dental procedures has not been demonstrated; in fact, viridans streptococci and other components of the oral flora are extremely unusual causes of prosthetic joint infection. Accordingly, the American Dental Association and the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons do not recommend antibiotic prophylaxis for most dental patients with total joint replacements. They do, however, recommend prophylaxis for patients who may be at high risk of hematogenous infection, including those with inflammatory arthropathies, immunosuppression, type 1 diabetes mellitus, joint replacement within the preceding 2 years, previous prosthetic joint infection, malnourishment, or hemophilia. The recommended regimen is amoxicillin (2 g PO) 1 h before dental procedures associated with a high incidence of bacteremia. Clindamycin (600 mg PO) is suggested for patients allergic to penicillin.
 
Acknowledgments

The contributions of James H. Maguire and the late Scott J. Thaler to this chapter in earlier editions are gratefully acknowledged.
 
Further Readings

Bardin T: Gonococcal arthritis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 17:201, 2003[PMID: 12787521]  [Full Text]

 
Franssila R, Hedman K: Infection and musculoskeletal conditions: Viral causes of arthritis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 20:1139, 2006[PMID: 17127201]  [Full Text]

 
Harrington JT: Mycobacterial and fungal arthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 10:335, 1998[PMID: 9725095]  [Full Text]

 
Mathews CJ et al: Bacterial septic arthritis in adults. Lancet 375:846, 2010[PMID: 20206778]  [Full Text]

 
Medina Rodriguez F: Rheumatic manifestations of human immunodeficiency virus infection. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 29:145, 2003 

 
Meehan AM et al: Outcome of penicillin-susceptible streptococcal prosthetic joint infection treated with debridement and retention of the prosthesis. Clin Infect Dis 36:845, 2003[PMID: 12652384]  [Full Text]

 
Moyad TF et al: Evaluation and management of the infected total hip and knee. Orthopedics 31:589, 2008 

 
Shirtliff ME, Mader JT: Acute septic arthritis. Clin Microbiol Rev 15:527, 2002[PMID: 12364368]  [Full Text]

 
Stengel D et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of antibiotic therapy for bone and joint infections. Lancet Infect Dis 1:175, 2001[PMID: 11871494]  [Full Text]

 
Tarkowski A: Infection and musculoskeletal conditions: Infectious arthritis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 20:1029, 2006[PMID: 17127195]  [Full Text]

 
Trampuz A et al: Sonication of removed hip and knee prostheses for diagnosis of infection. N Engl J Med 357:654, 2007[PMID: 17699815]  [Full Text]

 
Zimmerli W et al: Prosthetic-joint infections. N Engl J Med 351:145, 2004 
 
 

^^
Chapter 335. Fibromyalgia >
 

Fibromyalgia: Introduction

Definition

Fibromyalgia (FM) is characterized by chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain and tenderness. Although it is defined primarily as a pain syndrome, FM patients also commonly complain of associated neuropsychological symptoms of fatigue, unrefreshing sleep, cognitive dysfunction, anxiety, and depression. Patients with FM have an increased prevalence of other syndromes associated with pain and fatigue, including chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 389), temporomandibular disorder, chronic headaches, irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome, and other pelvic pain syndromes. Available evidence implicates the central nervous system as key to maintaining pain and other core symptoms of FM and related conditions. The presence of FM is associated with substantial negative consequences for physical and social functioning.

Epidemiology

FM is far more common in women than in men, with a ratio of about 9:1. In population-based studies worldwide, there is general agreement that the prevalence rate is approximately 2每3%, with rates of closer to 5每10% in primary care practices. The prevalence data are similar across socioeconomic classes. Cultural factors may play a role in determining whether patients with FM symptoms seek medical attention; however, even in cultures in which secondary gain is not expected to play a significant role, the prevalence of FM remains in this range.

Clinical Manifestations

Pain and Tenderness

The most common presenting complaint of a patient with FM is "pain all over." Patients with FM have pain that is typically above and below the waist on both sides of the body and involves the axial skeleton (neck, back, or chest). The pain attributable to FM is poorly localized, difficult to ignore, severe in its intensity, and associated with a reduced functional capacity. Pain should have been present most of the day on most days for at least 3 months.

The clinical pain of FM is associated with increased evoked pain sensitivity. In clinical practice, this is determined by a tender point examination in which the examiner uses the thumbnail to exert pressure of approximately 4 kg/m2, or the pressure leading to blanching of the tip of the thumbnail, on well-defined musculotendinous sites (Fig. 335-1). American College of Rheumatology classification criteria previously required that 11 of 18 sites be perceived as painful for a diagnosis of FM. In practice, tenderness is a continuous variable, and strict application of a categorical threshold for diagnosis specifics is no longer necessary. Increased pain sensitivity can be demonstrated not only for the mechanical pressure-induced pain used in the clinic but also for nonmuscular mechanical pressure, heat, cold, and other sensory stimuli; this reinforces the idea that the pathogenic mechanisms of FM are not related to specific musculoskeletal pathology but to altered pain processing. New criteria eliminate tender points and focus on clinical symptoms of widespread pain and neuropsychological symptoms.

Figure 335-1

 
 
 
Tender point assessment in patients with fibromyalgia.
 
 

Patients with FM often have peripheral pain generators that are thought to serve as triggers for the more widespread pain attributed to central nervous system factors. Potential pain generators such as arthritis, bursitis, tendinitis, neuropathies, and other inflammatory or degenerative conditions should be identified by history and physical examination. More subtle pain generators may include joint hypermobility and scoliosis. Patients also may have chronic myalgias triggered by infectious, metabolic, or psychiatric conditions that can serve as triggers for the development of FM. These conditions are often in the differential diagnosis of patients with FM, and a major challenge is to distinguish the ongoing activity of a triggering condition from FM as a consequence of a comorbid condition that should itself be treated.

Neuropsychological Symptoms

In addition to widespread pain, FM patients typically complain of fatigue, stiffness, sleep disturbance, cognitive dysfunction, anxiety, and depression. These symptoms are present to varying degrees in most FM patients but are not present in every patient or at all times. Such symptoms may, however, have an equal or even greater impact on function and quality of life. Fatigue is highly prevalent in patients under primary care who ultimately are diagnosed with FM. Pain, stiffness, and fatigue often are worsened by exercise or unaccustomed activity (postexertional malaise). The sleep complaints include difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, and early-morning awakening. Regardless of the specific complaint, patients awake feeling unrefreshed. Patients with FM may meet criteria for restless legs syndrome and sleep-disordered breathing; frank sleep apnea can also be present. Cognitive complaints are characterized as slowness in processing, difficulties with attention or concentration, problems with word retrieval, and short-term memory loss. Studies have demonstrated altered cognitive function in these domains in patients with FM, though speed of processing is age-appropriate. Symptoms of anxiety and depression are common, and the lifetime prevalence of mood disorders in patients with FM approaches 80%. Although depression is neither necessary nor sufficient for the diagnosis of FM, it is important to screen for major depressive disorders by querying for depressed mood and anhedonia. Analysis of genetic factors that are likely to predispose to FM reveals shared neurobiologic pathways with mood disorders, providing the basis for comorbidity.

Overlapping Syndromes

Because FM can overlap in presentation with other chronic pain conditions, review of systems often reveals headaches, facial/jaw pain, regional myofascial pain particularly involving the neck or back, and arthritis. Visceral pain complaints involving the gastrointestinal tract, bladder, and pelvic or perineal region are also often present. Patients may or may not meet defined criteria for specific syndromes. It is important for patients to understand that there may be shared pathways that mediate symptoms and that using treatment strategies effective for one condition may help with global symptom management.

Comorbid Conditions

FM is often comorbid with chronic musculoskeletal, infectious, metabolic, or psychiatric conditions. Whereas FM is present in only 2每5% of the general population, it occurs in 20% or more of patients with degenerative or inflammatory rheumatic disorders, probably because these conditions serve as peripheral pain generators to alter central pain-processing pathways. Similarly, chronic infectious, metabolic, or psychiatric diseases associated with musculoskeletal pain can mimic FM and/or serve as a trigger for the development of FM. It is particularly important for clinicians to be sensitive to pain management of these comorbid conditions so that when FM emerges, as characterized by pain outside the boundaries of what could reasonably be explained by the triggering condition, development of neuropsychological symptoms, or tenderness on physical examination, treatment of central pain processes will be undertaken rather than continuing to focus on treating peripheral or inflammatory causes of pain.

Psychosocial Considerations

Symptoms of FM often have their onset and are exacerbated during periods of high levels of real or perceived stress. This may reflect an interaction between central stress physiology, vigilance or anxiety, and central pain-processing pathways. Understanding current psychosocial stressors will aid in patient management as many factors that exacerbate symptoms cannot be addressed by using pharmacologic approaches. Furthermore, there is a high prevalence of exposure to previous interpersonal and other forms of violence in patients with FM and related conditions. If posttraumatic stress disorder is an issue, the clinician should be aware of it and consider treatment options.

Functional Impairment

It is crucial to evaluate the impact of FM symptoms on function and role fulfillment. In defining the success of a management strategy, improved function is a key measure. Functional assessment should include physical, mental, and social domains. Understanding where role functioning falls short will assist in establishing treatment goals.

Differential Diagnosis

Because musculoskeletal pain is such a common complaint, the differential diagnosis of FM is broad. Table 335-1 lists some of the more common conditions that should be considered. Patients with inflammatory causes for widespread pain should be identifiable on the basis of specific history, physical findings, and laboratory or radiographic tests.

Table 335-1 Common Conditions in the Differential Diagnosis of Fibromyalgia

 
 
Inflammatory  
Polymyalgia rheumatica

Inflammatory arthritis: rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthritides

Connective tissues diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus, Sj?gren's syndrome
 
Infectious  
Hepatitis C

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

Lyme disease

Parvovirus B19

Epstein-Barr virus
 
Noninflammatory  
Degenerative joint/spine/disk disease

Myofascial pain syndromes

Bursitis, tendinitis, repetitive strain injuries
 
Endocrine  
Hypo- or hyperthyroidism

Hyperparathyroidism
 
Neurologic diseases  
Multiple sclerosis

Neuropathic pain syndromes
 
Psychiatric disease  
Major depressive disorder 
Drugs  
Statins

Aromatase inhibitors
 
 

 

Laboratory or Radiographic Testing

Routine laboratory and radiographic tests are normal in patients with FM, and so diagnostic testing is focused on excluding other diagnoses and evaluating for pain generators or comorbid conditions (Table 335-2). Most patients with a new complaint of chronic widespread pain should be assessed for the most common entities in the differential diagnosis. Radiographic testing should be used sparingly and only for diagnosis of inflammatory arthritis. After the patient has been evaluated thoroughly, repeat testing is discouraged unless the symptom complex changes. Particularly to be discouraged is advanced imaging (MRI) of the spine unless there are features suggesting inflammatory spine disease or neurologic symptoms.

Table 335-2 Laboratory and Radiographic Testing in Patients with Fibromyalgia Symptoms

 
 
Routine  
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)

Complete blood count (CBC)

Complete metabolic panel

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
 
Guided by history and physical examination  
Antinuclear antibody (ANA)

Anti-SSA (anti-Sj?gren's syndrome A) and anti-SSB

Rheumatoid factor and anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP)

Creatine phosphokinase (CPK)

Viral and bacterial serologies

Spine and joint radiographs
 
 

 

Genetics and Physiology

As in most complex diseases, it is likely that a number of genes contribute to vulnerability to the development of FM. To date, these genes appear to be in pathways controlling pain sensitivity and stress response. Some of the genetic underpinnings of FM are shared across other chronic pain conditions. For example, catechol-O-methyltransferase, which controls the synaptic levels of norepinephrine and dopamine, has been associated with pain sensitivity in the general population and certain polymorphisms or haplotypes have been associated with FM, chronic fatigue syndrome, and temporomandibular disorder. Polymorphisms of the -adrenergic receptor and dopamine receptor are also associated with FM and other chronic pain conditions. Genes associated with metabolism, transport, and receptors of serotonin and other monoamines have also been implicated in FM and overlapping conditions. Taken together, the pathways in which polymorphisms have been identified in FM patients further implicate central factors as mediating the physiology that leads to FM clinical manifestations.

Psychophysical testing of patients with FM has demonstrated altered sensory afferent pain processing and impaired descending noxious inhibitory control leading to hyperalgesia and allodynia. Functional MRI and other research imaging procedures clearly demonstrate activation of the brain regions involved in the experience of pain in response to stimuli that are innocuous in study participants without FM. Pain perception in FM patients is influenced by the emotional and cognitive dimensions, such as catastrophizing and perceptions of control, providing a solid basis for recommendations for cognitive and behavioral treatment strategies.

Approach to the Patient: Fibromyalgia

FM occurs commonly and has an extraordinary impact on functioning and health-related quality of life; however, symptoms and impact can be managed effectively by physicians and other health professionals. Developing a partnership with patients with a goal of understanding and implementing a treatment strategy and choosing appropriate nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic treatments are essential for improving the outcome of FM.

Treatment: Fibromyalgia

Nonpharmacologic Treatment

Patients with chronic pain, fatigue, and other neuropsychological symptoms require a framework for understanding the symptoms that have such an important impact on their function and quality of life. Providing explanation of the genetics, triggers, and physiology of FM can be an important adjunct in relieving the associated anxiety as well as reducing the overall cost of health care resources. In addition, patients must be educated regarding the expectations for treatment. The physician should focus on improved function and quality of life rather than elimination of pain. Illness behaviors should be discouraged, and behaviors that focus on improved function strongly encouraged.

Treatment strategies should include physical conditioning, with encouragement to begin at low levels of aerobic exercise with slow but consistent advancement. Patients who have been physically inactive or who report postexertional malaise may do best in supervised or water-based programs to start. Treatments that incorporate improved physical function with relaxation, such as yoga and Tai Chi, may also be helpful. Strength training may be recommended after a patient has reached his or her aerobic goals. Exercise programs are helpful for reductions in tenderness and for enhanced self-efficacy. Cognitive-behavioral strategies to improve sleep hygiene and reduce illness behaviors can also be helpful in management.

Pharmacologic Approaches

It is essential for the clinician to treat any comorbid triggering condition and clearly delineate for the patient the treatment goals for each medication. For example, glucocorticoids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be useful for management of inflammatory triggers but are not effective for FM-related symptoms. At present, the treatment approaches that have proved most successful in FM patients target afferent or descending pain pathways. Table 335-3 outlines the drugs with demonstrated effectiveness. It should be emphasized strongly that opioid analgesics are to be avoided in patients with FM. These agents have no demonstrated efficacy in FM and are associated with opioid-induced hyperalgesia that can worsen both symptoms and function. Utilization of single agents to treat multiple symptom domains is strongly encouraged. For example, if a patient's symptom complex is dominated by pain and sleep disturbance, using an agent that exerts both analgesic and sleep-promoting effects is desirable. These agents include sedating antidepressants such as amitriptyline or alpha-2-delta ligands such as gabapentin and pregabalin. For patients with pain associated with fatigue, anxiety, or depression, drugs that have both analgesic and antidepressant/anxiolytic effects, such as duloxetine or milnacipran, may be the best first choice.

Table 335-3 Pharmacologic Agents Effective for Treatment of Fibromyalgia

 
 
Antidepressants: balanced serotonin:norepinephrine reuptake inhibition

Amitryptiline

Duloxetinea

Milnaciprana
 
Anticonvulsants: ligands of the alpha-2-delta subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels

Gabapentin

Pregabalina
 
 


a Approved for fibromyalgia by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
 
 
Further Readings

Annemans L et al: Health economic consequences related to the diagnosis of fibromyalgia syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 58:895, 2008[PMID: 18311794]  [Full Text]

 
Arnold LM: New therapies in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Res Ther 8:212, 2006[PMID: 16762044]  [Full Text]

 
Boomershine CS, Crofford LJ: A symptom-based approach to pharmacologic management of fibromyalgia. Nat Rev Rheumatol 5:191, 2009[PMID: 19337283]  [Full Text]

 
Busch AJ et al: Exercise for fibromyalgia: A systematic review. J Rheumatol 35:1130, 2008[PMID: 18464301]  [Full Text]

 
Wolfe F et al: The American College of Rheumatology preliminary diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia and measurement of symptom severity. Arthritis Care Res 62:600, 2010[PMID: 20461783]  [Full Text]

 
Williams DA, Clauw DJ: Understanding fibromyalgia: Lessons from the broader pain research community. J Pain 10:777, 2009[PMID: 19638325]  [Full Text] 
 

^^
Chapter 336. Arthritis Associated with Systemic Disease, and Other Arthritides >
 

Arthritis Associated with Systemic Disease

Arthropathy of Acromegaly

Acromegaly is the result of excessive production of growth hormone by an adenoma in the anterior pituitary gland (Chap. 339). The excessive secretion of growth hormone along with insulin-like growth factor I stimulates proliferation of cartilage, periarticular connective tissue, and bone, resulting in several musculoskeletal problems, including osteoarthritis, back pain, muscle weakness, and carpal tunnel syndrome.

Osteoarthritis is a common feature, most often affecting the knees, shoulders, hips, and hands. Single or multiple joints may be affected. Hypertrophy of cartilage initially produces radiographic widening of the joint space. The newly synthesized cartilage is abnormally susceptible to fissuring, ulceration, and destruction. Ligamental laxity of joints further contributes to the development of osteoarthritis. Cartilage degrades, the joint space narrows, and subchondral sclerosis and osteophytes develop. Joint examination reveals crepitus and laxity. Joint fluid is noninflammatory. Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals are found in the cartilage in some cases of acromegalyarthropathy and, when shed into the joint, these can elicit attacks of pseudogout. Chondrocalcinosis may be observed on radiographs. Back pain is extremely common, perhaps as a result of spine hypermobility. Spine radiographs show normal or widened intervertebral disk spaces, hypertrophic anterior osteophytes, and ligamental calcification. These changes are similar to those observed in patients with diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Dorsal kyphosis in conjunction with elongation of the ribs contributes to the development of the barrel chest seen in acromegalic patients. The hands and feet become enlarged, owing to soft tissue proliferation. The fingers are thickened and have spadelike distal tufts. One-third of patients have a thickened heel pad. Approximately 25% of patients have Raynaud's phenomenon. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs in about half of patients. The median nerve is compressed by excess connective tissue in the carpal tunnel. Patients with acromegaly could develop proximal muscle weakness, which is thought to be caused by the effect of growth hormone on muscle. Serum muscle enzyme levels and electromyography are normal. Muscle biopsy specimens show muscle fibers of varying size but with no inflammation.

Arthropathy of Hemochromatosis

Hemochromatosis is a disorder of iron storage. Excessive amounts of iron are absorbed from the intestine, leading to iron deposition in parenchymal cells, which results in impairment of organ function (Chap. 357). Symptoms of hemochromatosis usually begin between the ages of 40 and 60 but can occur earlier. Arthropathy, which occurs in 20每40% of patients, usually begins after the age of 50 and may be the first clinical feature of hemochromatosis. The arthropathy is an osteoarthritis-like disorder affecting the small joints of the hands, followed later by larger joints such as knees, ankles, shoulders, and hips. The second and third metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands are often the first and prominent joints affected; this may provide an important clue to the possibility of hemochromatosis because these joints are not predominantly affected by "routine" osteoarthritis. Patients experience some morning stiffness and pain with use of involved joints. The affected joints are enlarged and mildly tender. Radiographs show narrowing of the joint space, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cysts, and juxtaarticular proliferation of bone with frequent hooklike osteophytes. The synovial fluid is noninflammatory. The synovium shows mild to moderate proliferation of iron containing lining cells, fibrosis, and some mononuclear cell infiltration. In approximately half of patients, there is evidence of calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD), and some patients experience episodes of acute pseudogout.

Iron may damage the articular cartilage in several ways. Iron catalyzes superoxide-dependent lipid peroxidation, which may play a role in joint damage. In animal models, ferric iron has been shown to interfere with collagen formation and increase the release of lysosomal enzymes from cells in the synovial membrane. Iron inhibits synovial tissue pyrophosphatase in vitro and, therefore, may inhibit pyrophosphatase in vivo, resulting in chondrocalcinosis.

Treatment: Arthropathy of Hemochromatosis

The treatment of hemochromatosis is repeated phlebotomy. Unfortunately, this treatment has little effect on established arthritis, which, along with chondrocalcinosis, may progress. Symptomatic treatment of the arthritis consists of administration of acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), as tolerated. Acute pseudogout attacks are treated with high doses of an NSAID or a short course of glucocorticoids. Hip or knee total joint replacement has been successful in advanced disease.

Hemophilic Arthropathy

Hemophilia is a sex-linked recessive genetic disorder characterized by the absence or deficiency of factor VIII (hemophilia A, or classic hemophilia) or factor IX (hemophilia B, or Christmas disease) (Chap. 116). Hemophilia A constitutes 85% of cases. Spontaneous hemarthrosis is a common problem with both types of hemophilia and can lead to a deforming arthritis. The frequency and severity of hemarthrosis are related to the degree of clotting factor deficiency. Hemarthrosis is not common in other disorders of coagulation such as von Willebrand disease, factor V deficiency, warfarin therapy, or thrombocytopenia.

Hemarthrosis occurs after one year of age, when the child begins to walk and run. In order of frequency, the joints most commonly affected are the knees, ankles, elbows, shoulders, and hips. Small joints of the hands and feet are occasionally involved.

In the initial stage of arthropathy, hemarthrosis produces a warm, tensely swollen, and painful joint. The patient holds the affected joint in flexion and guards against any movement. Blood in the joint remains liquid because of the absence of intrinsic clotting factors and the absence of tissue thromboplastin in the synovium. The synovial blood is resorbed over a period of a week or longer, depending on the size of the hemarthrosis. Joint function usually returns to normal or baseline in about two weeks. Low-grade temperature elevation may accompany hemarthrosis, but a fever >101 warrants concern for infection.

Recurrent hemarthrosis may result in chronic arthritis. The involved joints remain swollen, and flexion deformities develop. Joint motion may be restricted and function severely limited. Restricted joint motion, or laxity with subluxation, are features of end-stage disease.

Bleeding into muscle and soft tissue also causes musculoskeletal dysfunction. When bleeding into the iliopsoas muscle occurs, the hip is held in flexion because of the pain, resulting in a hip flexion contracture. Rotation of the hip is preserved, which distinguishes this problem from hemarthrosis or other causes of hip synovitis. Expansion of the hematoma may place pressure on the femoral nerve, resulting in a femoral neuropathy. Hemorrhage into a closed compartment space, such as the calf or volar compartment in the forearm, can result in muscle necrosis, neuropathy, and flexion deformities of the ankles, wrists, and fingers. When bleeding involves periosteum or bone, a painful pseudotumor forms. These occur distal to the elbows or knees in children and improve with treatment of the hemophilia. Surgical removal is indicated if the pseudotumor continues to enlarge. In adults, pseudotumors occur in the femur and pelvis and are usually refractory to treatment. When bleeding occurs in muscle, cysts may develop within the muscle. Needle aspiration of a cyst is contraindicated because it can induce further bleeding; however, if they become secondarily infected, drainage may be necessary (after factor repletion).

Septic arthritis rarely occurs in hemophilia and is difficult to distinguish from acute hemarthrosis on physical examination. If there is serious suspicion of an infected joint, the joint should be aspirated immediately, the fluid cultured, and the patient started on antibiotics that provide broad coverage, including staphylococcus, until the results of the culture return. Clotting-factor deficiency should be corrected before arthrocentesis to minimize the risk of traumatic bleeding.

Radiographs of joints reflect the stage of disease. In early stages, there is only capsule distention; later, juxtaarticular osteopenia, marginal erosions, and subchondral cysts develop. Late in the disease, the joint space is narrowed and there is bony overgrowth similar to osteoarthritis.

Treatment: Hemarthrosis

The treatment of musculoskeletal bleeding is initiated with the immediate infusion of factor VIII or IX at the first sign of joint or muscle hemorrhage. Patients who have developed factor inhibitors are at greater risk for joint damage and may benefit from receiving recombinant activated factor VII or activated prothrombin complex concentrate. The joint should be rested in a position of forced extension, as tolerated, to avoid contracture. Analgesia should be provided; ideally, the nonselective NSAIDs, which can diminish platelet function, should be avoided if possible. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors do not interfere with platelet function and may be preferable based upon a demonstrated increased risk of upper GI bleeding and theoretical risk of increased articular bleeding with nonselective NSAIDs. Synovectomy, open or arthroscopic, may be attempted in patients with chronic symptomatic synovial proliferation and recurrent hemarthrosis, although hypertrophied synovium is very vascular and subject to bleeding. Both types of synovectomy reduce the number of hemarthroses. Open surgical synovectomy, however, is associated with some loss of range of motion. Both require aggressive prophylaxis against bleeding. Radiosynovectomy with either yttrium 90 silicate or phosphorus 31 colloid has been effective and may be attempted when surgical synovectomy is not practical. Total joint replacement is indicated for severe joint destruction and incapacitating pain.

Arthropathies Associated with Hemoglobinopathies

Sickle Cell Disease

Sickle cell disease (Chap. 104) is associated with several musculoskeletal abnormalities (Table 336-1). Children under the age of five may develop diffuse swelling, tenderness, and warmth of the hands and feet lasting from one to three weeks. The condition, referred to as sickle cell dactylitis or hand-foot syndrome, has also been observed in sickle cell thalassemia. Dactylitis is believed to result from infarction of the bone marrow and cortical bone leading to periostitis and soft tissue swelling. Radiographs show periosteal elevation, subperiosteal new bone formation, and areas of radiolucency and increased density involving the metacarpals, metatarsals, and proximal phalanges. These bone changes disappear after several months. The syndrome leaves little or no residual damage. Because hematopoiesis ceases in the small bones of hands and feet with age, the syndrome is rarely seen after age five.

Table 336-1 Musculoskeletal Abnormalities in Sickle Cell Disease

 
 
Sickle Cell Dactylitis Avascular Necrosis 
Joint effusions in sickle cell crises Bone changes secondary to marrow hyperplasia 
Osteomyelitis Septic arthritis 
Infarction of bone Gouty arthritis 
Infarction of bone marrow   
 

 

Sickle cell crisis is associated with periarticular pain and occasionally with joint effusions. The joint and periarticular area are warm and tender. Knees and elbows are most often affected, but other joints can be involved. Joint effusions are usually noninflammatory. Acute synovial infarction can cause a sterile effusion with high synovial fluid neutrophil counts. Synovial biopsies have shown mild lining cell proliferation and microvascular thrombosis with infarctions. Scintigraphic studies have shown decreased marrow uptake adjacent to the involved joint. The treatment is that for sickle cell crisis (Chap. 104).

Patients with sickle cell disease seem predisposed to osteomyelitis, which commonly involves the long tubular bones (Chap. 126) and Salmonella is a particularly frequent cause (Chap. 153). Radiographs of the involved site show periosteal elevation initially, followed by disruption of the cortex. Treatment of the infection results in healing of the bone lesion. Sickle cell disease is also more frequently associated with bone infarction resulting from vasoocclusion secondary to the sickling of red cells. Bone infarction also occurs in hemoglobin sickle cell disease and sickle cell thalassemia (Chap. 104). The bone pain in sickle cell crisis is due to bone and bone marrow infarction. In children, infarction of the epiphyseal growth plate interferes with normal growth of the affected extremity. Radiographically, infarction of the bone cortex results in periosteal elevation and irregular thickening of the bone cortex. Infarction in the bone marrow leads to lysis, fibrosis, and new bone formation. Clinical distinction between osteomyelitis and bone infarctions can be difficult; imaging can be helpful.

Avascular necrosis of the head of the femur occurs in 5% of patients. It also occurs in the humeral head and less commonly in the distal femur, tibial condyles, distal radius, vertebral bodies, and other juxtaarticular sites. Irregularity of the femoral head and other articular surfaces often results in degenerative joint disease. Radiograph of the affected joint may show patchy radiolucency and density followed by flattening of the bone. MRI is a sensitive technique for detecting early avascular necrosis as well as bone infarction elsewhere. Total hip replacement and placement of prostheses in other joints may improve function and relieve the joint pain in these patients.

Septic arthritis is occasionally encountered in sickle cell disease (Chap. 334). Multiple joints may be infected. Joint infection may result from bacteremia due to splenic dysfunction or fromcontiguous osteomyelitis. The more common microorganisms include Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and Salmonella. Salmonella does not cause septic arthritis as frequently as osteomyelitis. Acute gouty arthritis is uncommon in sickle cell disease, even though 40% of patients are hyperuricemic. However, it may occur in patients generally not expected to get gout (younger, including female patients). Hyperuricemia is due to overproduction of uric acid secondary to increased red cell turnover as well as suboptimal renal excretion. Attacks may be polyarticular, and arthrocentesis should be performed as the diagnostic test to distinguish infection from gout or synovial infarction.

The bone marrow hyperplasia in sickle cell disease results in widening of the medullary cavities, thinning of the cortices, and coarse trabeculations and central cupping of the vertebral bodies. These changes are also seen to a lesser degree in hemoglobin sickle cell disease and sickle cell thalassemia. In normal individuals, red marrow is located mostly in the axial skeletal, but in sickle cell disease, red marrow is found in the bones of the extremities and even in the tarsal and carpal bones. Vertebral compression may lead to dorsal kyphosis, and softening of the bone in the acetabulum may result in protrusio acetabuli.

Thalassemia

 Thalassemia is a congenital disorder of hemoglobin synthesis characterized by impaired production of  chains (Chap. 104). Bone and joint abnormalities occur in  thalassemia, being most common in the major and intermedia groups. In one study, 50% of patients with  thalassemia had evidence of symmetric ankle arthropathy, characterized by a dull aching pain aggravated by weight bearing. The onset was most often in the second or third decade of life. The degree of ankle pain in these patients varied. Some patients experienced self-limited ankle pain, which occurred only after strenuous physical activity and lasted several days to weeks. Other patients had chronic ankle pain, which became worse with walking. Symptoms eventually abated in a few patients. Compression of the ankle, calcaneus, or forefoot was painful in some patients. Synovial fluid from two patients was noninflammatory. Radiographs of ankle showed osteopenia, widened medullary spaces, thin cortices, and coarse trabeculations. These findings are largely the result of bone marrow expansion. The joint space was preserved. Specimens of bone from three patients revealed osteomalacia, osteopenia, and microfractures. Increased osteoblasts as well as increased foci of bone resorption were present on the bone surface. Iron staining was found in the bone trabeculae, in osteoid, and in the cement line. Synovium showed hyperplasia of lining cells, which contained deposits of hemosiderin. This arthropathy was considered to be related to the underlying bone pathology. The role of iron overload or abnormal bone metabolism in the pathogenesis of this arthropathy is not known. The arthropathy was treated with analgesics and splints. Patients were also transfused to decrease hematopoiesis and bone marrow expansion.

Patients with -thalassemia major and intermedia also have involvement of other joints, including the knees, hips, and shoulders. Acquired hemochromatosis with arthropathy has been described in a patient with thalassemia. Gouty arthritis and septic arthritis can occur. Avascular necrosis is not a feature of thalassemia because there is no sickling of red cells leading to thrombosis and infarction.

-Thalassemia minor (trait) is also associated with joint manifestations. Chronic seronegative oligoarthritis affecting predominantly ankles, wrists, and elbows has been described. These patients had mild persistent synovitis without large effusions. Joint erosions were not seen. Recurrent episodes of an acute asymmetric arthritis have also been reported; episodes last less than a week and may affect knees, ankles, shoulders, elbows, wrists, and metacarpal phalangeal joints. The mechanism for this arthropathy is unknown. Treatment with nonsteroidal drugs was not particularly effective.

Musculoskeletal Disorders Associated with Hyperlipidemia (See Also Chap. 356)

Musculoskeletal or cutaneous manifestations may be the first clinical indication of a specific hereditary disorder of lipoprotein metabolism. Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (previously referred to as type II hyperlipoproteinemia) may have recurrent migratory polyarthritis involving knees and other large peripheral joints and, to a lesser degree, peripheral small joints. Pain ranges from moderate to incapacitating. The involved joints can be warm, erythematous, swollen, and tender. Arthritis usually has a sudden onset, lasts from a few days to two weeks, and does not cause joint damage. Episodes may suggest acute gout attacks. Several attacks occur per year. Synovial fluid from involved joints is not inflammatory and contains few white cells and no crystals. Joint involvement may actually represent inflammatory periarthritis or peritendinitis and not true arthritis. The recurrent, transient nature of the arthritis may suggest rheumatic fever, especially because patients with hyperlipoproteinemia may have an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and elevated antistreptolysin O titers, because the latter are quite common. Attacks of tendinitis, including the large Achilles and patellar tendons, may come on gradually and last only a few days or be acute as described above. Patients may be asymptomatic between attacks. Achilles tendinitis and other joint manifestations often precede the appearance of xanthomas and may be the first clinical indication of hyperlipoproteinemia. Attacks of tendinitis may occur following treatment with a lipid-lowering drug. Patients, over time, may develop tendinous xanthomas in the Achilles, patellar, and extensor tendons of the hands and feet. Xanthomas have also been reported in the peroneal tendon, the plantar aponeurosis, and the periosteum overlying the distal tibia. These xanthomas are located within tendon fibers. Tuberous xanthomas are soft subcutaneous masses located over the extensor surfaces of the elbows, knees, and hands, as well as on the buttocks. They appear in childhood in homozygous patients and, after the age of 30, in heterozygous patients. Patients with elevated plasma levels of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and triglyceride (previously referred to as type IV hyperlipoproteinemia)may also have a mild inflammatory arthritis affecting large and small peripheral joints, usually in an asymmetric pattern, with only a few joints involved at a time. The onset of arthritis is usually in middle age. Arthritis may be persistent or recurrent, with episodes lasting a few days to weeks. Joint pain is severe in some patients. Patients may experience morning stiffness. Joint tenderness and periarticular hyperesthesia may also be present, as may synovial thickening. Joint fluid is usually noninflammatory and without crystals but may have increased white blood cell counts with predominantly mononuclear cells. Radiographs may show juxtaarticular osteopenia and cystic lesions. Large bone cysts have been noted in a few patients. Xanthoma and bone cysts are also observed in other lipoprotein disorders. The pathogenesis of arthritis in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia or with elevated levels of VLDL and triglyceride is not well understood. NSAIDs or analgesics usually provide adequate relief of symptoms when used on an as-needed basis.

Clinical improvement may occur in patients as they are treated with lipid-lowering agents; however, patients treated with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor may experience myalgias, and a few patients may develop a myopathy, myositis, or even rhabdomyolysis. Patients who develop myositis while on statin therapy may be susceptible to this side effect due to an underlying muscle disorder and should be reevaluated after discontinuation of the drug. Myositis has also been reported with the use of niacin (Chap. 388) but is less common than myalgias.

Musculoskeletal syndromes have not clearly been associated with the more common mixed hyperlipidemias seen in general practice.
 
Other Arthritides

Neuropathic Joint Disease

Neuropathic joint disease (Charcot's joint) is a progressive destructive arthritis associated with loss of pain sensation, proprioception, or both. Normal muscular reflexes that modulate joint movement are decreased. Without these protective mechanisms, joints are subjected to repeated trauma, resulting in progressive cartilage and bone damage. Neuropathic arthropathy was first described by Jean-Martin Charcot in 1868 in patients with tabes dorsalis. The term Charcot joint is commonly used interchangeably with neuropathic joint. Today, diabetes mellitus is the most frequent cause of neuropathic joint disease (Fig. 336-1). A variety of other disorders are associated with neuropathic arthritis including leprosy, yaws, syringomyelia, meningomyelocele, congenital indifference to pain, peroneal muscular atrophy (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease), and amyloidosis. An arthritis resembling neuropathic joint disease has been reported in patients who have received frequent intraarticular glucocorticoid injections into a weight-bearing joint, but this is a rare complication. The distribution of joint involvement depends on the underlying neurologic disorder (Table 336-2). In tabes dorsalis, knees, hips, and ankles are most commonly affected; in syringomyelia, the glenohumeral joint, elbow, and wrist; and in diabetes mellitus, the tarsal and tarsometatarsal joints are most commonly affected.

Figure 336-1

 
 
 
Charcot arthropathy associated with diabetes mellitus. Lateral foot radiograph demonstrating complete loss of the arch due to bony fragmentation and dislocation in the midfoot. (Courtesy of Andrew Neckers, MD and Jean Schils, MD; with permission.)
 
 
Table 336-2 Disorders Associated with Neuropathic Joint Disease

 
 
Diabetes mellitus Amyloidosis 
Tabes dorsalis Leprosy 
Meningomyelocele Congenital indifference to pain 
Syringomyelia Peroneal muscular atrophy 
 

 

Pathology and Pathophysiology

The pathologic changes in the neuropathic joint are similar to those found in the severe osteoarthritic joint. There is fragmentation and eventual loss of articular cartilage with eburnation of the underlying bone. Osteophytes are found at the joint margins. With more advanced disease, erosions are present on the joint surface. Fractures, devitalized bone, intraarticular loose bodies, and microscopic fragments of cartilage and bone may be present.

At least two underlying mechanisms are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of neuropathic arthritis. An abnormal autonomic nervous system is thought to be responsible for the dysregulated blood flow to the joint with subsequent resorption of bone. Loss of bone, particularly in the diabetic foot, may be the initial finding. With the loss of deep pain, proprioception, and protective neuromuscular reflexes, the joint is subjected to repeated microtrauma, resulting in ligamental tears and bone fractures. The mechanism of injury that occurs following frequent intraarticular glucocorticoid injections is thought to be due to the analgesic effect of glucocorticoids leading to overuse of an already damaged joint, which results in accelerated cartilage damage, although steroid-induced cartilage damage be more common in some animal species than in humans. It is not understood why only a few patients with neuropathy develop clinically evident neuropathic arthritis.

Clinical Manifestations

Neuropathic joint disease usually begins in a single joint and then becomes apparent in other joints, depending on the underlying neurologic disorder. The involved joint progressively becomes enlarged due to bony overgrowth and synovial effusion. Loose bodies may be palpated in the joint cavity. Joint instability, subluxation, and crepitus occur as the disease progresses. Neuropathic joints may develop rapidly, and a totally disorganized joint with multiple bony fragments may evolve in a patient within weeks or months. The amount of pain experienced by the patient is less than would be anticipated based on the degree of joint damage. Patients may experience sudden joint pain from intraarticular fractures of osteophytes or condyles.

Neuropathic arthritis is encountered most often in patients with diabetes mellitus, with the incidence estimated in the range of 0.5%. The usual age of onset is 50 years, following several years of diabetes, but exceptions occur. The tarsal and tarsometatarsal joints are most often affected, followed by the metatarsophalangeal and talotibial joints. The knees and spine are occasionally involved. Patients often attribute the onset of foot pain to antecedent trauma such as twisting their foot. Neuropathic changes may develop rapidly following a foot fracture or dislocation. Swelling of the foot and ankle are often present. Downward collapse of the tarsal bones leads to convexity of the sole, referred to as a "rocker foot." Large osteophytes may protrude from the top of the foot. Calluses frequently form over the metatarsal heads and may lead to infected ulcers and osteomyelitis. The value of protective inserts and orthotics, as well as regular foot examination, cannot be overstated. Radiographs may show resorption and tapering of the distal metatarsal bones. The term Lisfranc fracture-dislocation is sometimes used to describe the destructive changes at the tarsometatarsal joints.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of neuropathic arthritis is based on the clinical features and characteristic radiographic findings in a patient with an underlying sensory neuropathy. The differential diagnosis of neuropathic arthritis depends upon the severity of the process and includes osteomyelitis, osteonecrosis, advanced osteoarthritis, stress fractures, and CPPD. Radiographs in neuropathic arthritis initially show changes of osteoarthritis with joint space narrowing, subchondral bone sclerosis, osteophytes, and joint effusions followed later by marked destructive and hypertrophic changes. The radiographic findings of neuropathic arthritis may be difficult to differentiate from those of osteomyelitis, especially in the diabetic foot. The joint margins in a neuropathic joint tend to be distinct, while in osteomyelitis, they are blurred. Imaging studies may be helpful, but cultures of tissue from the joint are often required to exclude osteomyelitis. MRI and bone scans using indium 111每labeled white blood cells or indium 111每labeled immunoglobulin G, which will show an increased uptake in osteomyelitis but not in a neuropathic joint may be useful. A technetium bone scan will not distinguish osteomyelitis from neuropathic arthritis, as increased uptake is observed in both. The joint fluid in neuropathic arthritis is noninflammatory; may be xanthochromic or even bloody; and may contain fragments of synovium, cartilage, and bone. The finding of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals supports the diagnosis of crystal-associated arthropathy. In the absence of such crystals, an increased number of leukocytes may indicate osteomyelitis.

Treatment: Neuropathic Joint Disease

The primary focus of treatment is to stabilize the joint. Treatment of the underlying disorder, even if successful, does not usually affect established joint disease. Braces and splints are helpful. Their use requires close surveillance, because patients may be unable to appreciate pressure from a poorly adjusted brace. In the diabetic patient, early recognition and treatment of a Charcot's foot by prohibiting weight bearing of the foot for at least eight weeks may possibly prevent severe disease from developing. Fusion of an unstable joint may improve function and reduce pain, but nonunion is frequent, especially when immobilization of the joint is inadequate.

Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy and Clubbing

Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA) is characterized by clubbing of digits and, in more advanced stages, by periosteal new bone formation and synovial effusions. HOA may be primary or familial and begin in childhood. Secondary HOA is associated with intrathoracic malignancies, suppurative and some hypoxemic lung diseases, congenital heart disease, and a variety of other disorders. Clubbing is almost always a feature of HOA but can occur as an isolated manifestation (Fig. 336-2). The presence of clubbing in isolation may be congenital or represent either an early stage or one element in the spectrum of HOA. The presence of isolated acquired clubbing has the same clinical significance as clubbing associated with periostitis.

Figure 336-2

 
 
 
Clubbing of fingers.(Reprinted from the Clinical Slide Collection on the Rheumatic Diseases, Copyright 1991, 1995. Used by permission of the American College of Rheumatology.)
 
 

Pathology and Pathophysiology of Acquired Hoa

In HOA, the bone changes in the distal extremities begin as periostitis followed by new bone formation. At this stage, a radiolucent area may be observed between the new periosteal bone and subjacent cortex. As the process progresses, multiple layers of new bone are deposited, which become contiguous with the cortex and result in cortical thickening. The outer portion of bone is laminated in appearance, with an irregular surface. Initially, the process of periosteal new bone formation involves the proximal and distal diaphyses of the tibia, fibula, radius, and ulna and, less frequently, the femur, humerus, metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges. Occasionally, scapulae, clavicles, ribs, and pelvic bones are also affected. The adjacent interosseous membranes may become ossified. The distribution of the bone manifestations is usually bilateral and symmetric. The soft tissue overlying the distal third of the arms and legs may be thickened. Proliferation of connective tissue occurs in the nail bed and volar pad of digits, giving the distal phalanges a clubbed appearance. Small blood vessels in the clubbed digits are dilated and have thickened walls. In addition, the number of arteriovenous anastomoses is increased.

Several theories have been suggested for the pathogenesis of HOA, but many have been disproved or have not explained the development in all clinical disorders associated with HOA. Previously proposed neurogenic and humoral theories are no longer considered likely explanations for HOA. Recent studies have suggested a role for platelets in the development of HOA. It has been observed that megakaryocytes and large platelet particles, present in venous circulation, were fragmented in their passage through normal lung. In patients with cyanotic congenital heart disease and in other disorders associated with right-to-left shunts, these large platelet particles bypass the lung and reach the distal extremities, where they can interact with endothelial cells. Platelet-endothelial activation in the distal portion of extremities may result in the release of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and other factors leading to the proliferation of connective tissue and periosteum. Stimulation of fibroblasts by PDGF and transforming growth factor  results in cell growth and collagen synthesis. Elevated plasma levels of von Willebrand factor antigen have been found in patients with both primary and secondary forms of HOA, indicating endothelial activation or damage. Abnormalities of collagen synthesis have been demonstrated in the involved skin of patients with primary HOA. Other factors are undoubtedly involved in the pathogenesis of HOA, and further studies are needed to better understand this disorder.

Clinical Manifestations

Primary or familial HOA, also referred to as pachydermoperiostitis or Touraine-Solente-Gol谷 syndrome, usually begins insidiously at puberty. In a smaller number of patients, the onset is in the first year of life. The disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable expression and is nine times more common in boys than in girls. Approximately one-third of patients have a family history of primary HOA.

Primary HOA is characterized by clubbing, periostitis, and unusual skin features. A small number of patients with this syndrome do not express clubbing. The skin changes and periostitis are prominent features of this syndrome. The skin becomes thickened and coarse. Deep nasolabial folds develop, and the forehead may become furrowed. Patients may have heavy-appearing eyelids and ptosis. The skin is often greasy, and there may be excessive sweating of the hands and feet. Patients may also experience acnevulgaris, seborrhea, and folliculitis. In a few patients, the skin over the scalp becomes very thick and corrugated, a feature that has been descriptively termed cutis verticis gyrata. The distal extremities, particularly the legs, become thickened owing to proliferation of new bone and soft tissue; when the process is extensive, the distal lower extremities resemble those of an elephant. The periostitis is usually not painful, because it may be in secondary HOA. Clubbing of the fingers may be extensive, producing large, bulbous deformities and clumsiness. Clubbing also affects the toes. Patients may experience articular and periarticular pain, especially in the ankles and knees, and joint motion may be mildly restricted owing to periarticular bone overgrowth. Noninflammatory effusions occur in the wrists, knees, and ankles. Synovial hypertrophy is not found. Associated abnormalities observed in patients with primary HOA include hypertrophic gastropathy, bone marrow failure, female escutcheon, gynecomastia, and cranial suture defects. In patients with primary HOA, the symptoms disappear when adulthood is reached.

HOA secondary to an underlying disease occurs more frequently than primary HOA. It accompanies a variety of disorders and may precede clinical features of the associated disorder by months. Clubbing is more frequent than the full syndrome of HOA in patients with associated illnesses. Because clubbing evolves over months and is usually asymptomatic, it is often recognized first by the physician and not the patient. Patients may experience a burning sensation in their fingertips. Clubbing is characterized by widening of the fingertips, enlargement of the distal volar pad, convexity of the nail contour, and the loss of the normal 15∼ angle between the proximal nail and cuticle. The thickness of the digit at the base of the nail is greater than the thickness at the distal interphalangeal joint. An objective measurement of finger clubbing can be made by determining the diameter at the base of the nail and at the distal interphalangeal joint of all 10 digits. Clubbing is present when the sum of the individual digit ratios is >10. At the bedside, clubbing can be appreciated by having the patient place the dorsal surface of the distal phalanges of the fourth fingers together with the nails of the fourth fingers opposing each other. Normally, an open area is visible between the bases of the opposing fingernails; when clubbing is present, this open space is no longer visible. The base of the nail feels spongy when compressed, and the nail can be easily rocked on its bed. When clubbing is advanced, the finger may have a drumstick appearance, and the distal interphalangeal joint can be hyperextended. Periosteal involvement in the distal extremities may produce a burning or deep-seated aching pain. The pain can be quite incapacitating and is aggravated by dependency and relieved by elevation of the affected limbs. Pressure applied over the distal forearms and legs or gentle percussion of the distal long bones like the tibia may be quite painful.

Patients may experience joint pain, most often in the ankles, wrists, and knees. Joint effusions may be present; usually, they are small and noninflammatory. The small joints of the hands are rarely affected. Severe joint or long bone pain may be the presenting symptom of an underlying lung malignancy and may precede the appearance of clubbing. In addition, the progression of HOA tends to be more rapid when associated with malignancies, most notably bronchogenic carcinoma. Noninflammatory but variably painful knee effusions may occur prior to the appearance of clubbing and symptoms of distal periostitis. Unlike primary HOA, excessive sweating and oiliness of the skin and thickening of the facial skin are uncommon in secondary HOA.

HOA occurs in 5每10% of patients with intrathoracic malignancies, the most common being bronchogenic carcinoma and pleural tumors (Table 336-3). Lung metastases infrequently cause HOA. HOA is also seen in patients with intrathoracic infections, including lung abscesses, empyema, bronchiectasis, and chronic obstructive lung disease, but uncommonly in pulmonary tuberculosis. HOA may also accompany chronic interstitial pneumonitis, sarcoidosis, and cystic fibrosis. In the latter, clubbing is more common than the full syndrome of HOA. Other causes of clubbing include congenital heart disease with right-to-left shunts, bacterial endocarditis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, sprue, and neoplasms of the esophagus, liver, and small and large bowel. In patients with congenital heart disease with right-to-left shunts, clubbing alone occurs more often than the full syndrome of HOA.

Table 336-3 Disorders Associated with Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy

 
 
Pulmonary

    Bronchogenic carcinoma and other neoplasms

    Bronchogenic carcinoma and other neoplasms

    Lung abscesses, empyema, bronchiectasisChronic interstitial pneumonitisCystic fibrosis

    Chronic obstructive lung disease

    Sarcoidosis

Gastrointestinal

    Inflammatory bowel disease

    Sprue

    Neoplasms: esophagus, liver,

    bowel
 Cardiovascular

    Cyanotic congenital heart disease

    Subacute bacterial endocarditis

Infected arterial graftsa

Aortic aneurysmb

Aneurysm of major extremity arterya

Patent ductus arteriosusb

Arteriovenous fistula of major extremity vessela

Thyroid (thyroid acropachy)

Hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease)
 
 


aUnilateral involvement.

bBilateral lower extremity involvement.
 

Unilateral clubbing has been found in association with aneurysms of major extremity arteries, with infected arterial grafts, and with arteriovenous fistulas of brachial vessels. Clubbing of the toes but not fingers has been associated with an infected abdominal aortic aneurysm and patent ductus arteriosus. Clubbing of a single digit may follow trauma and has been reported in tophaceous gout and sarcoidosis. While clubbing occurs more commonly than the full syndrome in most diseases, periostitis in the absence of clubbing has been observed in the affected limb of patients with infected arterial grafts.

Hyperthyroidism (Graves' disease), treated or untreated, is occasionally associated with clubbing and periostitis of the bones of the hands and feet. This condition is referred to as thyroid acropachy. Periostitis may be asymptomatic and occurs in the midshaft and diaphyseal portion of the metacarpal and phalangeal bones. Significant hand joint pain may occur; this may respond to successful therapy of the thyroid dysfunction. The long bones of the extremities are seldom affected. Elevated levels of long-acting thyroid stimulator are found in the serum of these patients.

Laboratory Findings

The laboratory abnormalities reflect the underlying disorder. The synovial fluid of involved joints has <500 white cells per microliter, and the cells are predominantly mononuclear. Radiographs show a faint radiolucent line beneath the new periosteal bone along the shaft of long bones at their distal end. These changes are observed most frequently at the ankles, wrists, and knees. The ends of the distal phalanges may show osseous resorption. Radionuclide studies show pericortical linear uptake along the cortical margins of long bones that may be present before any radiographic changes.

Treatment Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy

The treatment of HOA is to identify the associated disorder and treat it appropriately. The symptoms and signs of HOA may disappear completely with removal or effective chemotherapy of a tumor or with antibiotic therapy and drainage of a chronic pulmonary infection. Vagotomy or percutaneous block of the vagus nerve leads to symptomatic relief in some patients. NSAIDs or analgesics may help control symptoms of HOA.

Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Syndrome

The reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome is now referred to as complex regional pain syndrome, type 1, by the new Classification of the International Association for the Study of Pain. It is characterized by pain and swelling, usually of a distal extremity, accompanied by vasomotor instability, trophic skin changes, and the rapid development of bony demineralization. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome, including its treatment, is covered in greater detail in Chap. 376.

Tietze Syndrome and Costochondritis

Tietze syndrome is manifested by painful swelling of one or more costochondral articulations. The age of onset is usually before 40, and both sexes are affected equally. In most patients, only one joint is involved, usually the second or third costochondral joint. The onset of anterior chest pain may be sudden or gradual. The pain may radiate to the arms or shoulders and is aggravated by sneezing, coughing, deep inspirations, or twisting motions of the chest. The term costochondritis is often used interchangeably with Tietze syndrome, but some workers restrict the former term to pain of the costochondral articulations without swelling. Costochondritis is observed in patients over age 40; tends to affect the third, fourth, and fifth costochondral joints; and occurs more often in women. Both syndromes may mimic cardiac or upper abdominal causes of pain. Rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and reactive arthritis (Reiter's syndrome) may involve costochondral joints but are distinguished easily by their other clinical features. Other skeletal causes of anterior chest wall pain are xiphoidalgia and the slipping rib syndrome, which usually involves the tenth rib. Malignancies such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, plasma cell cytoma, and sarcoma can invade the ribs, thoracic spine, or chest wall and produce symptoms suggesting Tietze syndrome. Patients with osteomalacia may have significant rib pain, with or without documented micro fractures. These conditions should be distinguishable by radiographs, bone scanning, vitamin D measurement, or biopsy. Analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs, and local glucocorticoid injections usually relieve symptoms of costochondritis/Tietze syndrome. Care should be taken to avoid overdiagnosing these syndromes in patients with acute chest pain syndromes; many patients will be tender to overly vigorous palpation of the costochondral joints.
 
Myofascial Pain Syndrome

Myofascial pain syndrome is characterized by multiple areas of localized musculoskeletal pain and tenderness in association with tender points. The pain is deep and aching and may be accompanied by a burning sensation. Myofascial pain may be regional and follow trauma, overuse, or prolonged static contraction of a muscle or muscle group, which may occur when reading or writing at a desk or working at a computer. In addition, this syndrome may be associated with underlying osteoarthritis of the neck or low back. Pain may be referred from tender points to defined areas distant from the area of original tenderness. Palpation of the tender point reproduces or accentuates the pain. The tender points are usually located in the center of a muscle belly, but they can occur at other sites such as costosternal junctions, the xiphoid process, ligamentous and tendinous insertions, fascia, and fatty areas. Tender point sites in muscle have been described as feeling indurated and taut, and palpation may cause the muscle to twitch. These findings, however, have been shown not to be unique for myofascial pain syndrome, because in a controlled study, they were also present in some "normal" subjects. Myofascial pain most often involves the posterior neck, low back, shoulders, and chest. Chronic pain in the muscles of the posterior neck may involve referral of pain from a tender point in the erector neck muscle or upper trapezius to the head, leading to persistent headaches, which may last for days. Tender points in the paraspinal muscles of the low back may refer pain to the buttock. Pain may be referred down the leg from a tender point in the gluteus medius and can mimic sciatica. A tender point in the infraspinatus muscle may produce local and referred pain over the lateral deltoid and down the outside of the arm into the hand. Injection of a local anesthetic such as 1% lidocaine into the tender point site often results in at least transient pain relief. Another useful technique is first to spray from the tender point toward the area of referred pain with an agent such as ethyl chloride and then to stretch the muscle. This maneuver may need to be repeated several times. Massage and application of ultrasound to the affected area also may be beneficial. Patients should be instructed in methods to prevent muscle stresses related to work and recreation. Posture and resting positions are important in preventing muscle tension. The prognosis in most patients is good. In some patients, regionally localized myofascial pain syndrome may seem to evolve into more generalized fibromyalgia (Chap. 335). Abnormal or nonrestorative sleep is a common accompaniment in these patients and may need to be specifically addressed.

Neoplasias and Arthritis

Primary tumors and tumor-like disorders of synovium are uncommon but should be considered in the differential diagnosis of monarticular joint disease. In addition, metastases to bone and primary bone tumors adjacent to a joint may produce joint symptoms. For further discussion, see Chap. 98.

Pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS) is characterized by the slowly progressive, exuberant, benign proliferation of synovial tissue, usually involving a single joint. The most common age of onset is in the third decade, and women are affected slightly more often than men. The cause of this disorder is unknown.

The synovium has a brownish color and numerous large, finger-like villi that fuse to form pedunculated nodules. There is marked hyperplasia of synovial cells in the stroma of the villi. Hemosiderin granules and lipids are found in the cytoplasm of macrophages and in the interstitial tissue. Multinucleated giant cells may be present. The proliferative synovium grows into the subsynovial tissue and invades adjacent cartilage and bone.

The clinical picture of pigmented villonodular synovitis is characterized by the insidious onset of persistent swelling and pain in affected joints, most commonly the knee. Other joints affected include the hips, ankles, calcaneocuboid joints, elbows, and small joints of the fingers or toes. The disease may also involve the common flexor sheath of the hands or fingers. Less commonly, tendon sheaths in the wrist, ankle, or foot may be involved. Symptoms of pain, a catching sensation, or stiffness may initially be mild and intermittent and may be present for years before the patient seeks medical attention. Radiographs may show joint space narrowing, erosions, and subchondral cysts. The joint fluid contains blood and is dark red or almost black in color. Lipid-containing macrophages may be present in the fluid. The joint fluid may be clear if hemorrhage has not occurred. Some patients have polyarticular involvement.

The treatment of pigmented villonodular synovitis is complete synovectomy. With incomplete synovectomy, the villonodular synovitis recurs, and the rate of tissue growth may be faster than it was originally. Irradiation of the involved joint has been successful in some patients.

Synovial chondromatosis is a disorder characterized by multiple focal metaplastic growths of normal-appearing cartilage in the synovium or tendon sheath. Segments of cartilage break loose and continue to grow as loose bodies. When calcification and ossification of loose bodies occur, the disorder is referred to as synovial osteochondromatosis. The disorder is usually monarticular and affects young to middle-aged individuals. The knee is most often involved, followed by hip, elbow, and shoulder. Symptoms are pain, swelling, and decreased motion of the joint. Radiographs may show several rounded calcifications within the joint cavity. Treatment is synovectomy; however, as in PVNS, the tumor may recur.

Synovial sarcoma is a malignantneoplasm often found near a large joint of both upper and lower extremities, being more common in the lower extremity. It seldom arises within the joint itself. Synovial sarcomas constitute 10% of soft tissue sarcomas. The tumor is believed to arise from primitive mesenchymal tissue that differentiates into epithelial cells and/or spindle cells. Small foci of calcification may be present in the tumor mass. It occurs most often in young adults and is more common in men. The tumor presents as a slowly growing deep-seated mass near a joint, without much pain. The area of the knee is the most common site, followed by the foot, ankle, elbow, and shoulder. Other primary sites include the buttocks, abdominal wall, retroperitoneum, and mediastinum. The tumor spreads along tissue planes. The most common site of visceral metastasis is lung. The diagnosis is made by biopsy. Treatment is wide resection of the tumor, including adjacent muscle and regional lymph nodes, followed by chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Amputation of the involved distal extremity may be required. Chemotherapy may be beneficial in some patients with metastatic disease. Isolated pulmonary metastasis can be surgically removed. The five-year survival rate with treatment is variable depending on the staging of the tumor, ranging from approximately 25% to 60% or higher. Synovial sarcomas tend to recur locally and metastasize to regional lymph nodes, lungs, and skeleton.

In addition to the rare direct metastases of solid cell tumors to the highly vascular synovium, neoplasia arising from nonarticular organ sites can affect joints in other ways. Acute leukemias in children can mimic juvenile inflammatory arthritis with severe joint pain and fever. In adults, chronic and acute myeloid leukemia can rarely infiltrate the synovium. The rarely occurring hairy cell leukemia has a peculiar tendency to cause episodic inflammatory oligoarthritis and tenosynovitis; these episodes are dramatic and mimic acute gout attacks. They respond to potent anti-inflammatory therapy with glucocorticoids; with remission of the leukemia, they may abate. Carcinomas can be associated with several paraneoplastic articular syndromes, including hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (discussed above). Acute palmar fasciitis with polyarthritis is a well-described, but rare association with certain cancers, mainly adenocarcinomas. Clinically, this is fairly abrupt in onset with pain in the MCP and PIP joints of the hands with rapidly evolving contractures of the fingers due to thickening of the palmar (flexor) tendons. A similar syndrome can be seen in diabetics. Paraneoplastic arthritis has been described and may occur in several patterns: asymmetric predominantly lower extremity joints and symmetric, polyarthritis with hand joint involvement. Tumors were often found after the onset of the arthritis, although many patients had a preceding period of malaise or weight loss. The onset is often acute, and patients tend to be older males. These features should raise the specter of an underlying malignancy (or viral infection such as hepatitis C) as the cause of the arthritis. In one series, the symptoms resolved with successful therapy of the malignancy but did not recur with relapse of the malignancy. Dermatomyositis is also well described as a paraneoplastic syndrome and may have joint pain and arthritis as components of the syndrome. Malignancy associated arthritis may be responsive to NSAID therapy and to treatment of the primary neoplasm.
 
Acknowledgment

This chapter represents a revised version of the chapter authored by Dr. Bruce C. Gilliland that was in the previous editions of Harrison's. Dr. Gilliland passed away on February 17, 2007, and had been a contributor to Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine since the 11th edition.
 
Further Readings


Altman RD, Tenenbaum J: Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, in Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology, 7th ed, ED Harris et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2005, pp 1748每1753 

 
Cronin ME: Rheumatic aspects of endocrinopathies, in Arthritis and Allied Conditions, 15th ed, WJ Koopman (ed). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp 2559每2576 

 
Heck LW JR: Arthritis associated with hematologic disorders, storage diseases, disorders of lipid metabolism, and dysproteinemias, in Arthritis and Allied Conditions, 15th ed, WJ Koopman (ed). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp 1969每1990 
 
 

^^
 Chapter 337. Periarticular Disorders of the Extremities >
 

Periarticular Disorders of the Extremities: Introduction

A number of periarticular disorders have become increasingly common over the past two to three decades, due in part to greater participation in recreational sports by individuals of a wide range of ages. Periarticular disorders most commonly affect the knee or shoulder. With the exception of bursitis, hip pain is most often articular or is being referred from disease affecting another structure (Chap 331). This chapter discusses some of the more common periarticular disorders.

Bursitis

Bursitis is inflammation of a bursa, which is a thin-walled sac lined with synovial tissue. The function of the bursa is to facilitate movement of tendons and muscles over bony prominences. Excessive frictional forces from overuse, trauma, systemic disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, gout), or infection may cause bursitis. Subacromial bursitis (subdeltoid bursitis) is the most common form of bursitis. The subacromial bursa, which is contiguous with the subdeltoid bursa, is located between the undersurface of the acromion and the humeral head and is covered by the deltoid muscle. Bursitis is caused by repetitive overhead motion and often accompanies rotator cuff tendinitis. Another frequently encountered form is trochanteric bursitis, which involves the bursa around the insertion of the gluteus medius onto the greater trochanter of the femur. Patients experience pain over the lateral aspect of the hip and upper thigh and have tenderness over the posterior aspect of the greater trochanter. External rotation and resisted abduction of the hip elicit pain. Olecranon bursitis occurs over the posterior elbow, and when the area is acutely inflamed, infection or gout should be excluded by aspirating the bursa and performing a Gram stain and culture on the fluid as well as examining the fluid for urate crystals. Achilles bursitis involves the bursa located above the insertion of the tendon to the calcaneus and results from overuse and wearing tight shoes. Retrocalcaneal bursitis involves the bursa that is located between the calcaneus and posterior surface of the Achilles tendon. The pain is experienced at the back of the heel, and swelling appears on the medial and/or lateral side of the tendon. It occurs in association with spondyloarthropathies, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, or trauma. Ischial bursitis (weaver's bottom) affects the bursa separating the gluteus medius from the ischial tuberosity and develops from prolonged sitting and pivoting on hard surfaces. Iliopsoas bursitis affects the bursa that lies between the iliopsoas muscle and hip joint and is lateral to the femoral vessels. Pain is experienced over this area and is made worse by hip extension and flexion. Anserine bursitis is an inflammation of the sartorius bursa located over the medial side of the tibia just below the knee and under the conjoint tendon and is manifested by pain on climbing stairs. Tenderness is present over the insertion of the conjoint tendon of the sartorius, gracilis, and semitendinosus. Prepatellar bursitis (housemaid's knee) occurs in the bursa situated between the patella and overlying skin and is caused by kneeling on hard surfaces. Gout or infection may also occur at this site. Treatment of bursitis consists of prevention of the aggravating situation, rest of the involved part, administration of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) where appropriate for an individual patient, or local glucocorticoid injection.

Rotator Cuff Tendinitis and Impingement Syndrome

Tendinitis of the rotator cuff is the major cause of a painful shoulder and is currently thought to be caused by inflammation of the tendon(s). The rotator cuff consists of the tendons of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, subscapularis, and teres minor muscles, and inserts on the humeral tuberosities. Of the tendons forming the rotator cuff, the supraspinatus tendon is the most often affected, probably because of its repeated impingement (impingement syndrome) between the humeral head and the undersurface of the anterior third of the acromion and coracoacromial ligament above as well as the reduction in its blood supply that occurs with abduction of the arm (Fig. 337-1). The tendon of the infraspinatus and that of the long head of the biceps are less commonly involved. The process begins with edema and hemorrhage of the rotator cuff, which evolves to fibrotic thickening and eventually to rotator cuff degeneration with tendon tears and bone spurs. Subacromial bursitis also accompanies this syndrome. Symptoms usually appear after injury or overuse, especially with activities involving elevation of the arm with some degree of forward flexion. Impingement syndrome occurs in persons participating in baseball, tennis, swimming, or occupations that require repeated elevation of the arm. Those over age 40 are particularly susceptible. Patients complain of a dull aching in the shoulder, which may interfere with sleep. Severe pain is experienced when the arm is actively abducted into an overhead position. The arc between 60∼ and 120∼ is especially painful. Tenderness is present over the lateral aspect of the humeral head just below the acromion. NSAIDs, local glucocorticoid injection, and physical therapy may relieve symptoms. Surgical decompression of the subacromial space may be necessary in patients refractory to conservative treatment.

Figure 337-1

 
 
 
Coronal section of the shoulder illustrating the relationships of the glenohumeral joint, the joint capsule, the subacromial bursa, and the rotator cuff (supraspinatus tendon). [From F Kozin, in Arthritis and Allied Conditions, 13th ed, WJ Koopman (ed). Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1997, with permission.]
 
 

Patients may tear the supraspinatus tendon acutely by falling on an outstretched arm or lifting a heavy object. Symptoms are pain along with weakness of abduction and external rotation of the shoulder. Atrophy of the supraspinatus muscles develops. The diagnosis is established by arthrogram, ultrasound, or MRI. Surgical repair may be necessary in patients who fail to respond to conservative measures. In patients with moderate-to-severe tears and functional loss, surgery is indicated.

Calcific Tendinitis

This condition is characterized by deposition of calcium salts, primarily hydroxyapatite, within a tendon. The exact mechanism of calcification is not known but may be initiated by ischemia or degeneration of the tendon. The supraspinatus tendon is most often affected because it is frequently impinged on and has a reduced blood supply when the arm is abducted. The condition usually develops after age 40. Calcification within the tendon may evoke acute inflammation, producing sudden and severe pain in the shoulder. However, it may be asymptomatic or not related to the patient's symptoms.

Bicipital Tendinitis and Rupture

Bicipital tendinitis, or tenosynovitis, is produced by friction on the tendon of the long head of the biceps as it passes through the bicipital groove. When the inflammation is acute, patients experience anterior shoulder pain that radiates down the biceps into the forearm. Abduction and external rotation of the arm are painful and limited. The bicipital groove is very tender to palpation. Pain may be elicited along the course of the tendon by resisting supination of the forearm with the elbow at 90∼ (Yergason's supination sign). Acute rupture of the tendon may occur with vigorous exercise of the arm and is often painful. In a young patient, it should be repaired surgically. Rupture of the tendon in an older person may be associated with little or no pain and is recognized by the presence of persistent swelling of the biceps ("Popeye" muscle) produced by the retraction of the long head of the biceps. Surgery is usually not necessary in this setting.

De Quervain's Tenosynovitis

In this condition, inflammation involves the abductor pollicis longus and the extensor pollicis brevis as these tendons pass through a fibrous sheath at the radial styloid process. The usual cause is repetitive twisting of the wrist. It may occur in pregnancy, and it also occurs in mothers who hold their babies with the thumb outstretched. Patients experience pain on grasping with their thumb, such as with pinching. Swelling and tenderness are often present over the radial styloid process. The Finkelstein sign is positive, which is elicited by having the patient place the thumb in the palm and close the fingers over it. The wrist is then ulnarly deviated, resulting in pain over the involved tendon sheath in the area of the radial styloid. Treatment consists initially of splinting the wrist and an NSAID. When severe or refractory to conservative treatment, glucocorticoid injections can be very effective.

Patellar Tendinitis (Jumper's Knee)

Tendinitis involves the patellar tendon at its attachment to the lower pole of the patella. Patients may experience pain when jumping during basketball or volleyball, going up stairs, or doing deep knee squats. Tenderness is noted on examination over the lower pole of the patella. Treatment consists of rest, icing, and NSAIDs, followed by strengthening and increasing flexibility.

Iliotibial Band Syndrome

The iliotibial band is a thick connective tissue that runs from the ilium to the fibula. Patients with iliotibial band syndrome most commonly present with aching or burning pain at the site where the band courses over the lateral femoral condyle of the knee; pain may also radiate up the thigh, toward the hip. Predisposing factors for iliotibial band syndrome include a varus alignment of the knee, excessive running distance, poorly fitted shoes, or continuous running on uneven terrain. Treatment consists of rest, NSAIDs, physical therapy, and addressing risk factors such as shoes and running surface. Glucocorticoid injection into the area of tenderness can provide relief, but running must be avoided for at least two weeks after the injection. Surgical release of the iliotibial band has been helpful in rare patients for whom conservative treatment has failed.

Adhesive Capsulitis

Often referred to as "frozen shoulder," adhesive capsulitis is characterized by pain and restricted movement of the shoulder, usually in the absence of intrinsic shoulder disease. Adhesive capsulitis may follow bursitis or tendinitis of the shoulder or be associated with systemic disorders such as chronic pulmonary disease, myocardial infarction, and diabetes mellitus. Prolonged immobility of the arm contributes to the development of adhesive capsulitis. Pathologically, the capsule of the shoulder is thickened, and a mild chronic inflammatory infiltrate and fibrosis may be present.

Adhesive capsulitis occurs more commonly in women after age 50. Pain and stiffness usually develop gradually but progress rapidly in some patients. Night pain is often present in the affected shoulder and pain may interfere with sleep. The shoulder is tender to palpation, and both active and passive movement are restricted. Radiographs of the shoulder show osteopenia. The diagnosis is typically made by physical examination but can be confirmed if necessary by arthrography, in that only a limited amount of contrast material, usually <15 mL, can be injected under pressure into the shoulder joint.

In most patients, the condition improves spontaneously 1每3 years after onset. While pain usually improves, many patients are left with some limitation of shoulder motion. Early mobilization of the arm following an injury to the shoulder may prevent the development of this disease. Physical therapy provides the foundation of treatment for adhesive capsulitis. Local injections of glucocorticoids and NSAIDs may also provide relief of symptoms. Slow but forceful injection of contrast material into the joint may lyse adhesions and stretch the capsule, resulting in improvement of shoulder motion. Manipulation under anesthesia may be helpful in some patients.

Lateral Epicondylitis (Tennis Elbow)

Lateral epicondylitis, or tennis elbow, is a painful condition involving the soft tissue over the lateral aspect of the elbow. The pain originates at or near the site of attachment of the common extensors to the lateral epicondyle and may radiate into the forearm and dorsum of the wrist. The pain usually appears after work or recreational activities involving repeated motions of wrist extension and supination against resistance. Most patients with this disorder injure themselves in activities other than tennis, such as pulling weeds, carrying suitcases or briefcases, or using a screwdriver. The injury in tennis usually occurs when hitting a backhand with the elbow flexed. Shaking hands and opening doors can reproduce the pain. Striking the lateral elbow against a solid object may also induce pain.

The treatment is usually rest along with administration of an NSAID. Ultrasound, icing, and friction massage may also help relieve pain. When pain is severe, the elbow is placed in a sling or splinted at 90∼ of flexion. When the pain is acute and well localized, injection of a glucocorticoid using a small-gauge needle may be effective. Following injection, the patient should be advised to rest the arm for at least one month and avoid activities that would aggravate the elbow. Once symptoms have subsided, the patient should begin rehabilitation to strengthen and increase flexibility of the extensor muscles before resuming physical activity involving the arm. A forearm band placed 2.5每5.0 cm (1每2 in.) below the elbow may help to reduce tension on the extensor muscles at their attachment to the lateral epicondyle. The patient should be advised to restrict activities requiring forcible extension and supination of the wrist. Improvement may take several months. The patient may continue to experience mild pain but, with care, can usually avoid the return of debilitating pain. Occasionally, surgical release of the extensor aponeurosis may be necessary.

Medial Epicondylitis

Medial epicondylitis is an overuse syndrome resulting in pain over the medial side of the elbow with radiation into the forearm. The cause of this syndrome is considered to be repetitive resisted motions of wrist flexion and pronation, which lead to microtears and granulation tissue at the origin of the pronator teres and forearm flexors, particularly the flexor carpi radialis. This overuse syndrome is usually seen in patients >35 years and is much less common than lateral epicondylitis. It occurs most often in work-related repetitive activities but also occurs with recreational activities such as swinging a golf club (golfer's elbow) or throwing a baseball. On physical examination, there is tenderness just distal to the medial epicondyle over the origin of the forearm flexors. Pain can be reproduced by resisting wrist flexion and pronation with the elbow extended. Radiographs are usually normal. The differential diagnosis of patients with medial elbow symptoms include tears of the pronator teres, acute medial collateral ligament tear, and medial collateral ligament instability. Ulnar neuritis has been found in 25每50% of patients with medial epicondylitis and is associated with tenderness over the ulnar nerve at the elbow as well as hypesthesia and paresthesia on the ulnar side of the hand.

The initial treatment of medial epicondylitis is conservative, involving rest, NSAIDs, friction massage, ultrasound, and icing. Some patients may require splinting. Injections of glucocorticoids at the painful site may also be effective. Patients should be instructed to rest for at least one month. Also, patients should start physical therapy once the pain has subsided. In patients with chronic debilitating medial epicondylitis that remains unresponsive after at least a year of treatment, surgical release of the flexor muscle at its origin may be necessary and is often successful.

Plantar Fasciitis

Plantar fasciitis is a common cause of foot pain in adults, with the peak incidence occurring in people between the ages of 40 and 60 years. It is also seen more frequently in a younger population consisting of runners, aerobic exercise dancers, and ballet dancers. The pain originates at or near the site of the plantar fascia attachment to the medial tuberosity of the calcaneus. Several factors that increase the risk of developing plantar fasciitis include obesity, pes planus (flat foot or absence of the foot arch when standing), pes cavus (high-arched foot), limited dorsiflexion of the ankle, prolonged standing, walking on hard surfaces, and faulty shoes. In runners, excessive running and a change to a harder running surface may precipitate plantar fasciitis.

The diagnosis of plantar fasciitis can usually be made on the basis of history and physical examination alone. Patients experience severe pain with the first steps on arising in the morning or following inactivity during the day. The pain usually lessens with weight-bearing activity during the day, only to worsen with continued activity. Pain is made worse on walking barefoot or up stairs. On examination, maximal tenderness is elicited on palpation over the inferior heel corresponding to the site of attachment of the plantar fascia.

Imaging studies may be indicated when the diagnosis is not clear. Plain radiographs may show heel spurs, which are of little diagnostic significance. Ultrasonography in plantar fasciitis can demonstrate thickening of the fascia and diffuse hypoechogenicity, indicating edema at the attachment of the plantar fascia to the calcaneus. MRI is a sensitive method for detecting plantar fasciitis, but it is usually not required for establishing the diagnosis.

The differential diagnosis of inferior heel pain includes calcaneal stress fractures, the spondyloarthritides, rheumatoid arthritis, gout, neoplastic or infiltrative bone processes, and nerve compression/entrapment syndromes.

Resolution of symptoms occurs within 12 months in more than 80% of patients with plantar fasciitis. The patient is advised to reduce or discontinue activities that can exacerbate plantar fasciitis. Initial treatment consists of ice, heat, massage, and stretching. Stretching of the plantar fascia and calf muscles are commonly employed and can be beneficial. Orthotics provide medial arch support and can be effective. Foot strapping or taping are commonly performed, and some patients may benefit by wearing a night splint designed to keep the ankle in a neutral position. A short course of NSAIDs can be given to patients when the benefits outweigh the risks. Local glucocorticoid injections have also been shown to be efficacious but may carry an increased risk for plantar fascia rupture. Plantar fasciotomy is reserved for those patients who have failed to improve after at least 6每12 months of conservative treatment.
 
Further Readings

Buchbinder R: Plantar fasciitis. N Engl J Med 350:2159, 2004[PMID: 15152061]  [Full Text]

 
Husni EM, Donohue JP: Painful shoulder and reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome, in Arthritis and Allied Conditions, 15th ed, WJ Koopman (ed). Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005, pp 2133每2152 

 
Martin SD, Thornhill TS: Shoulder pain, in Kelley's Textbook of Rheumatology, 7th ed, ED Harris et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2005, pp 557每587 

 
Matsen FA 3rd. Clinical practice. Rotator-cuff failure. N Engl J Med 358:2138, 2008[PMID: 18480206]  [Full Text]

 
Neer CS II: Impingement lesions. Clin Orthop 173:70, 1983[PMID: 6825348]  [Full Text]

 
Sheridan MA, Hannafin JA. Upper extremity: emphasis on frozen shoulder. Orthop Clin North Am 37:531, 2006[PMID: 17141009]  [Full Text]

 
 Deceased. A contributor to HPIM since the 11th edition, Dr. Gilliland passed away on February 17, 2007. 
^^